CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF DULUTH, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 1991 by Order of the Mayor and Council 
____________ 
Adopted November 25, 1991 
Effective November 25, 1991 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
DULUTH, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Nancy Harris 
Mayor 
____________ 
Marsha Anderson Bomar 
Kirkland Carden 
Robert W. Jones 
Kelly Kelkenberg 
Greg Whitlock 
City Councilmembers 
____________ 
James Riker 
City Manager 
____________ 
Randall Belcher 
Police Chief 
____________ 
Teresa Lynn 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Duluth, Georgia. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the mayor and council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of Chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Jan N. Shekitka, Supervising Editor, and Ron McLaughlin, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Ken Pittard, City Clerk, for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida  
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF DULUTH, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF DULUTH ORDAINS: 
    Section 1. That the Code entitle "Code of Ordinances of the City of Duluth, Georgia" consisting of Chapters 1 to 15, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before April 8, 1991, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than one hundred eighty (180) days or by both fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city council may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions and amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the mayor and council to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after April 8, 1991, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption. 
    Passed and Adopted by the Council this 25th day of November, 1991. 
/s/ Bobby G. Williams 
      Mayor   /s/ Kenneth Pittard 
      City Clerk   Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the Duluth City Council of the City of Duluth held on the 25th day of November, 1991. 
/s/ Kenneth Pittard 
      City Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature and ordinances that amend subject matter not found in the Code are not codified and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. Date Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 10-11-10 Included 24 11- 8-10 Included 24 11- 8-10 Included 24 12-13-10 Included 24 12-13-10 Included 24  1-24-11 Included 24  3-14-11 Included 24  3-14-11 Included 24  4-11-11 Included 24  4-11-11 Included 24  5- 9-11 Included 25  5- 9-11 Included 25  6-13-11 Included 25  6-13-11 Included 25  7-11-11 Included 25  8- 8-11 Included 25  9-12-11 Included 25  7-11-11 Included 26 11-14-11 Included 26 11-14-11 Included 26 12-12-11 Included 26 12-12-11 Included 26  6-13-11 Included 27  2-13-12 Included 27  3-12-12 Included 27  5-14-12 Included 27  5-14-12 Included 27  6-11-12 Included 27  6-11-12 Included 27  6-11-12 Included 27  6-11-12 Included 27  6-11-12 Included 27  7- 9-12 Included 27  8-13-12 Included 27  9-10-12 Included 28 10- 8-12 Included 28 10- 8-12 Included 28 10- 8-12 Included 28 12-10-12 Included 28 12-10-12 Included 28 12-10-12 Included 28  8-13-12 Included 29  2-11-13 Included 29  3-11-13 Included 29  3-11-13 Included 29  3-11-13 Included 29  3-11-13 Included 29  3-11-13 Included 29  3-11-13 Included 29  5-13-13 Included 29 10-14-13 Included 30 10-14-13 Included 30 10-14-13 Included 30 12- 9-13 Included 30 12- 9-13 Included 30  2-24-14 Included 30  4-14-14 Included 31  5-12-14 Included 32 12- 8-14 Included 32 12- 8-14 Included 32  1-12-15 Included 32  2- 9-15 Included 32  3- 9-15 Included 33  6- 8-15 Included 33  9-14-15 Included 33  9-14-15 Included 33  9-14-15 Included 33  9-14-15 Included 33  9-14-15 Included 33  9-14-15 Included 33  9-14-15 Included 33  9-14-15 Included 33 12-14-15 Omitted 34  1-11-16 Included 34  1-11-16 Included 34  1-11-16 Included 34  3-14-16 Included 35  3-14-16 Included 35  3-14-16 Included 35  3-14-16 Included 35  4-11-16 Included 35  4-11-16 Included 35  5- 9-16 Included 35  5- 9-16 Included 35  5- 9-16 Included 35  7-11-16 Included 35  8- 8-16 Included 35  8- 8-16 Included 35  8- 8-16 Included 35  8- 8-16 Included 35 11-14-16 Included 36 11-14-16 Included 36 12-12-16 Included 36   3-13-17 Included 37   8-14-17 Included 37   9-18-17 Included 38   2-12-18 Included 38   2-12-18 Included 38   3-12-18 Included 39   8-13-18 Included 39   8-13-18 Included 39   8-13-18 Included 39 11-13-18 Included 40  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter for the City of Duluth, adopted by the General Assembly on June 3, 2003; effective the same day. Amendments to the original Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision derives unchanged from the original Charter. A uniform system of punctuation and capitalization has been used. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation and material in brackets [ ] has been added for clarity. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Section 1.10. - Incorporation. 
    This city and the inhabitants thereof are constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style City of Duluth, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Section 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of the city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Charter and as further described in Exhibit A which is on file in the City Clerk's office and incorporated in this Charter by reference. Upon the adoption of this Charter, the boundaries of the City shall include all that area as described in the previous City Charter (Ga. L. 1987, P. 3914) as well as any areas added by amendments to said previous Charter and by all annexation ordinances adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Duluth since the adoption of said previous Charter plus the addition of 3.6951 acres as more particularly described in Exhibit A which is on file in the City Clerk's office and incorporated herein by reference. The boundaries of the City shall include those areas as shown on a map entitled "Official Map of the Corporate Limits of the City of Duluth" dated March 2003 which map shall be retained permanently in the office of the City Clerk and which map is incorporated herein by reference. Alterations of the boundaries of the City may be made from time to time in any manner provided by law. Boundaries of the City shall be shown at all times on a map to be retained permanently in the office of the City Clerk and entitled "Official Map of the Corporate Limits of the City of Duluth". Photographic, typed or other copies of such maps certified by the City Clerk shall be admitted as evidence in courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Section 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this Charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
Section 1.13. - Examples of powers. 
(1)  Air and water pollution . To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  Animal regulations . To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at -large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this paragraph. 
(3)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of this city. 
(4)  Building regulations. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air-conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades. 
(5)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for the failure to pay any city taxes or fees. 
(6)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(7)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations. 
(8)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists inside or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city. 
(9)  Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment and vital areas of the city, region, and state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment. 
(10)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations, not inconsistent with general law relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof. 
(11)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business within the city and benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges. 
(12)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
(13)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose. 
(14)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
(15)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares of the city; to provide for the commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for the commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials. 
(16)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city. 
(17)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same. 
(18)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(19)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city. 
(20)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof. 
(21)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties therefor; and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same. 
(22)  Nuisances. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property. 
(23)  Specific penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia, and to provide penalties for the violation of Gwinnett County board of health rules and regulations and Gwinnett County health and sanitation ordinances. 
(24)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community. 
(25)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police or fire-fighting agency. 
(26)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public. 
(27)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide for any other public improvements inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(28)  Public peace . To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances. 
(29)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial. 
(30)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission. 
(31)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights- of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, inside or abutting the corporate limits of the city and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances. 
(32)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the City of Duluth. 
(33)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights-of- way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so. 
(34)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system; to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charge and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system. 
(35)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others including the granting of exclusive or nonexclusive franchises for such services; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and provide for the sale of such items. 
(36)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortune telling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors. 
(37)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs of any public improvements. 
(38)  Taxes: ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation. 
(39)  Taxes: other . To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law. 
(40)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles. 
(41)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program. 
(42)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this Charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 03-6, 3-11-03) 
Section 1.14. - Exercise of powers. 
    All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Section 2.10. - City council creation; number; election. 
    The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and five councilmembers. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by this Charter. 
Section 2.11. - City council terms; qualifications for office. 
(a)  The five members of this city council shall serve for terms of four (4) years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. The councilmembers who hold posts 1, 2, and 3 shall be elected in the same odd year. The mayor and councilmembers who hold posts 4 and 5 shall be elected in the alternating odd year. 
(b)  No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless the person shall have been a resident of the city for a period of one (1) year preceding the date of the election of the mayor or members of the city council and must be a qualified voter in municipal elections for officers of said city; the mayor or councilmember shall continue to reside therein during his or her period of service and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. 
Section 2.12. - Vacancies; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this charter. 
Section 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
    The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
Section 2.14. - Holding other office; voting when personally interested. 
(a)  Elected and appointed officers of the city are trustees and servants of the residents of the city and shall act in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of such residents; 
(b)  Except as authorized by law, the mayor or any councilmember shall not hold any other city office or city employment during the term for which the official was elected. 
(c)  Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall vote upon, sign, or veto any ordinance, resolution, contract, or other matter in which the official is personally interested. 
Section 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
    The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Section 2.16. - General power and authority of the city council. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by article I of this charter. 
Section 2.17. - Eminent domain. 
    The city council is empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city, and to regulate the use thereof and, for such purposes, property may be condemned under procedures established under general law applicable now or as provided in the future. 
Section 2.18. - Organizational meetings. 
    The city council shall hold an organizational meeting on the second Monday in January. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of the office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the Charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
Section 2.19. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. The council may recess any regular meeting and continue such meetings on any date or hour it may fix and may transact any business at such continued meeting as may be transacted at any regular meeting. 
(b)  The mayor and city council may hold special meetings and may transact business therein in accordance with the law. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public in accordance with applicable law. 
Section 2.20. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairmen and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Section 2.21. - Quorum; voting. 
    The mayor, or mayor pro tempore, and three councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact the business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances may be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the affirmative vote of the majority of the members present shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
Section 2.22. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
    Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Section 2.23. - Ordinance forms; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. The enacting clause shall be "The Council of the City of Duluth hereby ordains . . . ." 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish. 
Section 2.24. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally, except that: 
(1)  The requirements for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(2)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the adoption of other codes or regulation by reference provided a copy of the referenced code or regulation is attached to the adopting ordinance. 
Section 2.25. - Signing; authentication; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by his or her signature and shall record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the council. 
(b)  The city shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known as and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Duluth, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and shall be made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and Charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this Charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and Charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as are deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
Section 2.26. - Election of mayor; forfeiture; compensation. 
    The mayor shall be elected for and shall serve for a term of four (4) years and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. The mayor shall be a qualified elector of this city and shall have been a resident of the city for one (1) year immediately preceding election. The mayor shall continue to reside in this city during the period of service. The mayor shall forfeit the office on the same grounds and under the same procedure as for councilmembers. The compensation of the mayor shall be established in the same manner as for councilmembers. 
Section 2.27. - Mayor pro tempore. 
    By a majority vote, at the first regular meeting of the mayor and council in each year, they shall elect a councilmember to serve as the mayor pro tempore. The mayor pro tempore shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during the mayor's disability or absence. If the mayor pro tempore is absent because of sickness or disqualification, any one (1) of the remaining councilmembers, chosen by the members present, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the mayor's duties. 
Section 2.28. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
    The mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council. 
(2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesman for the city and the chief advocate of policy. 
(3)  Have the power to administer oaths and to take affidavits. 
(4)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing. 
(5)  Vote only in case of a tie or in case only one vote is needed to pass any motion, resolution, ordinance, or other question before the council, the mayor, or mayor pro tempore, if presiding, may vote and the mayor may be counted toward a quorum as any other councilmember; and 
(6)  Fulfill such other executive and administrative duties as the city council shall by ordinance establish. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Section 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city council by ordinance shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointed officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be a director or department head of each department and agency of the city who shall be its principal officer. Each director or department head shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city administrator [manager], be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operation of his or her department or agency. 
(e)  The mayor and council may, by ordinance, delegate its authority regarding the administrative affairs of the city unless such delegation is prohibited herein or by the general laws or constitution of the State of Georgia. 
Editor's note- City administrator changed to city manager at the direction of the city. 
Section 3.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by charter, ordinance, or by other law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for the original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until he or she has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating such member to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor, city clerk or municipal court judge. 
(g)  Members of boards, commissions and authorities shall serve at the pleasure of the council and may be removed by majority vote of the city council. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one (1) member as vice-chairperson, and may elect as its secretary one (1) of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
( Ord. of 3-14-16 ) 
Section 3.12. - City attorney. 
    The mayor and city council shall appoint a city attorney, who shall not be a councilmember, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party, may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court, shall attend the meetings of the council as directed, shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers or employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs, and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of the position as city attorney. 
Section 3.13. - City clerk. 
    The mayor and council shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal, maintain the city council records required by this charter, and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. 
Section 3.14. - City treasurer. 
    The mayor and council may designate the city clerk or some other person as city treasurer, who shall not be a councilmember, and may designate a certain bank as city depository. The city treasurer shall be responsible for the general duties of a fiscal officer and such other duties as may be provided by ordinance. 
Section 3.15. - City manager. 
    The mayor and council shall appoint a city manager who shall not be a councilmember. The compensation and term of office of the city manager shall be established by the mayor and council. The city manager shall be vested with the authority and responsibility to oversee and supervise the regular business affairs of the city. Except as otherwise provided by general or local state law, the city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city and shall exercise executive supervision over all city employees and all departments. The city manager shall further have such other duties as the mayor and council may require and which are not inconsistent with this charter or state law. 
(Ord. of 9-12-11) 
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Section 4.10. - Creation; name. 
    There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Duluth. 
Section 4.11. - Chief judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. The method of selection and terms of such judges shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless he or she shall have attained the age of twenty-one (21) years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. Any and all judges shall be appointed by the city council. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Judges shall serve at the pleasure of the council and may be removed by a majority vote of the city council. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath that he or she will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his or her office to the best of his or her ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in section 2.20 of this charter. 
Section 4.12. - Convening. 
    The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Section 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this Charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt. Such punishment shall not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) or ten (10) days of imprisonment, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment and labor on the public works of the city for one (1) year or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and the caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his or her appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his or her bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution shall be issued thereon by serving the defendant and his sureties with a rule nisi at least two (2) days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court may be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(i)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to municipal courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
Section 4.14. - Certiorari. 
    The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Gwinnett County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Section 4.15. - Rules for court. 
    With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to said proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 

Section 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
    All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the `Georgia Municipal Election Code,' as now or hereafter amended. 
Section 5.11. - Election of the mayor and city council. 
(a)  There shall be a municipal election biennially in the odd years on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November. 
(b)  On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of 2005, and every four years thereafter, the successors to such three councilmembers who hold seats 1, 2, and 3 shall be elected and shall serve terms of office of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified and shall take office on the day of the first organizational meeting in January following their election. The seat held by Maxine Garner on the effective date of this Act shall be Post 1; the seat currently held by Jim Dugan on the effective date of this Act shall be Post 2; and the seat held by Jim Hall on the effective date of this Act shall be Post 3. 
(c)  On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of 2003, and every four years thereafter, the successors to the position of mayor and such two councilmembers who hold seats 4 and 5 shall be elected and shall serve terms of office of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified and shall take office on the day of the first organizational meeting in January following their election. The seat held by Doug Mundrick on the effective date of this Act shall be Post 4; the seat held by Doris Kirouac on the effective date of this Act shall be Post 5. 
Section 5.12. - Nonpartisan elections. 
    Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designations. 
Section 5.13. - Election by majority. 
    The person receiving a majority of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
Section 5.14. - Special elections; interim appointments; vacancies. 
    In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor who shall serve until the next regularly scheduled election. Should the office which became vacant not be scheduled for election at the next regularly scheduled election, then the city council shall order a special election at the time of the regularly scheduled election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of the vacant position. The special election to fill the unexpired term shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Section 5.15. - Other provisions. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." 
Section 5.16. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  The mayor or councilmembers may be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Incompetence, misfeasance, or malfeasance in office. 
(2)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude. 
(3)  Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this charter or by law. 
(4)  Knowingly violating any express prohibition of this Charter. 
(5)  Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(6)  Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this charter or by state law. 
(b)  Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one (1) of the following methods: 
(1)  By the vote of four councilmembers after an investigative hearing. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten (10) days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as provided in this section shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Gwinnett County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Duluth. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Section 6.10. - Property tax. 
    The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Section 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
    The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, the method of such payment, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Section 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
    The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling within the city to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Section 6.13. - Licenses; permits; fees. 
    The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individual or corporation who transacts business in this city or who practices or offers to practice any profession or calling within the city to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and to pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulations. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this charter. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitate. 
Section 6.14. - Franchises. 
    The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Section 6.15. - Service charges. 
    The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available inside or outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this charter. 
Section 6.16. - Special assessments. 
    The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the costs of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Section 6.17. - Construction; other taxes. 
    This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Section 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
    The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due, late penalties or interest, issuance and execution of fi. fas., creation and priority of liens, making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed, revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees, and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Section 6.19. - General obligation bonds. 
    The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Section 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
    Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Section 6.21. - Short-term loans. 
    The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December thirty-first of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Section 6.22. - Fiscal year. 
    The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
Section 6.23. - Preparation of budgets. 
    The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvements program, and a capital improvements budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. 
Section 6.24. - Submission of operating budget to city council. 
    On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city administrator [manager] shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city administrator [manager] containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as he may deem pertinent. The operating budget and the capital improvements budget hereinafter provided for, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed with the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Editor's note- City administrator changed to city manager at the direction of the city. 
Section 6.25. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the city administrator [manager], except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council by ordinance shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the fifteenth day of such fiscal year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by said date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to section 6.23 of this charter. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotments thereof to which it is chargeable. 
Editor's note- City administrator changed to city manager at the direction of the city. 
Section 6.26. - Tax levies. 
    Following adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expense of the general government of this city. 
Section 6.27. - Changes in appropriations. 
    The city council by ordinance may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
Section 6.28. - Independent audit. 
    There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Section 6.29. - Contracting procedures. 
    No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; or 
(2)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to section 2.21 of this charter. 
Section 6.30. - Centralized purchasing. 
    The city council may by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Section 6.31. - Sale of city property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon request by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place when such exchange is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
Section 6.32. - Capital reserve fund. 
(a)  The city council shall maintain a capital reserve fund to be set forth in the budget for each fiscal year. Interest income generated from said fund and payable in any particular fiscal year shall remain in the capital reserve fund for said fiscal year. 
(b)  The mayor and council may provide for the withdrawal of funds from the capital reserve fund to be used upon the passage of an ordinance. Approval of any such ordinance shall require the affirmative vote of at least four (4) council members. 
(Ord. of 8-9-10; Ord. of 12-8-14 ) 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
    The officers and employees of the city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council may from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Section 7.11. - Prior ordinances. 
    All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Section 7.12. - Pending matters. 
    Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Section 7.13. - Construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and shall not be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Section 7.14. - Severability. 
    In the event any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part of this charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect nor impair other parts of this Charter unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent and in enacting that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
Section 7.15. - Repealer. 
    All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
 This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ga. Laws Page Section  Section 
this Charter 1987 1000 1.10-7.14 1.10-7.14 2003 1.10-7.15       Rpld 1.10-7.14       Added 1.10-7.15  
Act No. Approval Date Section  Section 
this Charter 639  3-27-98 1 5.11  
Ordinance Date Section Section 
this Charter  6-22-92 6.32 11-22-93 6.32  1-24-94 3.15, 3.10(d), (e), 6.24, 6.25 11-24-97 6.25  7-28-98 1.13(22)  1-11-99 3.15  3-26-01 4.11(d)  7- 9-01 3.11(g) 4.11(d)  8- 9-10 6.32  9-12-11 3.15 12- 8-14 6.32  3- 14-16 3.11(f)  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Ordinances City of Duluth, Georgia" or "the Duluth Code" and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council. 
    City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Duluth" followed. 
    Code. Whenever the words "Code" or "this Code" are used they shall mean and refer to the Code of Ordinances of Duluth, Georgia as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided in O.C.G.A.  9-11-6, when a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted; and if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A.  1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the following day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty; however, when the following day is a Saturday or Sunday, the party shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. 
State Law reference- Similar construction, O.C.G.A.  1-3-1(d)(3). 
    County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean Gwinnett County, Georgia. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Health officer. Wherever the words "health officer" or "city health officer" are used in this Code they shall mean the health officer of Gwinnett County. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Keeper, proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
    Land, real estate. "Land" and "real estate" includes rights and easements of an incorporeal nature. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one (1) person and thing. 
    Oath. The word "oath" includes affirmation. When an oath is required or authorized by law, an affirmation in lieu thereof may be taken. An affirmation has the same force and effect as an oath. 
    O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." shall mean the latest edition of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner", applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Personal property. "Personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. "Property" includes real, personal and mixed estates and interests. 
    Public place. The term "public place" shall include any park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto, any lake or stream, or any place which, from its public character, members of the general public frequent, or where they may be expected to congregate at any time as a matter of common right; also, any place at which, even though it is privately owned or controlled, a number of persons have assembled through common usage or by general or indiscriminate invitation, expressed or implied. 
    Real property. "Real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Signature, subscription. "Signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Georgia. 
    Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
    Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant", applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Written, in writing. "Written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
State Law reference- Construction of definitions, O.C.G.A.  1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A.  1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-4. - Notes and catchlines of sections not part of law. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Code, the descriptive headings or catchlines immediately preceding or within the text of the individual sections of this Code, except the section numbers included in the headings or catchlines immediately preceding the text of such sections, and title and chapter analyses do not constitute part of the law and shall in no manner limit or expand the construction of any section of this Code. All historical citations, title and chapter analyses, and notes set out in this Code are given for the purpose of convenient reference and do not constitute part of the law. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A.  1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the mayor and council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section. 
Sec. 1-6. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than one hundred eighty (180) days or by compulsory labor on the streets or public works not to exceed thirty (30) days or by both fine and imprisonment or labor, or the fine may be imposed with an alternative of such imprisonment or compulsory labor, for each separate violation. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  The chief judge of the City of Duluth Municipal Court shall be authorized to establish by court order a surcharge amount which shall be added to any penalty imposed for violation of city ordinances, codes or state law violations over which the court has jurisdiction. The surcharge shall be used to defray the costs of operation associated with the prosecution of such offense and the amount set by the chief judge shall bear a reasonable relationship to the court's operational costs. If the addition of the surcharge results in a total monetary penalty exceeding that which is allowed by law such surcharge shall be reduced to ensure compliance with all applicable laws. 
(d)  The judges of the City of Duluth Municipal Court shall be authorized to assess reasonable fees, against defendants who do not appear in court for a scheduled appearance, in order to offset the administrative costs associated with the issuance of a bench warrant, late fee, or suspension of a driver's license. The decision as to whether to issue a bench warrant shall be left to the discretion of the municipal judge, subject to all legal requirements. 
(Ord. of 2-23-09; Ord. of 6-22-09; Ord. of 6-13-11; Ord. of 12-9-13) 
Charter reference- Authority to provide penalties for ordinance violations,  1.13(22); authority of municipal court to establish schedule of fees to defray costs,  4.13 (d). 
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Effect. Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the mayor and council to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Duluth, Georgia," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)  Manner. All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the mayor and council. 
(c)  Cite. All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number, article number, chapter or other number, as the case may be. 
(d)  Language. Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section _____ of The Code of Ordinances of the City of Duluth, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: ...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(e)  New sections. If a new section not heretofore existing in this Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of the City of Duluth, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section, article, chapter or other designation as the case may be, to be numbered _____, which reads as follows: ...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(f)  New material. In lieu of subsection (e), when the mayor and council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature embracing a subject not previously existing in this Code, which the council desires to incorporate into the Code, a provision in substantially the following language may be made part of such ordinance: "It is the intention of the city commission, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made part of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Duluth, Georgia, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
(g)  Subject to general penalty. In case of the amendment by the mayor and council of any section of this Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in section 1-6 shall apply to the section as amended. In case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the mayor and council. A supplement to the Code shall include substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the mayor and council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____," inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code. 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinances adopting this Code shall affect any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any ordinance which is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect. 
(2)  Any ordinance adopted for purposes which have been consummated. 
(3)  Any ordinance assessing a fee. 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by the mayor and council to any person, firm or corporation. 
(5)  Any administrative ordinance of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(6)  Any ordinance fixing salaries of officers or employees of the city. 
(7)  Any ordinance, resolution, policy or procedure pertaining to the regulation, retirement or pensioning of city personnel. 
(8)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(9)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(10)  Any ordinance making any act or failure to do any act an offense against the city, when such ordinance is authorized under the state law. 
(11)  Establishing any one-way street, traffic device, signal or marking, any parking regulation, or any limitation placed upon the use of any specific street for vehicles or pedestrians. 
(12)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(13)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the grades of any street in the city. 
(14)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city or providing regulations for the same. 
(15)  Any ordinance fixing ad valorem taxes, or providing for the levying or collecting thereof. 
(16)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor. 
(17)  Any ordinance annexing real property to the city. 
(18)  Any ordinance adopted after November 26, 1990. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. These ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Administrative affairs, Art. III. 
Cross reference- Police, Ch. 11. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Sale of property for past due ad valorem taxes. 
(a)  The city clerk is hereby designated as the authorized officer of the municipality to conduct sales of real and personal property for taxes due to the city. Said sales may be conducted in the council chambers at Duluth City Hall and/or may be held in conjunction with tax sales held at the Gwinnett County Justice and Administration Building and shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A.  48-5-359 and all other relevant local and state laws. 
(b)  The city clerk of the city is hereby authorized and directed to establish such administrative procedures or bylaws as the clerk may deem necessary to carry out such tax sales in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A.  48-5-359 and all other relevant state and local laws. 
(Ord. of 8-22-94; Ord. of 1-12-15 ) 
Sec. 2-2. - Refunds of taxes and license fees. 
(a)  Refunds allowed. In any case in which it is determined that an erroneous or illegal collection of any tax or license fee has been made by the city or that a taxpayer has voluntarily or involuntarily overpaid a tax or license fee, the taxpayer from whom the tax or license fee was collected may file a claim for a refund of the tax or license fee. In addition, should the city discover that taxes or license fees have been erroneously or illegally collected, the city may initiate the refund procedure. In addition, if it is determined that the tax or license fee has been erroneously or illegally collected, any penalties associated with that tax may be waived or refunded. 
(b)  Time for filing for refunds. All claims for refunds of license fees made by a taxpayer shall be made within one (1) year of the date the license fee was paid. All claims for refunds of taxes must be filed within three (3) years of the date the tax was paid. 
(c)  Procedure for filing for refunds. All claims for refunds of taxes or license fees must be made in the following manner. 
(1)  All claims for refunds must be in writing and in the form and containing the information required by the city. 
(2)  The claim must provide a summary statement of the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies for the refund. 
(3)  If the taxpayer desire a hearing or conference with the city or its officials, the taxpayer must specify the request in writing. If the claim for a refund conforms to the requirements of this section, the city council or its designee will then set a time for the hearing or conference. 
(d)  Decision regarding refund. At the conference or hearing, if requested, the city council or its designee will consider the information presented by the taxpayer and any other information relevant to the refund claim. At the conclusion of the conference or hearing or within thirty (30) days thereafter, the city council or its designee will decide whether or not to grant all or a portion of the taxpayer's claim for a refund. The city council or its designee must then inform the taxpayer of the city's decision within ten (10) days of rendering the decision. 
(e)  Payment of refund. If the refund is allowed, the city will remit the refund to the taxpayer within sixty (60) days of the approval of the refund claim or within sixty (60) days of the entry of a final decision in any action for a refund. Refunds are not assignable. Refunds allowed under this section must be paid from the city's funds to which the taxes or license fees were originally paid. 
(f)  Appeals. Taxpayers may file appeals in the Superior Court of Gwinnett County in the following cases: 
(1)  If all or a portion of a refund claim is denied by the city. 
(2)  If the refund claim is not decided by the city within one (1) year of the filing of the refund claim. 
Appeals to the Superior Court must be filed within one (1) year of the date on which the appeal was denied. This one-year period may be extended for such time as is agreed upon by the taxpayer and the city, but such agreement must be in writing and must be made within the one-year period allowed for the appeal or any extension thereof. No appeal may be filed in the Superior Court within one (1) year of the filing of the claim unless the taxpayer's claim has been denied by the city. 
(g)  Authority of city clerk. The city council hereby delegates to the city clerk the authority to process all claims for tax refunds. In addition, the city clerk may approve or disapprove refund claims where the basis for the refund claim is an obvious clerical error. All other cases in which there is no obvious clerical error must be decided by the city council. 
(Ord. of 4-13-98) 
Sec. 2-3. - Sale of parcels of property too small to be used independently. 
    The city council is hereby authorized to sell and convey parcels of property owned by the city which are narrow strips of land, so shaped or so small as to be incapable of being used independently as zoned or under applicable subdivision or other development ordinances or as streets whether this property is owned in fee by the city or has been obtained by grant of easement. The property may be sold to abutting property owners where such sales and conveyances facility the enjoyment of the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property. Such sales shall not require the use of the process of an auction or solicitation of sealed bids, however, for any such sale each abutting property owner shall be notified of the availability of the property and shall have an opportunity to present a proposal of purchase for said property to the city. 
    Upon receipt of any such proposals from any abutting property owners, the city shall be authorized to negotiate with such property owners, and the city council shall by motion authorize the sale of any such property and establish the terms of such sale. 
(Ord. of 9-14-98) 
Sec. 2-4. - Insolvent list. 
    The city clerk is hereby authorized to submit to the city council an insolvent list which shall contain a list of all property taxes determined to be uncollectible. Property taxes shall be considered uncollectible only after the city clerk has made every effort to collect such taxes. Property taxes may be deemed uncollectible for any valid reason including but not limited to the fact that the business or entity owing the taxes is out of business and maintains no property on which to levy, that the taxpayer has moved out of state, has no property on which to levy, and the city clerk is unable to locate the taxpayer, due to a legal decision that the taxes are not owed or that the property that was subject to taxation has been seized lawfully by another entity having priority over the city taxes, that more than seven (7) years has passed since the entry of a tax execution, or that the taxpayer has been adjudged bankrupt and the city clerk was unable to collect the taxes through the bankruptcy proceeding. 
    From time to time, but not more frequently than once per year, the city clerk shall establish an insolvent list which shall contain property taxes determined to be uncollectible. Said insolvent list shall be presented to the mayor and council. Said list shall contain the taxpayer's name, the year that the taxes were due, the bill number, the amount of taxes owed, and the reason that the city clerk has determined that said taxes are uncollectible. If the city council for any reason believes that any taxes listed on the insolvent list are capable of further collection attempts, the city council shall direct the clerk to remove those taxes from the insolvent list. Once appropriate revisions have been made, the city council shall approve the insolvent list, and the city clerk shall have no further obligation to attempt to collect the taxes shown on the insolvent list. The fact that property taxes have been determined to be uncollectible and placed on the insolvent list shall in no way relieve the taxpayer of the obligations to pay said taxes provided that said taxes are otherwise lawfully collectible under state law. 
(Ord. of 4-12-10) 
Secs. 2-5-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Government structure, Art. II. 

Sec. 2-26. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An ordinance of October 13, 2008 repealed  2-26, which pertained to time and place of regularly scheduled meeting, and derived from ordinances of January 13, 1997; and January 12, 1998. 
Sec. 2-27. - Compensation. 
    The city council hereby ordains compensation for the mayor and city council for performing their official duties shall be as follows: 
(1)  The mayor shall receive compensation in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per month plus one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per meeting attended for each official city meeting, not to exceed two (2) meetings per month. 
(2)  Members of the city council shall receive compensation in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per month plus one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per meeting attended for each official city meeting, not to exceed two (2) meetings per month. 
(3)  The mayor and members of the city council shall be entitled to reimbursement for expenses actually and necessarily incurred by the mayor or members of the city council in carrying out their official duties. 
The mayor or any member of the council may decline to accept the per meeting compensation. The mayor and each council member shall file a written statement with the city clerk at the first organizational meeting of their term of office and elect whether to accept or decline the per meeting compensation. The election of the mayor and each council member shall be binding on that person for their term of office. 
The term "official city meeting" as used in this section shall mean any regularly scheduled or called meeting of the city council at which a quorum is present and any official meeting or training session of the Georgia Municipal Association or the Gwinnett Municipal Association. 
(Ord. of 1-24-05; Ord. of 2-12-18 ) 
Secs. 2-28-2-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Building and inspection department,  5-31 et seq.; police, Ch. 11. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-46. - Commencement of terms of elected officials. 
    The terms of the elected officials of the city shall begin at the first organizational meeting in January following a general municipal election in accordance with the terms of O.C.G.A.  21-3-63(b). 
(Ord. of 12-27-88) 
Sec. 2-47. - Per diem, lodging, travel and overnight expenses of employees. 
(a)  General travel guidelines. This travel policy is hereby established to facilitate reimbursement for expenses incurred while attending training, meetings, or events that are directly related and necessary to the employee performing their official duties and who will be traveling outside the immediate area for approved city business. Employees are responsible for knowing the city's travel policy and for abiding by the policy. 
    Any employee traveling to or attending a training, meeting, or other event held out-of-state which has not been approved through the budget must obtain pre-approval by the department director or city manager prior to such travel. 
    Reimbursement for meals within a fifty-mile radius of an employee's regular work location or residence is not allowable, unless expressly provided herein. The daily per diem allowance includes all taxes and meal tips and is divided into breakfast, lunch and dinner amounts in order to allow employees to deduct specific meals, where required. Any meal included in a conference or registration fee will not be reimbursed, and the per diem allowance must be reduced by the applicable meal rate. Any employee seeking reimbursement shall submit a copy of the meeting or conference agenda at the time of making the request in order to confirm which, if any, meals are included. 
(b)  Per diem. Per diem meals and incidental expenses will be reimbursed according to the U.S. General Services Administration (GSA Per Diem) schedule of per diem rates as found at http://www.gsa.gov/perdiem for the metro-Atlanta area. This allowance is intended to cover food, non-alcoholic beverages and out-of-pocket expenses not covered through registration fees while an employee is performing their official duties while outside of the fifty-mile radius of their regular work location or residence, and which requires an overnight stay. An employee may opt to forgo the standard federal per diem rate according to the GSA schedule of per diem and turn in actual receipts for expenses. However, the total of such receipts may not exceed the allowable amount per the GSA per diem schedule. Per diem may be advanced prior to departure based on the GSA rate and the expected number of days of travel. Unexpended per diem is not refundable to the city, unless it is received in advance and travel was less than the expected duration. Receipts need not be kept to support or justify standard per diem. 
    For day seminars within the fifty-mile radius, where lunch is not included in the registration fee and prior approval of the department director has been obtained, an employee may receive the lunch per diem or use the city charge card. However, the charge must not exceed the lunch GSA per diem amount. 
    For each full day of travel, all three (3) meals are reimbursable. Per diems for the first and last day travel are governed as set forth below. 
Departure Day Reimbursable Meals Depart before 12:00 noon Lunch and dinner Depart after 12:00 noon Dinner  
Return Day Reimbursable Meals Return before 12:00 noon Breakfast Return between 12:00 noon & 7:00 p.m. Breakfast and lunch Return after 7:00 p.m. Breakfast, lunch and dinner The return time of 7:00 p.m. includes only direct travel time and shall not include time taken to stop for dinner.  
(c)  Required meal deductions. Any meal included in a conference or registration fee will not be reimbursed, and the employee shall be required to deduct the applicable meal rate from any reimbursement request. Required meal deductions include those provided by hotels, meetings, conferences or any other source. If a meal is offered as part of a conference and the employee has medical restrictions, dietary or religious convictions that restrict or prohibit consumption, the employee should make every effort to have the conference facilitate their needs. If the request is not honored, the employee is not required to deduct the applicable allowance amount from the per diem. However, the employee must include a note or other documentation with the per diem request to document this exception. 
(d)  High cost areas. All out-of-state travel should be pre-approved through the budget process. The GSA rates apply to most locations in the continental United States. All exceptions must be authorized/approved by the city manager and must follow the GSA approved per diem rate on the website referenced above for such area of travel. Examples to be considered for higher per diem rates include areas such as Washington, D.C., San Francisco, New York, Boston and Chicago. The purpose of the trip, duration of stay, individual representing the city, and reason for attendance may also be valid factors for exceptions to the standard GSA approved per diem rate. The employee traveling is responsible for requesting the per diem increase ahead of time. 
(e)  Spouse and dependent attendance. Within budget, the city encourages employees to attend functions that are in the best interest of the city. Spousal and dependent attendance can at times enhance the image of the city and is usually encouraged. However, the city cannot expend any public funds for the cost of spouse or dependent attendance while employees are attending meetings, conferences, training, conventions or other city sponsored functions. Therefore, spousal attendance is a personal expense. 
(1)  Prepayments. Where possible, known expenses for spousal or dependent attendance should be paid by the employee in advance of any function so that the city may include the payments with the initial registration. These expenses may include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Registration fees; 
b.  Travel cost; and 
c.  Specific function costs, e.g. dinners, socials, sporting functions, etc. 
(2)  Follow-up expenses. All final expenses for spousal or dependent attendance which were not paid prior to the function must be paid to the city within five (5) days of returning from the function. These typically include: 
a.  Any expenses incurred by a spouse or dependent and charged to the lodging bill; 
b.  Any unexpected travel cost charged to the city and not paid in advance; and 
c.  Any extraneous expenses incurred by a spouse or dependent while on the trip. 
(f)  Accommodations. 
(1)  Outside of fifty-mile radius. The city will pay for overnight lodging expenses outside of the fifty-mile radius of the employee's regular work location or residence for training and conferences. This reimbursement is separate from the per diem detailed above. Accommodations should be in or as close to the conference center as possible. The following procedures are required: 
a.  Employees are required to submit all room receipts. If staying at the convention headquarters hotel, charges are expected to be reasonable and within the range of similar accommodations in the immediate area visited. Employees should ask for and take advantage of special rates offered to convention attendees. If accommodations are not available at the convention headquarters hotel, the city will pay the prevailing rate at an alternate hotel recommended by the convention officials, not to exceed the rate of the headquarters hotel. 
b.  The city is exempt from certain taxes when traveling on behalf of the city and staying in a hotel within the State of Georgia. Employees are responsible for ensuring the hotel/motel tax exemption form and state tax exemption form are presented upon arrival at the hotel. The city will not reimburse for any tax that should have been exempted but for the employee's failure to follow this procedure. 
c.  Employees must check out a city credit card before leaving for a trip and present it at check-in for each overnight in-state trip, as required in order to receive tax exemptions. It is the responsibility of the employee to ensure that all tax exemptions are secured. The city will not reimburse for any tax that should have been exempted but for the employee's failure to follow this procedure. Further, only pre-approved, budgeted expenditures may be charged to the city's credit card. 
(2)  Within fifty-mile radius. The city will not pay or reimburse for overnight lodging expenses within a fifty-mile radius of the employee's regular work location or residence, unless pre-approved through the budget process or by the department director where an employee may have early morning or late night meetings. Prior approval should be obtained in advance of registration to stay at a convention hotel within the fifty-mile radius. As an exception, the city will pay for overnight lodging expenses within a fifty-mile radius when a city strategic planning conference is held and the city directly pays for the lodging. In such situation, mileage may be reimbursed for strategic conferences, using city hall as the beginning point, since reimbursement policies normally do not allow mileage for getting to a place of work. 
(g)  Unique expenses. Occasionally, while on overnight city business, unexpected events arise that are necessary to support the trip. An example of such would be a business meal. Such a function consists of a working meal where a city employee and another individual (or individuals) meet, dine and make decisions concerning issues beneficial to the city. If a business meal occurs while on per diem, a receipt must be turned in to support the claim for additional reimbursement or the charge to the city credit card. It is a judgment call on the employee's part to determine the necessity and worth of the expenditure. Whenever possible, an employee should obtain pre-approval from their immediate supervisor prior to the event. If not pre-approved, and the supervisor subsequently disagrees with the necessity, the employee will not be reimbursed. In such event, the city will be held harmless and [the] employee will remain totally responsible for the full amount of the meal. 
(h)  Reimbursements. Proper documentation is always required for expenses to be reimbursed by the city. Items for proper documentation include, but are not limited to, receipts, meeting agenda, outline of meals by day and meal, and detailed explanations for items that are not ordinary in nature. Documentation and payments with respect to lodging, travel, and the credit card charges are managed by the city clerk's office. Only pre-approved or budgeted items may be charged to the city's credit card. Absolutely no other charges to the city's credit card are permitted. 
(1)  All proper documentation must be attached to an expense report form before submittal to the department director for approval. The city clerk's office will review the reimbursement request and supporting documentation for any irregularities. If irregularities exist, the city clerk's office will address the issue immediately. If extenuating circumstances exist, each such situation will be handled on a case-by-case basis. 
(2)  To support reimbursement claims and/or extra expenses following out-of-town events, an expense reimbursement report must be submitted, along with all necessary receipts, within five (5) business days after returning from a trip. Employees may only be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred while carrying out their official duties. Any unusual but necessary expenses incurred will be paid only after a written explanation is attached to the travel voucher and approved by all appropriate personnel. 
(i)  Exclusions. 
(1)  The city will not pay for any movies, entertainment or similar expenses while an employee is traveling. 
(2)  The city will not pay any fees for sports activities associated with tournaments, etc., regardless of whether such activities are a part of the conference agenda. If the employee wishes to participate, the employee must pay the cost to do so. 
(j)  Transportation and travel reimbursement. Approved modes of transportation include vehicle, air, rail, taxi and public transportation. The method selected by the employee shall be what is the most economically feasible, taking into consideration the value of time. Employees are required to utilize city vehicles when available and practical, unless approval for the use of a personal vehicle or some other form of transportation is obtained from a supervisor prior to the trip. 
(1)  Mileage. Miles traveled in personal vehicles will be reimbursed at the rate established by the Internal Revenue Service guidelines. Medical mileage shall also be reimbursed in accordance with IRS guidelines. All personal vehicle mileage must be substantiated using an internet driving map site, such a MapQuest, Rand McNally, Google Maps, etc. Mileage will be paid from the employees place of work or from the actual point of departure, whichever is less. Reimbursement requests should include the purpose of the trip. Reimbursement requests without the proper documentation will be returned to the requestor for further explanation prior to payment. Under no circumstances should the employee use the city credit or fuel charge card to put gas in their personal vehicle. 
(2)  Rental cars. Expenses associated with rental cars, i.e. rental expense and fuel will be paid at cost, with receipts provided. Employees shall rent mid-size or smaller vehicles, or an appropriate vehicle size based upon the number of employees needing transportation. Expenses associated with exceeding this car class will be the responsibility of the employee. Employees should decline additional insurance coverage offered by rental car companies as the city's insurance covers car rentals. 
(3)  Air/rail. Transportation provided by major airlines or railroads shall be paid at cost to the employee. Travel will be limited to coach/economy class service. In the event the employee chooses a class higher than coach/economy such as business or first class, the difference in expense shall be the responsibility of the employee. 
(4)  Taxi/shuttle. Expenses associated with local transportation will be deemed eligible expenses as long as receipts are provided with point to point explanations for such mode of transportation. 
(Ord. of 4-5-93; Ord. of 12-13-93; Ord. of 2-12-96; Ord. of 1-24-00; Ord. of 1-2-01; Ord. of 2-26-01; Ord. of 1-14-02; Ord. of 10-27-03; Ord. of 12-13-04; Ord. of 6-12-06; Ord. of 12-11-06; Ord. of 12-17-07; Ord. of 6-30-08; Ord. of 12-8-08; Ord. of 4-12-10; Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 4-11-16 , pt. I) 
Editor's note- City administrator changed to city manager at the direction of the city. 
Sec. 2-48. - Travel reimbursement of elected officials. 
(a)  General travel guidelines. This travel policy is hereby established to facilitate reimbursement for expenses incurred while attending training, meetings, or events that are directly related and necessary to the elected official performing their official duties and who will be traveling outside the immediate area for approved city business. Elected officials are responsible for knowing the city's travel policy and for abiding by the policy. 
    Elected officials shall only be reimbursed for expenses actually and necessarily incurred by the elected official in carrying out their official duties. Reimbursement shall never exceed the actual expenditure incurred by the elected official. 
    Elected officials' attendance or travel to training, meetings, or events held out-of-state which are not related to the Georgia Municipal Association (GMA) or National League of Cities (NLC) must be pre-approved by the city council. 
(b)  Meals. Elected officials are expected to take advantage of all meals included in convention and meeting registration fees. Other meals are to be paid based on the reasonable food cost on the area being visited. The city will not pay for alcoholic beverages of any kind. Any alcoholic beverages, spouses or guest meals (including taxes and gratuities) must be deducted from receipts; only the elected official's expenses may be included on the reimbursement request. Tips shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the meal bill. 
    If a meal is offered as part of a convention or meeting and the elected official has medical restrictions, dietary or religious convictions that restrict or prohibit consumption, the elected official should make every effort to have the convention accommodate their needs. If the convention does not honor the request, the elected official may be reimbursed any cost incurred for a suitable meal. However, the elected official must include a note or other documentation with the request to document this exception. 
(c)  Spouse and dependent attendance. Within budget, the city encourages elected officials to attend functions that are in the best interest of the city. Spousal and dependent attendance can at times enhance the image of the city and is usually encouraged. However, the city cannot expend any public funds for the cost of spouse or dependent attendance while elected officials are attending meetings, conferences, training, conventions or other city sponsored functions. Therefore, spousal attendance is a personal expense. 
(1)  Prepayments. Where possible, known expenses for spousal or dependent attendance should be paid by the elected official in advance of any function so that the city may include the payments with the initial registration. These expenses may include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Registration fees; 
b.  Travel cost; and 
c.  Specific function costs, e.g. dinners, socials, sporting functions, etc. 
(2)  Follow-up expenses. All final expenses for spousal or dependent attendance which were not paid prior to the function must be paid to the city within five (5) days of returning from the function. These typically include: 
a.  Any expenses incurred by a spouse or dependent and charged to the lodging bill; 
b.  Any unexpected travel cost charged to the city and not paid in advance; and 
c.  Any extraneous expenses incurred by a spouse or dependent while on the trip. 
(d)  Accommodations. 
(1)  Outside of fifty-mile radius. The city will pay for overnight lodging expenses outside of the fifty-mile radius of the city for training and conferences. Accommodations should be in or as close to the conference center as possible. The following procedures are required: 
a.  Elected officials are required to submit all room receipts. If staying at the convention headquarters hotel, charges are expected to be reasonable and within the range of similar accommodations in the immediate area visited. Elected officials should ask for and take advantage of special rates offered to convention attendees. If accommodations are not available at the convention headquarters hotel, the city will pay the prevailing rate at an alternate hotel recommended by the convention officials, not to exceed the rate of the headquarters hotel. 
b.  The city is exempt from certain taxes when traveling on behalf of the city and staying in a hotel within the State of Georgia. Elected officials are responsible for ensuring the hotel/motel tax exemption form and state tax exemption form are presented upon arrival at the hotel. The city will not reimburse for any tax that should have been exempted but for the elected official's failure to follow this procedure. 
c.  Elected officials must check out a city credit card before leaving for a trip and present it at check-in for each overnight in-state trip, as required in order to receive tax exemptions. It is the responsibility of the elected official to ensure that all tax exemptions are secured. The city will not reimburse for any tax that should have been exempted but for the elected official's failure to follow this procedure. Further, only pre-approved, budgeted expenditures may be charged to the city's credit card. 
(2)  Within fifty-mile radius. The city will not pay or reimburse for overnight lodging expenses within a fifty-mile radius of the employee's regular work location or residence, unless pre-approved by council for circumstances where an elected official may have early morning or late night meetings. Prior approval should be obtained in advance of registration to stay at a convention hotel within the fifty-mile radius. As an exception, the city will pay for overnight lodging expenses within a fifty-mile radius when a city strategic planning conference is held and the city directly pays for the lodging. In such situation, mileage may be reimbursed for strategic conferences, using city hall as the beginning point. 
(e)  Reimbursement. Proper documentation is always required for expenses to be reimbursed by the city. Items for proper documentation include, but are not limited to, receipts, meeting agenda, outline of meals by day and meal, and detailed explanations for items that are not ordinary in nature. Documentation and payments with respect to lodging, travel, and the credit card charges are managed by the city clerk's office. Only pre-approved or budgeted items may be charged to the city's credit card. Absolutely no other charges to the city's credit card are permitted. 
(1)  All proper documentation must be attached to an expense report form before submittal to the city clerk for approval. The city clerk's office will review the reimbursement request and supporting documentation for any irregularities. If irregularities exist, the city clerk's office will address the issue immediately. If extenuating circumstances exist, each such situation will be handled on a case-by-case basis. The city clerk will then obtain one (1) other approval from another elected official and submit to the accounting department for payment. 
(2)  To support reimbursement claims and/or extra expenses following out-of-town events, an expense reimbursement report must be submitted, along with all necessary receipts, within five (5) business days after returning from a trip. Elected officials may only be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred while carrying out their official duties. Any unusual but necessary expenses incurred will be paid only after a written explanation is attached to the travel voucher and approved by another elected official. 
(f)  Exclusions. 
(1)  The city will not pay for any movies, entertainment or similar expenses while an elected official is traveling. 
(2)  The city will not pay any fees for sports activities associated with tournaments, etc., regardless of whether such activities are a part if the conference agenda. If the elected official wishes to participate, the employee must pay the cost to do so. 
(g)  Transportation and travel reimbursement. Approved modes of transportation include vehicle, air, rail, taxi and public transportation. The method selected by the elected official shall be what is the most economically feasible, taking into consideration the value of time. 
(1)  Mileage. Miles traveled in personal vehicles will be reimbursed at the rate established by the Internal Revenue Service guidelines. All personal vehicle mileage must be substantiated using an internet driving map site, such a MapQuest, Rand McNally, Google Maps, etc. Mileage will be paid from city hall or from the actual point of departure, whichever is less. Reimbursement requests should include the purpose of the trip. Reimbursement requests without the proper documentation will be returned to the requestor for further explanation prior to payment. Under no circumstances should the elected official use the city credit or fuel charge card to put gas in their personal vehicle. 
(2)  Rental cars. Expenses associated with rental cars, i.e. rental expense and fuel will be paid at cost, with receipts provided. Elected officials shall rent mid-size or smaller vehicles, or an appropriate vehicle size based upon the number of employees needing transportation. Expenses associated with exceeding this car class will be the responsibility of the elected official. Elected officials should decline additional insurance coverage offered by rental car companies as the city's insurance covers car rentals. 
(3)  Air/rail. Transportation provided by major airlines or railroads shall be paid at cost to the elected official. Travel will be limited to coach/economy class service. In the event the elected official chooses a class higher than coach/economy such as business or first class, the difference in expense shall be the responsibility of the elected official. 
(4)  Taxi/shuttle. Expenses associated with local transportation will be deemed eligible expenses as long as receipts are provided with point to point explanations for such mode of transportation. 
(Ord. of 11-26-01; Ord. of 3-27-06; Ord. of 4-11-2016 , pt. II) 
Sec. 2-49. - Term limits for boards and commissions. 
(a)  Service on each and every board, authority, commission or committee of the City of Duluth including but not limited to the alcohol review board, the construction board, the downtown development authority, the finance committee, the ethics board, and the parks and recreation advisory board shall be limited to three (3) consecutive full four (4) year terms and in no event shall exceed fourteen (14) consecutive years. 
(b)  Nothing in this code section shall prohibit an appointee to a board, authority, commission or committee from serving an unexpired term provided that no appointee shall serve a consecutive period greater than fourteen (14) years. 
(Ord. of 6-11-12) 
Secs. 2-50-2-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Division 2 was formerly titled city manager, at the direction of the city, city manager has been changed to city manager throughout this Code. 

Sec. 2-56. - Office created. 
    There is hereby created for the city the office of city manager. The manager shall be vested with the authority and responsibility to oversee and supervise the regular business affairs of the city, and shall act as the office manager of the city hall. Except as otherwise provided by general or local state law, he shall be the chief administrative officer of the city, and shall exercise executive supervision over all city employees and departments. He shall further have such other duties as the mayor or council may require, and which are not inconsistent with this Code, or any state law. The city manager need not be a resident of the city. 
(Ord. of 7-14-75(1),  1; Ord. of 11-22-93; Ord. of 2-22-99) 
Editor's note- City administrator changed to city manager at the direction of the city. 
Sec. 2-57. - Duties, responsibilities. 
(a)  The city manager shall be responsible for supervising all paid employees of the city other than the city attorney and the city judge. The city manager's authority to supervise employees under his or her control shall include the ability to hire, discipline or dismiss any such employee. The city manager shall be responsible for supervision and control of the city clerk and all employees reporting to the city clerk; however, the city manager shall not have the authority to hire, discipline or dismiss the city clerk or to alter the duties and responsibilities of the city clerk as provided by the Charter. The city manager may make recommendations to the mayor and city council regarding hiring, disciplinary and termination decisions relating to the city clerk, however, final decisions related to all such matters may only be taken by the city council. The city manager shall be responsible for the supervision and control of the chief of police and all employees reporting to the chief of police; however, the city manager shall not have the authority to hire, discipline or dismiss the chief of police or to alter the duties and responsibilities of the chief of police as determined by the mayor and council. The city manager may make recommendations to the mayor and city council regarding hiring, disciplinary and termination decisions related to the chief of police but final decisions related to all such matters may only be taken by the city council. The chief of police shall be responsible for the hiring, firing and supervision of all police department employees and shall have the ability to take disciplinary action against any employee of the police department. 
(b)  The city manager shall have the authority to adopt and implement personnel policies and procedures for the orderly administration of personnel matters within the city which shall apply to all employees under the control of the city manager. The chief of police shall have the authority, with the approval of the city manager, to adopt and implement standard operating procedures and personnel policies for the orderly administration of personnel matters in the police department. The city manager and the chief of police shall not adopt or implement any personnel policies pursuant to the authority granted in this section which would have the effect of changing the status of any employee of the city to any designation other than an employee at will. In addition, no personnel policies or procedures shall be adopted by the manager or the chief of police pursuant to the authority granted in this section which would limit or prohibit the mayor and city council from exercising the legal authority granted to the mayor and city council pursuant to article 3 of the Charter, which authorizes the mayor and council to exercise ultimate final authority over the administrative affairs of the city. 
(c)  The city manager shall have such other and further duties, responsibilities and authority as may be delegated to the city manager by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 9-21-90,  2; Ord. of 11-22-93; Ord. of 2-22-99) 
Editor's note- City administrator changed to city manager at the direction of the city. 
Sec. 2-58. - Supervision. 
    The city manager shall be responsible for overseeing and supervising the regular business affairs of the city and shall report directly to the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 7-14-75(1),  2; Ord. of 11-22-93) 
Editor's note- City administrator changed to city manager at the direction of the city. 
Sec. 2-59. - Appointment. 
    The city manager shall be appointed by the mayor and council. The compensation and term of office of the city manager shall be established by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 7-14-75(1),  3; Ord. of 11-22-93) 
Editor's note- City administrator changed to city manager at the direction of the city. 
Secs. 2-60-2-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of August 22, 1994,  I-VI, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Art. IV,  2-71-2-76, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-71. - Definition. 
    As used in this article, the term "emergency management" shall mean the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions other than those functions for which military forces or state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of man-made or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation, fire fighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, protection against the effects of radiological, chemical and other special weapons, emergency transportation, plant protection, shelter, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian population together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out the foregoing functions. 
(Ord. of 8-22-94,  I) 
Sec. 2-72. - Office of the county emergency management director. 
    It is the desire and intent of the governing officials of the City of Duluth, Georgia, that the City of Duluth be a part of the Gwinnett County emergency management agency. The present emergency management director will serve as director for the entire county. Should that office become vacant the chairman, and county commissioners of Gwinnett, with concurrence of the mayors of cities within the county, shall nominate for appointment, by the governor, a director of emergency management for Gwinnett County. When appointed, the emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  To represent the governing officials of the city on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  To assist city officials in organizing city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  To develop, in conjunction with city and county departments, the Gwinnett County plan for emergency functions set forth in section 2-71 of this article. Such plan will be consonance with the Georgia Emergency Operations Plan and shall be submitted to the governing officials of Gwinnett County and the cities therein for approval. 
(4)  To maintain the emergency management agency and to oversee the carrying out of the day-to-day administration of the Gwinnett emergency management program, including the submission of required reports, to the Georgia emergency management agency. 
(5)  To submit reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activity, etc. 
(6)  To obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the Gwinnett emergency operations center. 
(7)  To coordinate the activities of the Gwinnett emergency operating center staff during periods of an emergency, and under the supervision of Gwinnett governing officials. 
(Ord. of 8-22-94,  II) 
Sec. 2-73. - Gwinnett emergency management agency. 
    The Gwinnett emergency management agency shall be established around existing city and county departments and the emergency functions described in section 2-71 above are assigned as follows: 
Department/agency Functions*   1. Chairman, county commissioners, mayors of cities Direction and control   2. County police department, sheriff's office, city police Communications and warning   3. County administrators office Emergency public information   4. County police department, city police departments, sheriff's department Search, rescue and recovery   5. County police department, city police, sheriff's department Law enforcement services   6. County police department, city police, fire department Evacuation services   7. Fire department Fire services   8. Administrative services, board of education Transportation services   9. County public utilities, city public utilities Public works services  10. Fire, county police department, city police Medical and deceased identification services  11. American Red Cross, emergency management Emergency shelter services  12. American Red Cross, board of education Food services  13. DEFACS Human services  14. Fire Radiological protection  15. Fire Damage assessment services  16. Fire and emergency services Resource management  17. Fire Hazardous materials  18. Emergency management Attack preparedness, Dam failure preparedness  
* As appropriate to the local organization, these functions can be assigned to existing departments or may be separate. Functions should be assigned consistent with the local emergency operations plan. 
Heads of city departments listed above are responsible for assisting county department heads in developing appropriate annexes to the local emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
(Ord. of 8-22-94,  III) 
Sec. 2-74. - Powers during an emergency or disaster. 
    In the event of a man-made or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of Duluth, the mayor of Duluth separately, or jointly with the chairman, county commissioners, or in their absences their legally appointed successors, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues, the following powers: 
(1)  To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management, and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources; 
(2)  To seize or take for temporary use, any private property for the protection of the public; 
(3)  To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies; 
(4)  And, to perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
(Ord. of 8-22-94,  IV) 
Sec. 2-75. - Volunteers. 
    All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article, shall serve without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as city officers and employees. 
(Ord. of 8-22-94,  V) 
Sec. 2-76. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article, or any rule, order, or regulation made pursuant to this article, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable for committing a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 8-22-94,  VI) 
Secs. 2-77-2-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted September 30, 1994 did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Art. V,  2-86-2-90, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-86. - Purpose of the organization. 
(a)  To advise, make recommendations to, and assist the director of parks and recreation and the city officials on recreational and parks matters. 
(b)  To seek the development of a broad variety of programs, facilities, and services to meet the total needs and demands utilizing the total resources of the city. 
(c)  To inform and educate the public about the importance of and need for recreational programs, facilities, and services. 
(d)  To achieve citizens input in the planning and development of the recreation system and identify local needs. 
(e)  To establish and maintain an effective public relations program utilizing all appropriate communication media. 
(f)  To advise on financial planning and secure adequate budget support. 
(g)  To provide a close liaison and coordination with other agencies as well as all municipalities within the county to ensure total cooperative community effort to provide the most effective and economical services possible. 
(h)  To evaluate the organizations programs, facilities, services, and relationship periodically to assure that its goals and objectives are being achieved. 
(i)  To provide encouragement, support and work in partnership with the director of parks and recreation to provide a team approach to addressing concerns. 
(j)  To advise, guide and inform the youth athletic associations of the operating procedures and policies of the city parks and recreation department. 
(Ord. of 9-30-94; Ord. of 8-14-06) 
Sec. 2-87. - Membership. 
    The board shall consist of eight (8) members and one (1) alternate member appointed by the city council. Eight (8) of the nine (9) members shall reside in the city limits of Duluth. One (1) member shall either reside within the city limits of Duluth, or shall own or operate a business within the city limits of Duluth, provided the business is current in the payment of its city occupational tax and all other payments due to the city. Regardless of any other provision to the contrary contained in this section, at all times at least eight (8) of nine (9) members of the parks and recreation advisory board shall be residents of the city. Members shall serve without pay. 
    Terms of office shall begin the first Monday of April. Four (4) members appointed beginning the first Monday of April 2013 shall have terms ending the first Monday in April, 2017; Four (4) members appointed to begin the first Monday of April 2015 shall have terms ending the first Monday in April, 2019; and the one (1) alternate member appointed beginning the first Monday of April, 2013 shall have a term ending the first Monday in April 2017. All appointments thereafter shall be for four-year terms. 
(Ord. of 9-30-94; Ord. of 2-12-96; Ord. of 10-28-96,  1; Ord. of 8-14-06; Ord. of 3-26-07; Ord. of 6-11-12) 
Sec. 2-88. - Officers. 
(a)  The annual meeting (February), the members of the recreation board shall elect from its membership a chairperson, vice-chairperson and secretary. 
(b)  The chairperson will set the agenda for all meetings, with approval of the director of parks and recreation, preside at meetings of the board, appoint committees, and perform all duties generally pertaining to the office of chairperson. 
(c)  The vice-chairperson shall perform these duties in the absence of the chairperson and perform other duties as assigned by the board. 
(d)  The secretary shall keep a record of the meetings of the board, record all official actions, have custody of it's books and records, give notices to the members of the meetings, establish and maintain necessary financial records, and perform other duties as may be assigned by the board. 
(Ord. of 9-30-94; Ord. of 8-14-06) 
Sec. 2-89. - Meetings. 
(a)  The annual meeting shall be held the second Wednesday of February of each year and officers elected at this meeting shall take office immediately. 
(b)  The board shall meet regularly the second Wednesday of each month, or as scheduled by majority vote of the board. 
(c)  Special meeting may be called or regular meeting can be cancelled by the chairperson, director of parks and recreation or a majority of members at any time deemed necessary or desirable. 
(d)  The absence from three (3) consecutive meetings by any member of the board, without due acceptable excuse, shall constitute a vacancy on the board. 
(e)  A majority of the board shall at all times constitute a quorum. 
(f)  All meetings shall be conducted in compliance with any open meeting laws mandated by the state. 
(Ord. of 9-30-94; Ord. of 8-14-06; Ord. of 12-8-14 ) 
Sec. 2-90. - Board responsibilities. 
(a)  The board is responsible for advising and making recommendations on all recreational matters. 
(b)  The board shall operate under this adopted city ordinance and the ordinances shall act as by-laws from this point on. 
(c)  The board shall prepare and recommend for approval, regulations and policies for proper conduct of public recreation facilities. 
(d)  The board shall advise the director of parks and recreation of the development of programs for all citizens of the city. 
(e)  The board shall advise the director of parks and recreation on an annual budget for its approval by the city council. 
(f)  The board shall make provisions for a high standard in the development, preservation, care, and maintenance of the park areas and facilities for the maximum enjoyment and use by the public. 
(g)  The board is responsible for the initiation, participation, and approval of a long range plan for acquiring, developing and maintaining areas designed for community recreation use. 
(h)  The board is responsible for guiding and advising the director of parks and recreation on the development of park master plans of all city parks for the elected official's approval. 
(Ord. of 9-30-94; Ord. of 8-14-06) 
Secs. 2-91-2-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE COMMITTEE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of February 14, 1994 did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Art. VI,  2-96-2-98, was at the discretion of the editor. An ordinance of February 26, 1996,  1-4, repealed former Art. VI,  2-96-2-98, in its entirety, and added a new Art. VI,  2-96-2-99. Former Art. VI pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the aforementioned ordinance of February 14, 1994. An ordinance adopted March 25, 2002, amended the Code by amending the title of Art. VI. Subsequently, an ordinance of December 17, 2007 amended the title of Art. VI, which was formerly entitled "Capital Reserve and Retirement Benefits Investment Committee." 

Sec. 2-96. - Duties. 
(a)  There is hereby established a finance committee, composed of up to eight (8) members. 
(b)  The committee shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Two (2) members of the governing body. 
(2)  One (1) to four (4) city residents with investment experience. May consist of up to two (2) city residents of whom one (1) shall be designated as an alternate. All committee members serving must have some experience with financial/investment and/or employee benefits experience. Such members shall be appointed by the mayor and council of the city to serve four-year staggered terms. 
(3)  The city's finance manager. 
(4)  The city's human resources manager. 
These positions permanently serve on the committee. 
(c)  Members of the finance committee meet at least quarterly to determine general strategies, and monitor results of both the fund and pension plan. Committee members as outlined in subsection 2-96(b)(2) shall be compensated at twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per meeting, up to a maximum of four (4) meetings per calendar year. 
(d)  The finance committee shall include in its deliberations such topics as: Economic outlook, portfolio diversification and maturity structure, potential risks to the city funds, brokers and dealers, and the target rate-of-return on the investment portfolio. 
(e)  The finance committee will be responsible for advising the mayor and council and appropriate appointed officials on investment opportunities and actions with respect to the capital reserve funds monies. 
(f)  The finance committee will act as the city's audit review panel and perform cost analysis relating to employee benefits when directed, and be responsible for making recommendations before the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 2-26-96; Ord. of 2-25-02; Ord. of 3-25-02; Ord. of 2-10-03; Ord. of 3-8-04; Ord. of 8-8-05; Ord. of 7-24-06; Ord. of 6-11-07; Ord. of 12-17-07; Ord. of 6-8-09; Ord. of 5-10-10; Ord. of 6-11-12; Ord. of 1-11-16 ,  1) 
Sec. 2-97. - Investment procedures. 
(a)  Written investment procedures must be approved by the investment committee for the capital reserve fund or the pension plan, they have no independent authority to expend said funds. 
(b)  The investment committee shall provide for immediate release of meeting minutes, which shall be distributed to the full governing body. 
(c)  Any two (2) members of the committee may request a special meeting, and four (4) members shall constitute a quorum. The committee shall establish its own rules of procedure. The committee shall perform such other duties as may be assigned, or upon motion of the governing body. 
(Ord. of 2-26-96) 
Sec. 2-98. - Ethics and purpose. 
    The council and employees of the city want to ensure the most professional and ethical management of the city's invested monies. Multiple signatures of elected and appointed officials promote honest and ethical control, and an independent committee composed of non-signatory members ensures avoidance of impropriety. 
(Ord. of 2-26-96) 
Sec. 2-99. - Signatures. 
    Any directing of distributions, authorizations of payments, or authorization of investments of capital reserve funds shall require the signatures of both the mayor and mayor pro tem, and either the city clerk or city manager to be official. 
    All authorized signatures are as referenced on the "Notification to South Trust Bank, N.A." (the "trustee"); and will be required to be updated on an annual basis upon the request of the trustee. 
(Ord. of 2-26-96; Ord. of 2-10-03) 
Secs. 2-100-2-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - APPOINTMENT, REVIEW, COMPENSATION AND TERMINATION PAY FOR CITY MANAGER, POLICE CHIEF AND CITY CLERK[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of November 11, 1996 amended the Code by adding a new Art. IV,  2-60 and 2-61. In order to prevent duplication of article numbers, said provisions have been redesignated as Art. VII,  2-106 and 2-107, at the discretion of the editor. 
Editor's note- City administrator changed to city manager at the direction of the city. 

Sec. 2-106. - Appointment, annual compensation and evaluations. 
    The city manager, the chief of police and the city clerk shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. The compensation and benefits for the city manager shall be established by the mayor and council. The mayor and council shall confer with the city manager on at least an annual basis regarding job performance and compensation. The mayor and council shall provide the city manager with a written job evaluation at least once per fiscal year; shall conduct a salary review prior to the end of each fiscal year; and shall determine whether any adjustment of the compensation and benefits provided for the city manager should be made for the next fiscal year. Any action changing the compensation or benefits of the city manager shall be taken in a public meeting and shall be recorded in the minutes of the public meeting, except the city manager shall be eligible for costs of living increases and annual performance compensation subject to the same terms and conditions as all other employees. 
    The city manager shall have authority to review the job performance and compensation of the city clerk and chief of police and to make adjustments in said compensation in the same manner as provided for in the city personnel polices for all other administrative employees. Any recommendations of the city manager for disciplinary action or termination of the city clerk or chief of police shall be forwarded to the mayor and city council for consideration. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96; Ord. of 12-11-00) 
Editor's note- City administrator changed to city manager at the direction of the city. 
Sec. 2-107. - Termination pay. 
    The chief of police, the city manager and the city clerk shall be entitled to certain termination pay as part of their compensation and benefits of the position. Upon appointment by the mayor and council and during the first twelve (12) months after appointment, the chief of police, the city manager and the city clerk (hereinafter "the official") shall be entitled to termination pay equal to two (2) weeks salary; after twelve (12) months of service and until the official has completed twenty-four (24) months of service, the official shall be entitled to termination pay equal to four (4) weeks salary; this termination benefit shall thereafter increase by an amount equal to the official's salary for one week for each additional year of service with the city (Example: six (6) years of service equals eight (8) weeks of termination pay). The amount of termination pay accumulated by the official shall never exceed sixteen weeks of the official's salary. Any termination pay earned in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be in addition to any other accrued or guaranteed benefits which the employee may be entitled under the personnel policies of the city or the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States of America; however, the official shall not gain or accrue any additional benefits as a result of the termination pay provided to the employee. 
    The official shall be entitled to this termination pay if the official is terminated by the mayor and council for any reason other than arrest and/or conviction of a crime or for professional misconduct. For purposes of this article, the term "professional misconduct" shall include but not be limited to the following offenses: Willful disregard of an express direction of the city council and/or refusal to obey reasonable orders of the city council; willful neglect of duties; inappropriate or illegal harassment of city employees; or actions involving fraud or dishonesty. The official shall also be entitled to termination pay should the official resign following a request by a majority of the city council that a resignation be tendered in lieu of termination for a reason other than arrest or conviction of a crime or for professional misconduct. The official shall not be entitled to termination pay as described in this section upon voluntary resignation of the official's position. 
(Ord. of 11-11-97) 
Editor's note- City administrator changed to city manager at the direction of the city. 
Secs. 2-108, 2-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ACCEPTANCE OF CREDIT CARD PAYMENTS BY THE CITY 

Sec. 2-110. - All sums due city may be paid by credit card. 
    All sums due the city including, but not limited to, occupation taxes, fines, forfeitures, penalties, license fees, permit fees and registration fees, may be paid by the use of credit cards. The city manager shall establish the procedures for acceptance of credit card payments for amounts due the city. The city manager is authorized to enter into agreements with credit card issuers to facilitate the acceptance of credit card payments by the city. 
(Ord. of 4-8-02; Ord. of 4-12-04) 
Editor's note- City administrator changed to city manager at the direction of the city. 
Sec. 2-111. - Discounts provided by credit card agreements. 
    A credit card agreement may provide for the acceptance of the credit card payments from the credit card company at a discount from the face amount of the payment or for the withholding of administrative fees from the face amount of the payment. Such discounted fee is granted in exchange for the improved governmental cash flow, reduction of administrative overhead expenses and increased public convenience as a result of credit card payments. 
(Ord. of 4-8-02) 
Sec. 2-112. - Surcharges. 
    A surcharge equal to the administrative fees charged by the credit card issuer to the city shall be imposed upon any person making a payment by credit card, when such surcharges are permitted by the operating rules and regulations of the credit card issuer. 
(Ord. of 4-8-02) 
Sec. 2-113. - Cancellation provisions. 
    Any agreement with a credit card issuer for the acceptance or payments via credit shall contain a provision that the agreement may be canceled at any time by the city. 
(Ord. of 4-8-02) 
Sec. 2-114. - Liability for obligations. 
    No person making payment by credit card to the city is relieved from liability for the underlying obligation except to the extent that the city actually receives final payment of the obligation in cash or its equivalent. If final payment is not made by the credit card issuer or other guarantor of payment in the credit card transaction, the underlying obligation for the money due is not extinguished. All applicable penalties, interest and collection fees on the unpaid amount shall be due from the person making the payment by credit card. 
    Such penalties, interest and fees on an unpaid amount shall accrue from the date the unpaid obligation was first due under the applicable statute or ordinance. The city shall follow the collection procedures for the unpaid amount that would have otherwise been applicable had the credit card payment not been attempted. 
(Ord. of 4-8-02) 
Secs. 2-115-2-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 2-200. - Internal operating procedures. 
    The internal operating procedures of the Gwinnett Judicial Circuit's Indigent Defense Program as accepted by the Gwinnett County Indigent Defense Committee on January 30, 2002, and as ordered by the Superior Court of Gwinnett County on January 30, 2002, the State Court of Gwinnett County on February 7, 2002, the Magistrate Court of Gwinnett County on February 17, 2002, the Gwinnett Circuit Juvenile Court on February 7, 2002, and the Recorder's Court of Gwinnett County on February 7, 2002, a copy of which is hereby set forth as attachment "A" to the ordinance of August 26, 2000, which adopted this article, is hereby adopted as the official policy of the city as modified herein. Attachement "A" is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 8-26-02) 
Sec. 2-201. - Interpretation of terms. 
    All references to the "county" or any office of the county including, but not limited to, the administrative office of the courts, in attachment "A" shall be considered to be references to the city. All references to the "committee" or "governing committee" in attachment "A" with respect to the selection of panel attorneys for the municipal court of the city and the processing and consideration of invoices from attorneys shall be considered to be references to the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. of 8-26-02) 
Sec. 2-202. - Panel of attorneys. 
    The panel of attorneys from which appointments may be made by the municipal court of the city may be compiled by periodically soliciting attorneys who are on the panel of qualified attorneys created by the county indigent defense governing committee. The city panel of attorneys need not be categorized as in part X of attachment "A." Any attorney on the county's panel of attorneys who is involuntarily removed for cause pursuant to section 10.4(B) of attachment "A" to an ordinance of August 26, 2002, shall be ineligible for appointment by the municipal court of the city. Any other qualified attorney not appearing on the county's panel of qualified attorneys may request his or her inclusion on the city panel and may be included on the city panel if found to be qualified by the chief municipal court judge. Any attorney accepting an appointment by the municipal court of the city shall be required to comply with the guidelines and standards applicable to panel attorneys and other appointed counsel set forth in attachment "A," as modified herein. 
(Ord. of 8-26-02) 
Sec. 2-203. - Fee or expense invoice. 
    Any fee or expense invoice submitted by appointed counsel shall be submitted to the municipal court clerk and shall be reviewed by the city municipal court judge who made the appointment or the chief judge, whose decision regarding city panel attorneys, payment of fees, expenses, and costs shall be final and may not be appealed except as may be provided by law. 
(Ord. of 8-26-02) 
Sec. 2-204. - Standards ofAlabama v. Shelton. 
    To the extent that attachment "A" assumes a standard for determining an indigent defendant's right to appointed counsel inconsistent with the holding of Alabama v. Shelton, it shall be the policy of the city to apply the standards of Alabama v. Shelton. 
(Ord. of 8-26-02) 
Sec. 2-205. - Appeals. 
    The term "appeal" as used in section 8.2 and section 3 of attachment "A" shall be construed to include a petition for certiorari to be filed in the superior court of the county after a conviction in the municipal court of the city. However, unless otherwise ordered by the municipal court, any appointment of counsel by the municipal court of the city shall terminate upon the entry of an order binding the case over to a court of record prior to any adjudication of the merits of the case by the municipal court. 
(Ord. of 8-26-02) 
Sec. 2-206. - Court clerk to maintain list of attorneys. 
    The municipal court clerk shall maintain a list of attorneys deemed eligible for appointment by the chief municipal court judge. The municipal court clerk shall provide a form for requesting appointed counsel to any defendant in a case pending in the municipal court and shall forward any such form or other request for appointed counsel to the chief judge of the municipal court. If no such forms have been developed or are not available at the time a request for appointed counsel is made, the clerk shall notify the chief judge of such request. 
(Ord. of 8-26-02) 
Sec. 2-207. - Chief judge of municipal court to develop procedures and forms. 
    The chief judge of the municipal court of the city may develop internal operating procedures and forms and other documents as may be necessary to effectuate this article and/or resolution. 
(Ord. of 8-26-02) 
Sec. 2-208. - Solicitor; qualifications and compensation. 
(a)  The mayor and council are authorized to appoint a solicitor of the municipal court of the city. The city solicitor is hereby authorized to prosecute all cases to be heard before the municipal court of the city for the city. The mayor and council are authorized to appoint an assistant solicitor to act in the solicitor's place and stead. In the event that the solicitor is unable to attend a particular court session due to illness, emergency or conflicting court appearance schedules, or should the solicitor determine that an assistant solicitor should be present at a particular court session due to a large number of cases on the docket or other applicable factor(s), then the solicitor shall be authorized to designate an assistant solicitor to either act in the solicitor's place and stead or otherwise assist the solicitor for such court session. The solicitor and any assistant solicitors must be permitted to practice law in all courts of the state and be members in good standing with the state bar. The solicitor shall be appointed by the mayor and council and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. The solicitor and any assistant solicitors may be removed by a majority vote of the council. 
(b)  The compensation of the solicitor and any assistant solicitor shall be on an hourly basis and that rate shall be fixed by the mayor and council on an annual basis during the regular budget process. Before entering on duties of office, the solicitor shall take an oath before an officer duly authorized to administer oaths in the state, that he or she will truly, honestly, and faithfully discharge the duties of his office to the best of his ability without fear, favor or partiality. 
(Ord. of 8-25-03) 
Sec. 2-209. - Judges. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall appoint a chief judge of the municipal court of the city. The chief judge shall serve as the judge of the municipal court and shall also be the court administrator. The duties of the court administrator shall include the supervision of all court personnel, conducting written job evaluations of said court personnel at least once per fiscal year, and monitoring and overseeing the day to day operations of the municipal court. The court administrator shall be considered a department head. 
(b)  The city manager shall have the authority to review the job performance and compensation of the chief judge/court administrator and to make adjustments in said compensation in the same manner as provided for in the city personnel policies for all other administrative employees. The mayor and council shall have the sole authority to hire, terminate or discipline the chief judge/court administrator. 
(c)  The chief judge shall have the authority, by written order, to direct one (1) or more associate judges, appointed by the mayor and council, to preside over the municipal court in the absence of the chief judge or in addition to the chief judge. Such written order shall state the time and place that said associate judges shall preside over the city's municipal court. Said associate judges shall have all the powers granted to the judge of the city's municipal court by the Charter of the city during such time as set out in the written order from the chief judge. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the chief judge to notify the associate judges of the chief judge's absence from any session of the municipal court and to secure an associate judge to preside at that session of court. This notification shall be written and shall include a copy of the chief judge's written order as required by subjection (c) above. 
(e)  The salary, compensation and benefits of the chief judge shall be set by ordinance approved by the mayor and council. All associate judges for the municipal court of the city will bill their services to the city at the rate of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per any court session of at least one (1) hour duration. All other court sessions and judicial duties will be billed at a uniform hourly rate of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) per hour with a minimum of one-half (1/2) hour to be billed in connection with any other judicial duties. Routine telephone inquiries by the clerk's office to an associate judge, and brief telephone calls, will not be billed by the associate judge. The compensation of associate judges may be changed from time to time by ordinance. 
(f)  The chief judge of the municipal court of the city is hereby authorized to establish sessions of municipal court to be conducted at a time and place to be established in consultation with the city manager, city clerk, chief of police, and director of planning and development. Sessions of municipal court may be held to hear specific types of cases, as determined by the chief judge. 
(g)  Upon the incapacity or death of the chief judge, the city council shall have the authority to appoint an interim chief judge who will serve until such time as a new chief judge can be appointed pursuant to the Charter and Code of Ordinances of the city. 
(h)  The chief judge, city manager, city clerk and city attorney are hereby authorized and directed to revise the operational policies and procedures of the city relating to the municipal court to incorporate the operating changes set forth in this section. 
(i)  All provisions of previously adopted ordinances relating to the appointment and compensation of the municipal court judges of the city which are in direct conflict with this section are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 12-8-03; Ord. of 4-25-05; Ord. of 10-10-05; Ord. of 8-8-16 ; Ord. of 8-14-17 ) 
Editor's note- City administrator changed to city manager at the direction of the city. 
Secs. 2-210-2-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 2-221. - Purpose. 
    Declaration of policy. It is the policy of the city that the proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that governmental decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, a code of ethics ordinance for all city officials is adopted. 
    This Code has the following purposes: 
(1)  To encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
(2)  To establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interest of the city; 
(3)  To require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in manners which affect the city; and 
(4)  To serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to political contributions, loans, expenditures, reports or regulation of political campaigns or the conduct of candidates in such campaigns. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
Sec. 2-222. - Scope of persons covered. 
    Scope of persons covered. The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all members of the city council, planning and zoning commission, board of zoning appeals, all advisory commissions and committee members. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
Sec. 2-223. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
    City official or official, unless other expressly defined, means the mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, city clerk, and chief of police, whether such person is salaried, hired or elected, and all other persons holding positions designated by the city charter, as it may be amended from time to time. "City official," unless otherwise expressly defined, includes individuals appointed by the mayor and city council to all city commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other city bodies unless specifically exempted from this ordinance by the city council. 
    Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
    Discretionary authority means the power to exercise any judgment in a decision or action. 
    Entity means a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, firm, corporation, professional corporation, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust or any other entity recognized by law through which business may be conducted. 
    Immediate family means spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son, or daughter of any city official. 
    Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest and which has insignificant value. 
    Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, who would be affected in the same way as the general public. The interest of a council member in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges, or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar decisions is incidental to the extent that the council member would be affected in common with the general public. 
    Substantial interest means a known interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity: 
(1)  The interest is ownership of five (5) percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more of the equity or market value of the entity; or 
(2)  Funds received by the person from the other person or entity either during the previous twelve (12) months or the previous calendar year equaled or exceeded five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees or five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in payment for goods, products or nonprofessional services, or ten (10) percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 
(3)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of the for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or 
(4)  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more. Substantial interest in real property means an interest in real property which is an equitable or legal ownership with a market value of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
Editor's note- City administrator changed to city manager at the direction of the city. 
Sec. 2-224. - Standards of conduct. 
(a)  No council member or member of any board or commission shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for such person or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official responsibilities. 
(b)  No council member or member of a board or commission, in any matter before the council, board or commission in which he has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the common good for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote. 
(c)  No council member or member of a board or commission shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or any board or commission. 
(d)  No council member or commissioner shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
(e)  No council member or member of any board or commission shall enter into any contract with the city except as specifically authorized by state statues. Any council member or member of a board or commission who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make known that interest in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(f)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(h)  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed or compensation to be received while still a city official or employee, if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair in judgment or performance of city duties. 
(i)  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the board or commission on which he serves or to his supervisor and shall take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)  No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)  No city official or employee shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant to make available to the public at large. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
Sec. 2-225. - Conflict of interest. 
    Prohibition of conflict of interest. A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting a person, entity, or property in which the official or employee has a substantial interest; in addition, a city official or employee who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity may not participate in a vote or decision regarding funding by or through the city of the entity. Where the interest of a city official or employee in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or inciden tal, the city official or employee may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
Sec. 2-226. - Exemptions. 
    This code shall not be construed to require the filing of any information relating to any person's connection with, or interest in, any professional society or any charitable, religious, social, fraternal, educational, recreational, public service, civil or political organization, or any similar organization not conducted as a business enterprise or governmental agency, and which is not engaged in the ownership or conduct of a business enterprise or governmental agency. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
Sec. 2-227. - Complaints. 
    Any person having a complaint against a city official for an alleged ethics violation shall file in writing a verified complaint setting forth the particular facts and circumstances which constitute the alleged violation against the city official. The complaint shall be filed with the mayor, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, shall be filed with the mayor pro-tem. Upon receipt of a complaint, the mayor, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, the mayor pro-tem shall appoint three (3) members of council, who, along with the city attorney, shall constitute an investigating committee to determine whether the complaint sets forth significant facts and circumstances so as to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics. In the event the complaint does not set forth sufficient facts to constitute an alleged violation and is found unjustified, frivolous or patently unfounded, it shall be dismissed and the complainant notified immediately. In the event the complaint is found to state sufficient facts to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics, the board shall be appointed as provided herein. No member of council or the mayor shall investigate a complaint involving themselves. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
Sec. 2-228. - Composition of the board; powers and duties. 
(a)  Composition of the board of ethics. 
(1)  The board of ethics of the city shall be composed of five (5) residents of the city to be appointed as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection. Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of the city for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a member of the board of ethics. No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one (1) year period, any interest in any contract, transaction, or official action of the city. 
(2)  The mayor and councilmembers shall each designate two (2) qualified citizens to provide a pool of twelve (12) individuals who have consented to serve as a member of such board of ethics and who will be available for a period of four (4) years to be called upon to serve in the event a board of ethics is appointed. On the initial appointment, the mayor or councilmember shall designate one (1) person for a four-year term and one person for a five-year term. 
(3)  The city manager shall maintain a listing of these twelve (12) qualified citizens. Should the investigating committee determine a complaint warrants a hearing before the board of ethics, the mayor and council, at the first public meeting after such determination, shall draw names randomly from the listing of qualified citizens until the specified five (5) members of the board of ethics have been appointed. Such board will elect one (1) of its members to serve as chairman. 
(4)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The governing authority of the city shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, the city shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for it to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(b)  The constituted board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  To establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs; 
(2)  To hold a hearing within sixty (60) days after the receipt of complaint. Failure to hold a hearing within the specified time shall result in dismissal of the complaint as to the transaction and shall prevent refiling if a complaint arises in the same incident for at least a period of six (6) months. 
(3)  To prescribe forms, approved by the city attorney, for the disclosure required in this article and to make available to the public information disclosed as provided in this section; 
(4)  To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this article; 
(5)  To make such investigation and response to a complaint as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated any provisions of this article; 
(6)  To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as deemed necessary to investigate and rule upon complaints; 
(7)  To report its findings to the city council for such action as the city council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07; Ord. of 6-11-12) 
Editor's note- City administrator changed to city manager at the direction of the city. 
Sec. 2-229. - Service of complaint; hearings and disposition of complaints. 
    The board of ethics as appointed herein set forth shall cause the complaint to be served on the city official charged as soon as practicable. Service may be by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. A hearing shall be held within sixty (60) days after filing of the complaint. The board of ethics shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, the hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to mayor and council within five (5) days after completion of the hearing. At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the city official who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the allegations at least ten (10) business days before a hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and to present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
Sec. 2-230. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any city official or the complainant adversely affected by these findings of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the superior court of the county within thirty (30) days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedes. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
Sec. 2-231. - Penalties. 
    Any persons violating any provisions of this policy are subject to: 
(1)  Written and oral reprimand by the city council. 
(2)  A fine greater than one hundred dollars ($100.00) but less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) to be imposed by the city council. 
(3)  Request for resignation by the city council. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
Secs. 2-232-2-249. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 2-250. - Findings. 
    The Federal Trade Commission ("FTC") requires a broad category of creditors to implement an identity theft prevention program ("ITPP"). The FTC requirement and regulation is necessary because of section 114 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act ("FACT Act"). The FTC has set forth the ITPP requirement in 16 C.F.R.  681.2. Identity theft is defined as a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. The city adopts the program set forth in this section to comply with FTC rules and regulations. In drafting its ITPP, the city has considered: 
(1)  The methods it provides to open its accounts; 
(2)  The methods it provides to access its accounts; and 
(3)  Its previous experiences with identity theft. 
    Based on these considerations, the governing authority of the city hereby determines that the city is a low to moderate risk entity and as a result develops and implements the streamlined ITPP set forth in this section. 
(Ord. of 7-27-09) 
Sec. 2-251. - Red flags. 
    The FTC regulations identify numerous red flags that must be considered in adopting an ITPP. The FTC has defined a red flag as a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. The city identifies the following red flags from the examples provided in the regulations of the FTC: 
(1)  Notifications from consumer reporting agencies. The city does not request, receive, obtain or maintain information about its customers from any consumer reporting agency. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Possible red flags include: 
a.  Presentation of documents appearing to be altered or forged; 
b.  Presentation of photographs or physical descriptions that are not consistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Presentation of other documentation that is not consistent with the information provided when the account was opened or existing customer information; 
d.  Presentation of information that is not consistent with the account application; or 
e.  Presentation of an application that appears to have been altered, forged, destroyed, or reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identifying information. Possible red flags include: 
a.  Personal identifying information is being provided by the customer that is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer or is not consistent with the customer's account application; 
b.  Personal identifying information is associated with known fraudulent activity; 
c.  The social security number (if required or obtained) is the same as that submitted by another customer; 
d.  The telephone number or address is the same as that submitted by another customer; 
e.  The applicant failed to provide all personal identifying information requested on the application; or 
f.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity related to an account. Possible red flags include: 
a.  A change of address for an account followed by a request to change the account holder's name; 
b.  A change of address for an account followed by a request to add new or additional authorized users or representatives; 
c.  An account is not being used in a way that is consistent with prior use (such as late or no payments when the account has been timely in the past); 
d.  A new account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraudulent activity (such as customer fails to make the first payment or makes the first payment but no subsequent payments); 
e.  Mail sent to the account holder is repeatedly returned as undeliverable; 
f.  The city receives notice that a customer is not receiving his paper statements; or 
g.  The city receives notice of unauthorized activity on the account. 
(5)  Notice regarding possible identity theft. Possible red flags include: 
a.  Notice from a customer, an identity theft victim, law enforcement personnel or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing related to accounts. 
(Ord. of 7-27-09) 
Sec. 2-252. - Proof of identity. 
    Any person or entity opening an account with the city shall provide a complete application and provide satisfactory evidence of their identity and/or address. Said proof may include but not be limited to: a valid driver's license; passport; state, federal, employer, or school issued identification card; or military identification card. The required application must be completed in its entirety and must be signed in order to establish an account. 
(Ord. of 7-27-09) 
Sec. 2-253. - Confidentiality of applications and account information. 
    All personal information, personal identifying information, account applications and account information collected and maintained by the city shall be a confidential record of the city and shall not be subject to disclosure unless otherwise required by state or federal law. Additionally, any employee with access to an account holder's personal information, account applications or account information shall be required to execute and abide by the confidentiality and nondisclosure policy of the city. 
(Ord. of 7-27-09) 
Sec. 2-254. - Access to account information. 
    Access to account information shall be limited to employees that provide customer service and technical support to the service or good being provided by the city. Any computer that has access to account holders' account or personal identifying information shall be password protected and all computer screens shall lock after no more than fifteen (15) minutes of inactivity. All paper and non-electronic based account or customer personal identifying information shall be stored and maintained in a locked room or cabinet and access shall only be granted by the compliance officer or his/her designee. 
(Ord. of 7-27-09) 
Sec. 2-255. - Credit card transactions. 
    All internet or telephone credit card payments shall only be processed through a third party service provider which certifies that it has an identity theft prevention program operating and in place. Credit card payments accepted in person shall require a reasonable connection between the person or entity billed for the goods or services and the credit card owner. 
(Ord. of 7-27-09) 
Sec. 2-256. - Suspicious transactions. 
    Suspicious transactions include but are not limited to the presentation of incomplete applications; unsigned applications; payment by someone other than the person named on the account; presentation of inconsistent signatures, addresses or identification. Suspicious transactions shall not be processed and shall be immediately referred to the compliance officer. 
(Ord. of 7-27-09) 
Sec. 2-257. - Notification of law enforcement. 
    The compliance officer shall use his/her discretion on whether to report suspicious transactions to the police department or other appropriate law enforcement. 
(Ord. of 7-27-09) 
Sec. 2-258. - Third party service providers. 
    All transactions processed through a third party service provider shall be permitted only if the service provider certifies that it has complied with the FTC regulations and has in place a consumer identity theft prevention program. 
(Ord. of 7-27-09) 
Sec. 2-259. - Compliance officer and training. 
    The compliance officer for this ITPP and section shall be the city clerk or his/her designee. The compliance officer shall conduct training of all city employees that transact business with account holders of the city. The compliance officer shall periodically review this program and recommend any necessary updates to the city council. 
(Ord. of 7-27-09) 
Sec. 2-260. - Annual report. 
    An annual report, as required by FTC regulations, shall be provided by the compliance officer to the city manager. The contents of the annual report shall address and/or evaluate at least the following: 
(1)  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of the city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of accounts and with respect to access to existing accounts; 
(2)  Service provider arrangements; 
(3)  Incidents involving identity theft with accounts and the city's response; 
(4)  Changes in methods of identity theft and the prevention of identity theft; and 
(5)  Recommendations for changes to the city's ITPP. 
(Ord. of 7-27-09) 
Secs. 2-261-2-269. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - PUBLIC ART COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-270. - Membership, appointment, terms. 
(a)  The Duluth Public Arts Commission, hereinafter known as "DPAC" shall consist of six (6) regular members and one (1) member of the mayor and council. At a minimum five (5) members shall reside in the city limits of Duluth. Members shall serve without pay. 
(b)  DPAC members shall serve four-year terms and the membership terms shall be staggered when possible. 
(c)  Members of DPAC serve at the pleasure of mayor and council and may be removed and replaced by mayor and council with or without cause at any time. 
(d)  Members of DPAC shall be subject to the same term limits as other boards in the city as set forth in section 2-49 of this Code. 
(e)  DPAC members shall be subject to and comply with the code of ethics found in chapter 2, article X, of this Code. 
(f)  DPAC members are volunteers and shall serve without compensation or reimbursement for personal expenses, unless specifically approved by the city council. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13; Ord. of 10-14-13; Ord. of 3-12-18 ) 
Sec. 2-271. - Duties. 
(a)  Officers. There shall be a chair and vice-chair of the commission. DPAC shall elect all officers from its membership for a term of one (1) year and shall determine responsibilities of the officers. 
(b)  Meetings. DPAC shall hold regularly scheduled meetings; the commission shall determine the frequency, time and location of meetings. The commission shall provide notice of all meetings to the Duluth city clerk a minimum of forty-eight (48) hours prior to the meeting to ensure public notice requirements are met. All meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Georgia Open Meetings Act and any amendments thereto. Meetings shall be held at a location within the corporate limits of Duluth that is open to the public and accessible to persons with disabilities. All minutes and records of the commission shall be public records and kept in the custody of the city clerk. A majority of the commission shall at all times constitute a quorum. 
(c)  Master plan. DPAC shall prepare, maintain and update a public art master plan which identifies locations for public art in the city and identifies specific performing arts venues or locations for development thereof. 
(d)  Authorization of expenditures. The chair of the DPAC or designee and the city manager or city clerk shall be jointly required to authorize expenditures of the performing art and acquisition fund pursuant to decisions of the DPAC. These expenditures shall be for art acquisition, performances, art programming, art education, fund raising and other purposes consistent with the promotion of public and performing art in Duluth. 
(e)  Creation of committees. From time to time DPAC shall have the authority to create a study committee or task force to assist in matters consistent with duties associated with the commission. No committee or task force shall have voting power or authority to obligate funds from the Performing Art and Acquisition Fund (PAAF). The mayor or council representative to DPAC or their designee shall chair any committee or task force. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13; Ord. of 3-12-18 ) 
Sec. 2-272. - Performing art and acquisition fund (PAAF). 
(a)  Accounting. The performing art and acquisition fund ("PAAF") shall be a separate, special revenue fund as part of the city's overall fund structure into which public art donations and funding are deposited, transferred and used for the acquisition, commissioning, performance, exhibition and conservation of public art as recommended by DPAC and approved by the city manager or designee. The funds shall be included as part of the city's main operating account for banking purposes. 
(b)  Developer contributions. The city planning department shall develop and institute a process whereby prior to the issuance of any building permit an applicant must meet with a DPAC subcommittee or member to discuss the value of public art. Applicants shall be encouraged, but not required, to donate one (1) percent of the value of new non-city initiated, construction or redevelopment projects to PAAF. 
(1)  Ten (10) percent of each donation, gift or contribution received by DPAC shall be designated and restricted to expenditures related to the routine maintenance, repair and cleaning of public art projects. 
(c)  PAAF funds may be authorized for the following purposes: 
(1)  Artist fees and artist travel related to the training, education and performance of art open to the general public; 
(2)  Artist fees and artist travel and expenses that are related to the city's commission or purchase of public art; 
(3)  Purchase of equipment to be used in performing arts; 
(4)  Leasing of equipment and space for education, practice and performance; 
(5)  Studies and planning documents to further the arts; 
(6)  Promotions and marketing of activities associated with educational activities and performances; 
(7)  Fabrication, storage, and installation of a commissioned work of art; 
(8)  Acquisition of existing works of art; 
(9)  Decorative, ornamental or functional elements that are designed by an artist selected specifically for the project and through the processes established in the guidelines, but not by a member of the pre-existing design team working on the related capital project (if applicable); 
(10)  Fees associated with the lease of works of art for temporary display; 
(11)  Required permits and insurance during the fabrication and installation of the public art per contract; 
(12)  Project consultants and contracted services; 
(13)  Curatorial services; 
(14)  Public art planning services; 
(15)  Documentation and interpretive plaques; 
(16)  Publicity for public art projects; 
(17)  Education and outreach, including symposia and special events; 
(18)  Conservation, cleaning and routine maintenance of works in the City of Duluth Public Art Collection; and 
(19)  Expenses associated with art donations/sponsorships. 
(d)  PAAF funds may not be used for: 
(1)  Mass produced work, with the exception of limited editions controlled by the artist. 
(2)  Professional graphics, unless designed or executed by an artist or used in the development of collateral material for the City of Duluth Public Art Program. 
(3)  City of Duluth staff costs. 
(e)  PAAF annual report. Each year the city manager or designee shall assist DPAC in preparing an annual report to be presented to mayor and council which provides for a detailed accounting of all PAAF monies raised and all monies spent and/or earmarked for future expenditures. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13; Ord. of 12-12-16 ; Ord. of 3-12-18 ) 
Secs. 2-273-2-279. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - DULUTH TAD ADVISORY COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-280. - Membership, appointment, terms. 
(a)  The Duluth TAD Advisory Committee, hereinafter known as "DTADAC" shall be made up of five (5) regular members. Members shall include two (2) members of the mayor and council, appointed by the mayor and council; the city manager or his/her designee; the chair of the Gwinnett County Commission or his/her designee and Gwinnett County's Director of Planning or his/her designee. 
(b)  The two (2) officials representing the mayor and council posts [are] to be appointed for four (4) year terms. Permanent positions shall be the city manager or his/her designee; the chair of the Gwinnett County Board of Commissioners or his/her designee, and the Gwinnett County Director of Planning or his/her designee. 
(c)  City of Duluth DTADAC members shall be subject to and comply with the code of ethics found in chapter 2, article X, of this Code. 
(d)  DTADAC members hall serve without compensation or reimbursement for personal expenses, unless specifically approved by the city council. 
( Ord. of 5-12-14 ) 
Sec. 2-281. - Duties. 
(a)  Officers. There shall be a chair and vice-chair and secretary of the committee. DTADAC shall elect all officers from its membership for a term of one (1) year and shall determine responsibilities of the officers. 
(b)  Meetings. DTADAC shall hold meetings as needed and the committee shall determine the frequency, time and location of the meetings. The committee shall provide notice of all meetings as well as agenda of the meeting, to the Duluth City Clerk a minimum of forty-eight (48) hours prior to the meeting to ensure public notice requirements are met. All meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Georgia Open Meetings Act and any amendments thereto. Meetings shall be held at a location within the corporate limits of Duluth that is open to the public and accessible to persons with disabilities. All minutes and records of the committee shall be public records and kept in the custody of the city clerk. 
(c)  TAD annual report. Each year the DTADAC shall provide to Gwinnett County, within sixty (60) days after the end of each such fiscal year, a comprehensive annual report regarding the amount of positive tax allocation increment deposited in the TAD special fund, the uses of such funds, and the status of all development undertaken within the TAD. 
( Ord. of 5-12-14 ) 
Secs. 2-282-2-289. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - VETERANS MARKER COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-290. - Establishment and membership. 
(a)  There is hereby established a Veterans Marker Committee, composed of five (5) members. 
(b)  The committee shall consist of the following: 
(1)  One (1) member of the governing body appointed by the governing body. 
(2)  Two (2) citizens of Duluth, Georgia at least one of whom is an active or retired veteran of the Army, Navy, Air force, Marines or U.S. Coast Guard. Such members shall be appointed by the governing body and shall serve four (4) year terms. 
(3)  The chairperson of the Duluth Planning Commission. 
(4)  The director of the Duluth Public Works Department. 
(Ord. of 9-18-17 ) 
Sec. 2-291. - Meetings. 
(a)  Members of the committee shall meet twice annually to consider applications for exceptions and exemptions from the City of Duluth's O/I PW-06 governing Veteran's Marker Program. In the event no applications for exemptions are pending the committee need not convene. 
(b)  A quorum of three (3) members of the Veteran Marker Committee shall be required to take any official action. 
(c)  At the discretion of the Veterans Marker Committee applicants may be provided with an opportunity to present testimony at a meeting in support of their application. 
(Ord. of 9-18-17 ) 
Sec. 2-292. - Decisions. 
(a)  The Veterans Marker Committee shall grant exceptions or exemptions from O/I PW-06 only where such a decision is consistent with the purpose of the Veteran's Marker Program; the accurate commemoration of U.S. veterans with close ties to the City of Duluth, Georgia. 
(b)  Decisions of the Veteran Marker Committee shall be issued in writing and provided to the applicant by U.S. mail within thirty (30) days of the meeting where the exception or exemption is considered. 
(c)  All decisions of the Veterans Marker Committee shall be final and no appeals are authorized. 
(Ord. of 9-18-17 ) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONSUMPTION, LICENSING AND REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance August 13, 2012 amended the Code by repealing ch. 3, article I-V, and adding a new ch. 3. Former ch. 3 derived from Ords. of August 9, 2010; October 11, 2010; December 13, 2010; January 24, 2011; March 14, 2011; April 11, 2011; July 11, 2011; November 14, 2011; December 12, 2011; February 13, 2012; March 12, 2012; May 14, 2012 and June 11, 2012. 
Cross reference- Consumption of alcoholic beverages in public,  10-4. 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. Title 3. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
DIVISION 1. - PURPOSE, ALCOHOL SALES LICENSED, DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 3-100. - Purpose. 
    This article has been enacted for the purposes, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, to establish reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control for the licensing and sales of alcoholic beverages and retail package alcohol; to protect and preserve schools and churches; to give effect to existing land use; and to preserve certain residential areas, with reasonable considerations, among others, to the character of the areas and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in the roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining the stability of neighborhoods and property values; to protect against the evils of concentration of the retail outlets for liquor in one (1) family and/or in one (1) corporation; and to prevent undesirable persons in engaging in or having any interest in alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-101. - Sales to be licensed; compliance with ordinance and state law required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages, or to offer for sale for consumption on the premises, or to offer free of charge as a promotional activity or incentive any alcoholic beverages within the city without having first complied with the provisions of this article. No person shall sell or possess for the purpose of sale any alcoholic beverage unless such person has a license from the city to sell or possess for sale alcoholic beverages, or sell or make deliveries beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. The requirements and restrictions contained in O.C.G.A., Title 3, and regulations promulgated there under, which are not otherwise enumerated by this article are hereby expressly incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-102. - Sale within the incorporated areas of the city; license a privilege. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold within the incorporated areas of the city under an annual license granted by the city clerk as governed by the terms and conditions hereafter provided. 
(b)  All licenses herein shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the ordinances of the city and state law. 
(c)  All licenses hereunder shall have printed on the front a statement expressing that the license is a privilege, not a right and is subject to revocation, suspension and changes in ordinances. 
(d)  Whenever in this chapter any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this chapter the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision shall be subject to prosecution in Duluth Municipal Court and subject to the penalty provisions contained in section 1-6 of the City of Duluth Ordinances and further the licensee shall be subject to suspension or revocation of their license issued under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. I ) 
Sec. 3-103. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, defined words shall have the meaning specified unless the context in which the word or term is used clearly requires that a different meaning be used. For the purpose of this article the following definitions shall apply: 
    Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
    Alcoholic beverages means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine or fortified wine. 
    Art shop means a retail business located in the CBD zoning district devoted exclusively to providing art education that is limited to instructing in painting, sculpture, and similar crafts; or to selling and displaying portraits, paintings, sculptures, and similar art work and crafts. An art shop may sell art supplies in addition to providing art education or to offering artwork for sale. An art shop shall not allow any activities that would cause the business to be an "adult entertainment establishment" as defined in chapter 7, article XIV, sections 7-601 et seq. of this Code. 
    Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other product, or any combination of such products in water containing not more than fourteen (14) percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, strong beer, and hard cider as may be defined by state law. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
    Brewer means a manufacturer of beer or malt beverages. 
    Brewpub is a restaurant in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed subject to state law barrel production limitations for retail sales directly to consumers. 
    Church shall mean a permanent building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
    City clerk shall mean the person holding the official title of clerk for the city. 
    College shall mean only such state, county, city, church, or other colleges that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common colleges of the state and shall not include private colleges where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
    Commercial area shall mean any area which is correspondingly zoned in accordance with the city zoning ordinance. 
    Deli and food market shall mean a retail establishment that sells food products prepared on site and may also engage in the selling of unprepared food products. Such establishment shall be authorized to sell unopened containers of wine or beer provided that the establishment derives no more than fifteen (15) percent of its gross sales from the sale of beer and wine. Unopened containers of wine or beer may only be sold in conjunction with the sale of food products prepared on site. 
    Golf course shall mean an outdoor golf course covering one (1) acre or more and containing at least nine (9) tees, fairways and greens. 
    Growler means a container used to transport draft beer that is not to exceed sixty-eight (68) ounces and not less than twelve (12) ounces and is filled with beer from a keg or a tax-determined tank by a licensee, or an employee of a licensee with a license issued by the city. 
    Hours of operation shall mean the hours during which a licensed establishment shall remain open for the purposes to include the sale of alcoholic beverages on or off premises. 
    Hotel shall mean a building or structure kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests whether transient, permanent or residential, in which fifty (50) or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests. Boarding houses or other similar facilities which have less than fifty (50) rooms used for sleeping accommodations for such guests are not classified as a hotel for the purposes of this article. Motels meeting the qualifications set out herein for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a lounge restaurant on their premises, and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of hotel thereunder. 
    Indoor commercial recreational establishment shall mean and is limited to an establishment: 
(1)  In which the sale of food and alcoholic beverages is incidental to its primary enterprise and activity on the premises and which shall derive at least twenty (20) percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or foods and recreation activities; and 
(2)  In which meals are served, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. Said establishment shall be prepared to serve food every hour they are open; and 
(3)  In which the primary activity on the premises of the indoor commercial recreational establishment shall be family oriented in nature, generally meaning a use which attracts a range of individuals from all age groups. Uses may specifically include, but are not limited to, dinner theaters, bowling centers, billiard parlors, video arcades, skating arenas and other similar use. Outdoor commercial recreation is not included, nor shall concession sales of alcoholic beverages be permitted. Bingo parlors, dance halls, nightclubs, adult entertainment and/or sexually related entertainment activities as defined in the city adult entertainment ordinance, chapter 7, article XIV, sections 7-601 et seq., and similar uses are specifically excluded from this definition of indoor commercial recreational establishments. 
    Karaoke shall mean a form of interactive entertainment in which customers sing along with recorded music (or music video) using a microphone and sound system. The lyrics are sometimes displayed on the video screen and usually do not have the original lyrics playing on the soundtrack. 
    License shall mean the authorization by the clerk of the city to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
    Licensee means the individual to whom a license is issued or, in the case of a partnership, corporation or company, all partners, officers, members, managers, and directors of the partnership corporation or company. 
    Liter means the metric measurement currently used by the United States. 
    Lounge shall mean a separate room connected with a part of and adjacent to a restaurant or located in hotels with all booths, stools and tables being unobstructed and open to view. All lounges shall be air conditioned. 
    Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer; and 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vintner 
    Open area means the area that is directly outside and adjacent to a licensed restaurant where a licensee may obtain an annual permit authorizing the consumption of alcoholic beverages. Smoking shall not be allowed in the permitted open areas. 
    Package means a bottle, can, keg barrel, growler, or other original consumer container. 
    Package store shall mean a geographic location within the city wherein a license may be issued for the sale of package alcoholic beverages. Such package store must be operated as a distinct business and cannot be operated in conjunction with or as a part of any other business, except only as provided in this article and/or by the laws of this state. 
    Patio shall be defined as that portion of an establishment which is outside the main structure but accessible from the main structure and is used for sales of food and/or beverages. 
    Performing arts facility shall mean and is limited to an establishment: 
(1)  Which is located in the CBD zoning classification; 
(2)  Which has as its principal objective or business the presentation of live music, mainline dramatic arts, plays, theatre productions and stand-up comedy; and 
(3)  Which does not feature, show, allow, promote or advertise adult businesses as defined and regulated in chapter 7, article XIV of the Duluth Code, including but not limited to adult dancing establishments, adult mini-motion picture theatres, adult motion picture theatres, adult motion picture arcades and erotic dance establishments. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public. 
    Premises shall mean the definite closed or partitioned-in facility including, but not limited to, a room, shop, building, restaurant, or club wherein alcoholic beverages are sold. 
    Private club shall mean any association organized under the laws of the state which has been in existence at least one (1) year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued hereunder; has at least seventy-five (75) regular dues paying members; owns, hires or leases a building or space within a building for reasonable use of its members with suitable kitchen and dining space and equipment for the serving of prepared meals for the members and guests; and does not compensate any member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly from the profits of the sale of distilled spirits beyond a fixed salary as established by its members at any annual meeting or by its governing board out of the general revenue of the club; except that for the purposes of this section, tips which are added to the bills under club regulation shall not be considered as profits from the sale of distilled spirits. 
    Private residence shall mean a house or dwelling where not less than one (1) or more than three (3) families customarily reside and shall not include an apartment house having facilities for housing four (4) or more families and any residence which has been unoccupied for a period of six (6) consecutive months immediately prior to the filing of any application hereunder. 
    Registered agent shall mean a natural person age twenty-one (21) years or older and residing in the city or the county who is empowered to act for and represent the licensee in all matters with the city relating to an establishment licensed or making application for a license to sell alcohol upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this article may be served. 
    Restaurant shall mean a public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are actually and regularly cooked and served to the public, without sleeping accommodations, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to cook and serve suitable food for its guests. At least one (1) meal per day shall be cooked on the premises and served at least five (5) days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecorating, and the cooking and service of such meals shall be the principal business conducted by such establishment with such establishment deriving at least fifty (50) percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
    Retail sales shall mean selling or offering for sale alcoholic beverages to any member of the public. 
    Retailer or retail dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
    School building or educational building shall apply only to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and are accredited by the state or federal government. 
    Special events facility shall mean any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where special events including, but not limited to, weddings, wedding receptions, private parties and similar events are held and which provides meals for food services in connection with such events. Any such facility shall be equipped with an adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room facility, and shall be capable of preparing and cooking meals, or serving catered meals and other food products associated with its special events on site. Any such establishments shall derive at least seventy-five (75) percent of its total annual gross sales from rental for special events and the service of meal and food products in connection with such special events. The revenues received from alcohol sales shall never exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total annual gross sales for any such facility. Any such facility open to the public for the service of at least one (1) meal per day for five (5) or more days per week, shall be considered a restaurant. 
    Special events vendor shall mean a vendor licensed by the state to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption. Before receiving a license as a special events vendor, the vendor shall have entered into a contractual agreement with the city for the sale of alcoholic beverages at special events approved by the city to be held on public property including but not limited to the Duluth Town Green. 
    Specialty gift shop shall be defined as any retail gift shop that derives not more than fifteen (15) percent of its gross sales from the sale of package gift baskets containing non-alcohol related items such as flowers, plants, food or similar items which also contain unbroken containers of wine or malt beverages. 
    Spirituous liquors or distilled spirits shall mean any alcoholic beverages containing alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey, gin, cordials, or other spirituous liquors by whatever name called to include fortified wines, as defined by the Federal Alcohol Administration. 
    Tavern shall mean an establishment located in the CBD and licensed to sell alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises. 
    Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
    Wine shall mean any alcoholic beverages containing not more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. "Fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
    Wine or beer tasting room means a room that has a single means of ingress and egress in which a spirituous liquor retail establishment offers the sampling or tasting of wine or beer for educational or instructional purposes. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of. 3-11-13,  1; Ord. of 5-13-13; Ord. of 3-9-15, pt. I ; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. II ; Ord. of 5-9-16 , pt. I; Ord. of 11-14-16 , pt. I; Ord. of 2-12-18 ) 
Sec. 3-104. - Inspection of licensed establishments. 
    Sworn officers of the police department and the city clerk or designee shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under the alcoholic beverage ordinances of the city during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of law. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-105. - License to be exhibited. 
(a)  Each license issued under this chapter shall at all times be kept in public in a public area plainly exposed to view upon the licensed premises. 
(b)  All retail consumption dealers and retail dealers who sell at retail any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall post, in a conspicuous place, a sign that clearly reads: "Warning: Drinking alcoholic beverages during pregnancy can cause birth defects." 
(c)  Each retail business establishment which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages of any kind shall post in a conspicuous place a notice which shall contain the provisions in the laws of this state which deal with the unlawful sale of such items to underage persons and the penalties for violating such laws. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-106. - Familiarity with ordinance provisions; responsibility of licensee for violations. 
    Each licensee hereunder shall make this article available for review in the licensed premises and shall instruct any person working therein with respect to the terms hereof and each licensee, the licensee's agents and employees selling alcoholic beverages shall at all times be familiar with the terms hereof. The licensee shall be responsible for any acts of agents or employees which are in violation of this article or of the laws of the state or of the rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-107. - Production of records; audits. 
(a)  In conjunction with any application for license, or in conjunction with any license which has been issued under the terms hereof, or in conjunction with the revocation, suspension or cancellation of any license, or in conjunction with the payment or nonpayment of any excise tax levied or to be collected under this chapter, the city clerk shall have the right to subpoena all or any part of the records, books, documents, electronic or magnetic media and associated software, reports or invoices of any licensee for the purpose of auditing the records of such licensee, securing compliance by such licensee with the provisions of this chapter, proving or disproving violation of any part of this chapter by any licensee, or showing payment or nonpayment of any taxes, fees, charges or the like due hereunder. 
(b)  All licensed establishments must maintain the following records for a three-year period and make the original records or certified copies available for audit at the licensed premises: 
(1)  Monthly income or operating statements; 
(2)  Daily sales receipts showing liquor, beer, and wine separately; 
(3)  Daily cash register receipts such as Z tapes; 
(4)  Monthly Georgia Sales and Use Tax Reports; and 
(5)  Federal Income Tax Returns with all Form 1099's. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-108. - Invoices. 
(a)  Upon each and every delivery by a licensed wholesaler to a licensed retailer, an invoice in triplicate shall be prepared showing the quantities and brands of spirituous liquors, malt beverages and wine delivered, together with the price thereof and the excise tax due and collected thereon. The original of such invoice shall be delivered by the wholesaler to the retailer simultaneously with such delivery. The wholesaler shall retain the second copy of such invoice and shall keep it for a period of thirty-six (36) months after the date of delivery and during such 36-month period, such invoices shall be made available for inspection by the city clerk or duly authorized representatives. The remaining copy of the invoice shall be distributed in accordance with Georgia law. Upon request of the city, a copy of such invoice shall be attached to any reports requested or required by the city. 
(b)  Each retail licensee doing business in the city shall keep and maintain accurate and complete records regarding the purchases and sales made by such business including, but not limited to, the original invoice of each sale to him or purchase by him from a wholesaler of any alcoholic beverages and shall maintain such records for at least thirty-six (36) months after the date of such purchase. Such records shall reveal the gross sales from the operation of their business and the exact quantities of spirituous liquors, malt beverages and wines by size and type of container purchased by such retail dealer together with the dates of delivery of such shipments by wholesale dealers as well as the identity of each wholesale dealer from whom such licensee purchases alcoholic beverages. The city or its duly authorized representative shall have the right to inspect the records of each licensee and make a complete audit of the records of each licensee at any time. Failure of a licensee to maintain proper records showing receipt of alcoholic beverages, payment therefore, and payment of the taxes due thereon to the appropriate wholesaler, and records which clearly show the sales, the amount of sales, and the types of sales of each licensee may, at the discretion of the city clerk, after a hearing as herein provided, result in the revocation or suspension of such license. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-109. - Penalties established for failure to keep records. 
(a)  In the event that any wholesale dealer or retail dealer licensed under this article shall fail to keep and maintain records required to be kept of sales by this article or in the event that the right of audit is refused to persons duly authorized by the city to conduct such audits, the license of such dealer shall be subject to suspension or revocation as provided for under this article. 
(b)  In the event that an audit of the records required to be kept by wholesale and retail dealers under the terms of this article are found to vary from the monthly reports required to be furnished by the wholesale dealers to the city and such discrepancies are not explained to the satisfaction of the city clerk, the license of such wholesale dealers shall be subject to suspension or revocation as provided for under the ordinances of the city. If it appears to the city clerk that any retail dealer participated in or conspired with any wholesale dealer to falsify or keep and maintain incorrect records of such sales in order to avoid payment of the taxes imposed by this article, all licenses of the licensees involved in such scheme shall be subject to suspension or revocation as provided for under this article. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-110. - Duration of licenses. 
    All licenses, except as otherwise indicated, issued under this chapter shall be issued on a annual basis, and all licenses shall expire at midnight on June 30 of each year, regardless of issue date. If June 30 falls on a weekend or a holiday, the licenses shall expire at 5 p.m. the next business day. License fees shall be prorated as follows: New applications received after January 1 shall be prorated at half of total amount due. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-111. - Distance requirements. 
(a)  For the purposes of this code section, distance shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground in a straight line from the front door of the structure from which alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale, to the front door of the building of a church, government owned treatment center or a retail package store or to the nearest property line of the real property being used for school or educational purposes. 
(b)  No license permitting the sale of malt beverages or wine or both for retail by the package shall be issued for any proposed location which is: 
(1)  Within a distance of one hundred (100) yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds or college campus; or 
(c)  No license permitting the sale of any distilled spirits or spirituous liquors for retail by the package shall be issued for any proposed location which is: 
(1)  Within a distance of fifty (50) yards of any private residence unless such residence is located in a commercially zoned (C-1, C-2, HC-R or HC-A) district; 
(2)  Within a distance of one hundred (100) yards of any church building; 
(3)  Within a distance of one hundred (100) yards of any public library or branch thereof; 
(4)  Within a distance of one hundred (100) yards of a public park; 
(5)  Within a distance of two hundred (200) yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds or college campus; or 
(6)  Within a distance of five hundred (500) yards of any business licensed to sell package spirituous liquors pursuant to this article unless other such business is a hotel. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 10-8-12; Ord. of 12-9-13, pt. I; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. I ; Ord. of 11-14-16 ) 
Sec. 3-112. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Consumption on the premises. 
(1)  Consumption on the premises licensees shall sell alcoholic beverages only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. on the following day, Monday through Saturday. The sale of beer and/or wine for consumption on the premises is permitted on Sundays from 11:00 a.m. until 12:00 Midnight in any licensed establishment which derives a minimum of sixty (60) percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food and in any licensed establishment which derives at least as much of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging 
(2)  No dealer shall remain open: 
a.  Between 2:30 a.m. and 4:30 a.m. Monday through Sunday; 
b.  At any time in violation of a local ordinance or regulation or of a special order of the city clerk, chief of police, city manager, or their designee. 
(b)  Retail package spirituous liquor. No retail license holder holding a license under the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall furnish, sell, or offer for sale any spirituous liquor or distilled spirits by the package except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 11:45 p.m. Monday through Saturday and 12:30 p.m. until 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. No retail license holder shall furnish, sell, or offer for sale any spirituous liquor or distilled spirits by the package at any time in violation of state law, local ordinance or regulation, or special order of the city clerk, city manager or their designee. 
(c)  Retail package malt beverage and wine. Retail licensees shall not engage or permit in the sale of alcoholic beverages except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. No retail license holder shall furnish, sell, or offer for sale any beer/malt beverage or wine at any time in violation of state law, local ordinance or regulation, or special order of the city clerk, city manager or their designee. 
(d)  Wholesale dealer. The hours during which the sale of alcoholic beverages may be conducted in the city by any wholesale dealer licensed hereunder shall be from 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., exclusive of Sundays. 
(e)  Alcohol sales on election day. The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be legal on any election day. This authorization is approved by the city pursuant to the provisions of Georgia Laws, 1985, page 1508. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages within eighty-four (84) yards (two hundred fifty (250) feet) of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established on primary or election days. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 12-10-12, pt. I; Ord. of 12-9-13, pt. II; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. IV ; Ord. of 11-13-18 ,  1) 
Secs. 3-113, 3-114. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE REVIEW BOARD 

Sec. 3-115. - Alcoholic beverage review board. 
(a)  There is hereby established an alcoholic beverage review board which shall have the duty of hearing appeals from decisions of the city clerk denying the issuance or renewal of any license or permit provided for by this article and to hear appeals from the decision of the city clerk revoking or suspending any such license or permit provided for by this article. 
(b)  The alcoholic beverage review board shall be composed of five (5) members and two (2) alternates who shall be nominated by the mayor and council of the city to serve a four-year term. They shall be limited to three (3) consecutive full four-year and in no event shall exceed fourteen (14) consecutive years. Nominations shall be made by members to the mayor and council and such nominees shall be investigated as herein provided prior to their appointment to the alcoholic beverage review board. Alternates nominated to the alcoholic beverage review board by the mayor and council shall meet all requirements set forth in this article for regular members of the alcoholic beverage review board but shall be entitled to a vote on the alcoholic beverage review board only when the participation of one (1) or both of the alternates is necessary to replace a regular member due to the absence of one (1) or more regular members of the alcoholic beverage review board or due to a disqualification of one (1) or more regular members of the alcoholic beverage review board as a result of a conflict of interest. The alternates shall be designated as alternate one (1) and alternate two (2) and shall replace regular alcoholic beverage review board members as necessary according to the numerical sequence. A quorum of the alcoholic beverage review board shall be three (3) members. 
(c)  Following the nomination of each member of the alcoholic beverage review board, each nominee, and prior to their final appointment by the mayor and council shall submit himself or herself to the city police department so that an investigation may be completed as to their fitness to serve as members of the alcoholic beverage review board. The result of such investigation shall be confidential and presented to the mayor and council for review prior to such nominee's appointment to the alcoholic beverage review board. Following the completion of the investigation, the mayor and council may formally appoint such nominees to the alcoholic beverage review board for the term specified above. 
(d)  Members and alternates of the alcoholic beverage review board shall be residents of the city for at least one (1) year prior to their nomination; however, two (2) members or alternates of the alcoholic beverage review board may either be a resident of the city for at least one (1) year prior to nomination or an owner or operator of a business located within the city limits of the city, provided the business is current in the payment of its city occupational tax and all other payments due to the city, for at least one (1) year prior to nomination. Regardless of any other provision to the contrary contained in this section, at all times at least six (6) of seven (7) members of the alcoholic beverage review board shall be residents of the city. No alcoholic beverage review board member may be nominated or may serve if convicted of: driving under the influence; any felony or misdemeanor of any state, or of the United States; or any municipal ordinance except traffic violations not related to driving under the influence, within a period of ten (10) years immediately prior to nomination or service. The term "conviction" as used in this subsection shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond by a person charged with a crime. Where the violation is for a misdemeanor, forfeiture of a bond, violation of a municipal ordinance, or where there is a plea of nolo contendere, the city clerk may, after investigation, waive such conviction as a disqualification. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. III ) 
Secs. 3-116-3-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - APPLICATION, TRAINING, LICENSES AND FEES 
DIVISION 1. - APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 3-200. - Application forms. 
    All persons, firms or corporations desiring to sell alcoholic beverages within the city shall make application on the forms prescribed by the appropriate authorities of the city to the city clerk and must follow the applicable procedures, hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-201. - Procedure for considering application. 
    The city clerk shall not consider any application for a license until the written application provided for herein shall have been made, the application fee paid, the plat required herein filed and the fingerprinting and investigation of all persons as required under this article is completed by the police department. The chief of police shall, upon completion of the investigation, file a written report of the results of such investigation, which report shall be attached to said application and form a part of the permanent city record. Upon the completion of all of the foregoing the application, together with all data, shall be submitted to the city clerk for consideration pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-202. - Application; data; information; requirement for. 
    The appropriate officials, depending upon the type of license or permit involved, shall have authority to prescribe forms for new or renewal applications which are required under this article. Applicants are required to complete all aspects of all prescribed forms required under this article. The failure to provide all information required by such forms may result in denial of any application under this article. All applicants shall furnish all data requested of them by the city clerk or the chief of police and failure to furnish such data, information and records within thirty (30) days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application. The applicants, by filing an application for a license permitted under this article, agree to produce, for oral interrogation, any person or persons requested by the city clerk or the chief of police, considered by either as being important in ascertaining the facts relative to such application and/or licenses issued under this article. The failure to produce such person or persons within thirty (30) days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal, with prejudice, of any application pending under this article. The application form and all data requested by the city clerk or the chief of police shall be subscribed by the applicant(s) under oath before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. Any untrue or misleading information contained in, or material statement omitted from, an original, renewal or transfer application for a license shall be cause for the denial or revocation thereof. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-203. - Citizenship; residence requirements; corporate licensees. 
    No license for the sale of alcoholic shall be granted to any applicant who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully permitted for permanent residence. Where the applicant is a corporation or other business entity other than an individual, any stockholder or principal owning more than a ten (10) percent financial interest must meet the requirements contained herein and, in the event any license provided for hereunder shall be issued, such license shall be issued in the name of the corporation or business entity and the principal stockholder or principal behind such business entity. If the applicant is a partnership, the requirements contained herein shall be met by all partners, whether general or limited partners. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 12-10-12, pt. II) 
Sec. 3-204. - Application; form; content; process; deposit. 
(a)  All persons desiring to engage in the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages within the city shall make a written application to the city clerk for such privilege upon the forms provided by the city clerk. The application shall include but shall not be limited to: the name and address of the applicant; the proposed business to be carried on; the name and address of the registered agent for service of process; the name and address of the manager; if a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners, and, if a corporation or other entity, the names and addresses of the officers and the names and addresses of all stockholders holding more than ten (10) percent of any class of corporate stock or more than a ten (10) percent financial interest in the business or in any other entity having a financial interest in the business. The applicant shall also disclose whether the applicant (its partners if a partnership; its officers, manager, and stockholders having more than ten (10) percent of any class of corporate stock if a corporation) has: 
(1)  Been convicted of or plead guilty or nolo contendere to any felony, misdemeanor, or a violation of any municipal ordinance within a period of ten (10) years prior to the license application, and 
(2)  Has any interests in a license to sell spirituous liquors by the package at retail within the state. 
    The application form and all data requested by the city clerk or the chief of police shall be subscribed by the applicant(s) under oath before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. Any untrue or misleading information contained in, or material statement omitted from, an original, renewal or transfer application for a license shall be cause for the denial or revocation thereof. 
(b)  No license hereunder shall be issued to any applicant unless information is provided as required in the written application concerning the business location and building construction. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with the ordinances of the city; regulations of the state revenue commissioner; the laws of the state; and all other pertinent laws. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval when finished by the building inspector. Each building in which the business is to be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located so as to reveal all of the outside premises of such building. All premises for which a license shall be issued shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways and open areas may be clearly seen by the customers therein. 
(c)  Each applicant seeking a license under this section shall submit proof of ownership of the building in which the applicant will conduct its business. If the applicant is the owner of such building, the applicant shall provide a certified copy of the deed conveying ownership to the applicant. If the applicant is not the owner of such building, the applicant shall provide a copy of the current lease, in addition to a certified copy of the deed conveying ownership to the current owner of the building. 
(d)  Each applicant surveyor shall, upon request by the city clerk, submit a survey by a registered land surveyor showing compliance with all distance requirements contained herein. If the business address location was licensed at any time during the twelve (12) months immediately preceding the filing of the new alcohol application, the location is grandfathered and a new survey is not required. 
(e)  All applicants granted a license under this chapter shall promptly make an application for the applicable state alcohol sales license necessary to carry out their business. A license granted under this chapter is expressly contingent upon the licensee obtaining and maintaining an appropriate state alcohol sales license. 
(f)  In the case of corporate or limited partnership applicants, the applicant must be a business in good standing with the Secretary of State of Georgia. 
(g)  Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check or cash for the full amount of the license fee in accordance with the scale fixed by the city council, together with a separate certified check or cash in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) payable to the city and shall be paid over to the clerk of the city who shall note the payment of such investigative fee upon the original application for such license. The fee provided for herein is to be used to defray the investigative and administrative costs and expenses of investigating and considering the application. If the application is denied and the license refused or if the applicant withdraws his application after submission to the city clerk, the fee provided for herein shall not be refundable. However, the license fee (without interest) shall be refunded. Any request to amend any provision of a license granted under this article is subject to an additional one hundred fifty dollar ($150.00) investigative fee. 
(h)  Each application shall contain a certification stating that the applicant (its partners if a partnership; its officers, manager, and stockholders having more than ten (10) percent of any class of corporate stock if a corporation) and registered agent have read this article. 
(i)  In the event the applicant is denied a license by the state, the license fee (without interest), but not the investigative fee, shall be refunded. 
(j)  The city shall require not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days for processing any application for license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises after a complete application, including all additional information requested, has been submitted. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 12-10-12, pt. III; Ord. of 12-9-13, pt. III; Ord. of. 2-9-15, pt. VI ; Ord. of 2-12-18 ) 
Sec. 3-205. - Fingerprints of applicants. 
    As a prerequisite to the issuance of a license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages, applicants for a license shall provide a set of fingerprints as part of their application, which fingerprints may be forwarded to the appropriate investigative agencies of both the state and federal governments who shall search the appropriate files for any instance of criminal activity as provided for by O.C.G.A.  3-3-2. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 12-10-12, pt. IV; Ord. of 8-8-16 ) 
Sec. 3-206. - Advertisement of intent to engage in business; signs posted. 
(a)  All applicants desirous of obtaining a license for the sale of alcohol shall give notice at their expense of the making of an application by advertisement at least twice a week for two (2) consecutive weeks, said advertisement to begin no later than ten (10) days following submission of the application required by section 3-204, application; form; content; process; deposit. The advertisement shall be published in the daily newspaper in which the legal advertisements of the city are published. The advertisement referred to herein shall be of type not smaller than ten-point capital in lower case and shall be at least a two-inch, one-column advertisement in size. Said notice shall contain a complete description of the location of the proposed business and shall give the name of the applicant and if a partnership, the names of the partners, whether limited or general, and if a corporation, the names of the officers and all stockholders having more than ten (10) percent of any class of corporate stock therein, and the date the application was filed with the city clerk. The advertisement shall contain the following additional statement: "AN APPLICATION HAS BEEN FILED ON (date) WITH THE CLERK OF THE CITY OF DULUTH FOR A LICENSE TO OPERATE _______ AT THE ABOVE LOCATION. A DECISION ON WHETHER OR NOT TO GRANT OR DENY SUCH A LICENSE WILL BE MADE BY THE CLERK OF THE CITY OF DULUTH NO LATER THAN THIRTY (30) DAYS FROM THE DATE THE FILED APPLICATION IS DETERMINED TO BE COMPLETE. MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC ARE INVITED TO NOTE ANY OBJECTIONS, IN WRITING, THAT THEY MAY HAVE TO THE GRANTING OF SUCH A LICENSE BY FILING SAID WRITTEN OBJECTIONS WITH THE CLERK OF THE CITY OF DULUTH." 
(b)  Sheets and a publisher's affidavit shall be furnished to the city by the applicant(s) prior to the applicant's application being considered complete. 
(c)  The applicant shall cause to be placed at their expense upon the location of the proposed business no later than ten (10) days following submission of the application, a sign or signs stating the following: "AN APPLICATION HAS BEEN FILED WITH THE CLERK OF THE CITY OF DULUTH FOR A LICENSE TO SELL ALCOHOL. A DECISION ON WHETHER OR NOT TO GRANT OR DENY SUCH A LICENSE WILL BE MADE BY THE CLERK OF THE CITY OF DULUTH NO LATER THAN THIRTY (30) DAYS FROM THE DATE THE FILED APPLICATION IS DETERMINED TO BE COMPLETE. MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC ARE INVITED TO NOTE ANY OBJECTIONS, IN WRITING, THAT THEY MAY HAVE TO THE GRANTING OF SUCH A LICENSE BY FILING SAID WRITTEN OBJECTIONS WITH THE CLERK OF THE CITY OF DULUTH." 
(d)  The sign or signs required by subsection (c) shall be constructed of wood or metal and shall be placed with the base of the sign not more than three (3) feet from the ground and shall be not less than forty-eight (48) inches by forty-eight (48) inches in size and shall face toward a public street adjoining the proposed location. The statement above shall be printed or painted on the sign in the English language. Such signs shall be placed where they can be easily seen and the statement above easily read from all public properties adjoining the proposed location. Said sign shall not be required to comply with the requirements of article 6 of the Unified Development Code pertaining to signs. 
    The advertising requirements of this section shall not be required in cases where the location of the proposed business has previously served as a location where alcoholic beverage sales have been licensed within five (5) years of the date of the application for license. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 4-14-14; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. III ) 
Sec. 3-207. - Separate application and separate license for each location of sale. 
    Separate applications must be made for each location and separate licenses obtained except as hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-208. - Annexation of licensed businesses. 
    Any person, persons, establishment, partnership, corporation or other entity which holds a license from a county for the retail sale of package malt beverages and wine and which is located in an area annexed by the city, shall have thirty (30) days from the effective date of the annexation to apply for the appropriate licenses and permits under this chapter. However, all applicable fees and costs for the equivalent license(s) in the city shall be waived for the year of annexation. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-209. - Other licenses. 
    The licenses and taxes provided for in this chapter are not levied in lieu of any other license fees or taxes that may be levied upon licensees, but are in addition thereto. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-210. - Restriction upon transfers. 
(a)  Licenses permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages shall not be transferable except as otherwise provided for in this section. 
(b)  In case of the death of any person owning a license, or any interest greater than ten (10) percent therein, the license may, with the approval of the city clerk and subject to the terms of this article, be transferred to the administrator, executor or personal representative of the deceased person, or the lawful heirs of the deceased person, if such heirs make application and meet all of the other qualifications contained herein. The license of such deceased person shall be held by the administrator, executor or personal representative of such deceased person only for the time necessary to complete execution of his estate and dispose of the license or his interest therein, but in no event to exceed eight (8) months. In the event of the bankruptcy or in the event that any applicant shall have a receiver appointed by any court of competent jurisdiction, such license shall be transferable to such receiver or trustee in bankruptcy for such period of time as may be granted by the city clerk for the proper liquidation of such assets and stock and goods of alcoholic beverages or both. 
(c)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one (1) or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership and to assign his/her interest in such partnership to one (1) or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not, however, serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership, unless all provisions of this article are fully complied with, and then only upon the approval of the city clerk. This section shall not prohibit transfer of stock to persons who held more than ten (10) percent of any class of stock in the corporate owner at the time of issuance of the license. 
(d)  A licensee may take in partners or additional stockholders where it is determined that additional capital furnished is to be used exclusively for additional inventory or expanding the facilities of the business or for building new facilities and where it appears that the licensee himself will directly receive none of the additional capital investment. Under this section an additional partner or new stockholder must be approved by the city clerk. This subsection only applies to corporations when the new stockholder obtains ten (10) percent or more of the common stock or financial interest in the business entity. 
(e)  Should a transfer of the license be approved, there shall be no prorated return of any license fee and the new licensee shall meet all requirements for a new license to be issued hereunder, except payment of license fees. 
(f)  Except as provided above, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed establishment shall be cause for immediate suspension of any license issued hereunder pending a revocation hearing as provided for under this article. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-211. - Time limit for commencement of business in licensee's establishment; forfeiture for non-use. 
(a)  All holders of licenses permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages must within twelve (12) months after the issuance of said license, open for business the establishment referred to in the license. Failure to open the licensed establishment within twelve (12) months after the issuance of such license shall serve as cause for the revocation of such license and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder. A six-month extension to the 12-month period may be granted by the city clerk in the case of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  Failure to operate the business authorized by a license under this article for a period of six (6) consecutive months after the licensee has begun operation under a license, shall serve as cause for the revocation of such license and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-212. - Annual renewal. 
    All licensees holding licenses permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be required to file their application to renew their licenses by June 1 of each year on forms prescribed by the city clerk. Any person licensed hereunder shall be required to submit a complete application to renew his/her license on the forms prescribed by the city clerk on or before June 1 of each year. For those applicants who fail to submit a complete application and license fee before June 1 but do so on or before June 30, a penalty of ten (10) percent of the license fee shall be imposed for said failure in addition to any other penalties that may be authorized. Further, those renewal applicants who fail to submit a complete application and license fee prior to the June 1 deadline may not receive the new license prior to the expiration of the old license. A minimum of seven (7) days shall be required for review prior to issuance of a renewed license. Unlicensed sales of alcohol are prohibited. Any license holder who fails to submit a complete application for a license renewal prior to June 30 of each year shall be required to undergo the application process as a new license applicant. Unlicensed sales of alcohol are prohibited. 
Secs. 3-213, 3-214 - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REQUIRED TRAINING 

Sec. 3-215. - Training required for issuance of licenses. 
(a)  The applicant for a license under this chapter shall attend an approved alcohol awareness training program as a condition of their license. 
(b)  If the applicant lacks such training and certification, the applicant shall have sixty (60) days from the date of the granting of the license to complete the training and submit certification to the city clerk or designee. Upon due cause being shown, the city clerk or designee may grant an extension of time, not to exceed sixty (60) days, to complete said training. Failure to timely obtain such certification shall be grounds for revocation of the alcoholic beverage license. 
(c)  Every applicant to whom a handling permit is issued and all managerial staff of a licensee shall also complete an approved alcohol awareness training program within sixty (60) days of being issued a pouring permit, being employed as a part of any managerial staff, or being issued a license in the case of the named individual licensee. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 12-9-13, pt. IV) 
Sec. 3-216. - Alcohol awareness training program. 
(a)  The city clerk or his/her designee will determine which alcohol awareness training program(s) are authorized to satisfy an applicant's training requirements as set out in this chapter or whether the city will undertake to provide the training. 
(b)  In order for any private organization or company to be approved as an authorized alcohol awareness training program for purposes of this chapter an entity must: 
(1)  Operate as a not for profit organization and be incorporated or authorized to do business by the Secretary of State of Georgia as a not for profit organization. 
(2)  Provide a training program specific to the City of Duluth Code of Ordinances as well as state law and regulations. 
(c)  In determining whether to authorize an alcohol awareness program to provide required training under this chapter the city clerk or his/her designee should consider the following factors: 
(1)  Flexibility and frequency of training schedule; 
(2)  Training opportunities for non-English speaking applicants; 
(3)  Price charged to applicants; 
(4)  Reputation and experience. 
(d)  In the event that the city clerk or his/her designee determines that there are no groups that meet the city's alcohol awareness training needs the city clerk and/or city manager are authorized to have the training requirements of this chapter performed by staff. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 12-9-13, pt. IV) 
Secs. 3-217-3-219. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONSIDERATION OF LICENSE APPLICATIONS 

Sec. 3-220. - Considerations for granting a license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  The sale of alcoholic beverages provided for by this article is purely a privilege and the city clerk shall have discretionary powers to grant or refuse to grant any such application for license hereunder; however, it shall be proper for the city clerk to consider the following matters in connection with any application for license hereunder, which considerations are deemed to be in the public interest and welfare, as follows: 
(1)  That the applicant for a license for retail sales or consumption on the premises is related to any distributor or wholesaler of alcoholic beverages or employees thereof within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as computed according to the laws of the state; 
(2)  That the applicant for a wholesaler license is related to any retailer of alcoholic beverages or employees thereof within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as computed according to the laws of the state; 
(3)  That the applicant, or any person having a direct or indirect beneficial interest in the issuance of the license, has had any license issued by the city or by any other city in the state, or by any other licensing authority in the state relating to the manufacture, distribution or sale of alcohol or malt beverages suspended within the past five (5) years or revoked within the past ten (10) years; 
(4)  That any applicant for a license to sell spirituous liquor or package beer and wine is related to any distributor or wholesaler of alcoholic beverages or employees thereof within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as computed according to the laws of the state; 
(5)  That any applicant for a license to sell spirituous liquor or package beer and wine, or any person having a direct or indirect beneficial interest in the issuance of the license, has had any license issued by the city or by any other city in the state, or by any other licensing authority in the state relating to the manufacture, distribution or sale of alcohol or malt beverages suspended within the past five (5) years or revoked within the past ten (10) years; 
(6)  That the applicant or any person owning a direct or indirect beneficial interest in the license for which application is made does not have sufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which the application is made, or who has been dishonorably discharged from the armed services of the United States, or fails to demonstrate financial stability; 
(7)  That the applicant is not twenty-one (21) years of age or older; 
(8)  That the applicant is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully permitted for permanent residence; 
(9)  The location of the premises from which the proposed sale of alcoholic beverages shall be conducted does not meet the distance restrictions; 
(10)  That any licensee, owner, or manager has not obtained a valid alcohol handling permit as required by this chapter; 
(11)  Failure to meet any other criteria specified by this article; 
(12)  The applicant's reputation, character, mental and physical capacity to conduct the business proposed to be conducted; 
(13)  That applicant, or any person who shall have a direct or indirect beneficial interest in the license, as a previous holder of a license to sell any type of alcoholic beverages has been found to have violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business within a ten-year period, immediately preceding the date of the application for license hereunder; 
(14)  If applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell any type of alcoholic beverages, the manner in which he or she conducted the business under such license and as to the necessity for any unusual police observation and inspection of such prior business in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business; 
(15)  If applicant has had a prior license, whether or not any such prior license for the sale of any type of alcoholic beverages has been previously suspended or revoked or whether or not hearings have been held for the revocation or suspension of any such license regardless of whether or not any such license was revoked or suspended as a result of such hearing; 
(16)  The location of the premises from which the proposed sale of alcoholic beverages shall be conducted; 
(17)  That corporate or other business entity applicants are of bad business reputation; 
(18)  That applicant, or any person who shall have a direct or indirect beneficial interest in the license, has had any city license revoked within two (2) years prior to the filing of the application; 
(19)  Any other matters which the city clerk in his/her sole discretion, may choose to consider; 
(20)  That the facility where the business entity applicants propose to sell alcoholic beverages does not meet city zoning requirements. 
(b)  All applicants for any alcoholic beverage license must be of good character, and all operators, managers, clerks, or other employees shall be of like character. 
(c)  A license may be denied to any applicant for any alcoholic beverage license where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the application is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
(d)  The city clerk has discretionary authority to consider any extenuating circumstances which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application, or the proposed location of the business. If in the judgment of the city clerk circumstances are such that granting the license would not be in the best interest of the general health, safety, and public welfare, such circumstances may be grounds for denying the application. 
(e)  All decisions of the city clerk either approving or denying a license application shall be stated in writing and a copy of such statement shall be provided to the applicant either personally or by certified mail. 
(f)  Whenever the city clerk shall deny an application for a license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, the applicant shall be notified of the right to a hearing under this article upon timely application. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-221. - Moral character criminal record of owners, officers and shareholders. 
(a)  Where the applicant is a corporation or other business entity other than an individual, the provisions of this section shall apply to all its stockholders or principals owning more than a ten (10) percent financial interest, and all partners and officers. 
(b)  No person shall be granted any alcoholic beverage license unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the city clerk that such person, partners in the firm, or officers and directors of the corporation are of good moral character and reputation. In no event shall any license be granted to any applicant when a person to whom this section applies has been convicted or has pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony or any crime of another state or jurisdiction which would be a felony in Georgia within a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the filing of such application. No person shall be granted an alcohol license when such person has had any license or permit relating to the sale, manufacture or distribution of alcohol revoked by any jurisdiction within a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the filing of such application. No person shall be granted an alcohol license when that person has been convicted, pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to two offenses of driving under the influence of alcohol in this state or any other state, or in any country, within a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the filing of the license application. At the time an application is submitted for any alcoholic beverage license, the applicant shall, by duly sworn affidavit, certify that the applicant, other owners of the establishment and the manager of such establishment satisfy the criminal history prerequisites set forth in this chapter. Should any person to whom this section applies, after a license has been granted, be convicted or plead guilty or nolo contendere to any of the crimes enumerated above, the license shall be suspended pending a revocation hearing as provided for under this article. 
(c)  For purposes of this article, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense to which defendant was allowed to avail themselves of the Georgia First Offender Act (Ga. Laws 1968, P. 324) as amended. Except, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored where the defendant violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender treatment or committed another crime and the sentencing court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender. 
(d)  A licensee denied a license under subsection (b) of this section may reapply for such license upon the expiration of one (1) calendar year from the date of the original application. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 10-8-12; Ord. of 12-10-12, pt. V; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. I ) 
Sec. 3-222. - Payment of taxes and other debts to the city. 
    The city clerk shall cause an inquiry to be made into the tax records of the city to determine if any applicant or other parties interested in an application have any outstanding taxes or special assessments that are delinquent or any other monies owing to the city. No license shall be issued, nor shall a license be renewed, until all such debts are paid in full. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-223. - Limitation on number of licenses within a family and/or corporation. 
    No application for a retail license to sell spirituous liquors in the package at retail shall be granted where the person applying for such license and/or members of such person's immediate family and/or corporation is already holding two (2) interests in a license to sell spirituous liquors by the package at retail within the city. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-224. - Change in relationships and/or ownership interest. 
    Any change in any of the relationships and/or ownership interest contained on the application must be filed with the city clerk within thirty (30) days after such change is made and the failure to do so shall be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of an alcohol license as provided for under this article or for the immediate denial of any application for such a license. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-225. - Completion of proposed licensed premises. 
    Where a building in which an applicant proposes to operate under a license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages is at the time of the application for such license not in existence, or not yet completed, a license may be issued for such location providing the plans and specifications for the proposed building are filed with the city clerk and show clear compliance with the other provisions of this article and other applicable ordinances of the city. No sales shall be allowed in such establishment until it has been completed in accordance with said plans and specifications and is in conformity with all other provisions of this article and other applicable ordinances of the city and an occupancy permit has been issued. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-226. - Application for new license in existing license location. 
    An application for a new license in an existing license location shall meet and qualify under all requirements of this article for granting of a new license except as provided in section 3-206. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-227. - Managers and employees; responsibilities. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all licensees who sell alcoholic beverages to file one (1) submittals annually; on or before June 1 with the office of the city clerk. Such submittal shall include the name of the establishment, the license number and the following information regarding; (1) all licensees, owners, and managers, and, (2) all employees working on the premises and connected with the sale of alcoholic beverages: name; birth date; social security number; home address; home telephone number; race; gender; place of birth (if outside the United States, Alien Registration Number); driver's license number and state of issuance; height; weight; hair color; eye color; and alias used presently or in the past. 
(b)  No licensee shall allow any manager or employee required under this section to hold a permit to work on the licensed premises beyond five (5) days after their first work unless the licensee has on file, on the premises, the current, valid alcohol handling permit of each such manager or employee. An individual working on the premises beyond five (5) days after their first work in an establishment holding a license to sell alcoholic beverages without the required permit shall be considered in violation of this article and the employee and licensee punishable as provided elsewhere in this article. 
(c)  The licensee is responsible for the conduct and action of his/her employees while in his/her employment. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-228. - Employment of persons with certain prior convictions prohibited. 
(a)  No licensee shall employ in connection with the sale of alcoholic beverages any person, who has been convicted of a felony or of any crime in another state or jurisdiction which would be a felony in Georgia within five (5) years immediately prior to the application for employment. No licensee shall employ in connection with the sale of alcoholic beverages any person, who has had any license or permit relating to the sale, manufacture or distribution of alcohol revoked by any jurisdiction within a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the application for employment. No licensee shall employ in connection with the sale of alcoholic beverages any person, who has been convicted of two (2) or more offenses of driving under the influence of alcohol in this state or any other state, or in any country, within the five-year period immediately prior to the application for employment. For purposes of this article, a bond forfeiture or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be considered a conviction. 
(b)  For purposes of this article, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense to which defendant was allowed to avail themselves of the Georgia First Offender Act (Ga. Laws 1968, P. 324) as amended. Except, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored where the defendant violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender treatment or committed another crime and the sentencing court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender. The city clerk or designee shall be authorized to run additional criminal background checks to verify that no violation of probation has occurred. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 12-10-12, pt. VI; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. II ) 
Secs. 3-229-3-239. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ALCOHOL HANDLING PERMIT 

Sec. 3-240. - Licensees, owners, managers, and employees; permitting. 
(a)  All licensees, owners, and managers must make application for and obtain an alcohol handling permit prior to being granted a license to sell alcoholic beverages. In addition, all persons employed to work on the premises in connection with the sale of alcoholic beverages shall, within five (5) days after the date of their first work beyond in an establishment holding a license to sell alcoholic beverages, file a signed application as well as provide an authorization for release of personal information and criminal history record information to the city clerk, chief of police or authorized representative. Said application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth, and prior arrest record of the applicant. The licensee shall also be noted. Any arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. No permit shall be issued until such time as a search of the criminal record of the applicant has been completed. The applicant must also certify that he or she has read and understands the legal restrictions on alcohol handling and sales and the potential penalties that may apply if such requirements are not met. 
(b)  The city clerk, chief of police or their designee shall have a criminal background history made relative to any police record of the person to be cleared. No alcohol handling permit may be issued to any person who has been convicted of a felony or of any crime in another state or jurisdiction which would be a felony in Georgia within five (5) years immediately prior to the application. No alcohol handling permit may be issued to any person who has had any license or permit relating to the sale, manufacture or distribution of alcohol revoked by any jurisdiction within a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the filing of such application. No alcohol handling permit may be issued to any person who has been convicted of two (2) or more offenses of driving under the influence of alcohol in this state or any other state, or in any country, within the five-year period immediately prior to the application. For purposes of this section, a bond forfeiture or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be considered a conviction. In the event there is no record of a violation of this article, the city clerk may issue a temporary permit to the applicant which shall be specific as to the licensee. The city clerk may prescribe reasonable fees for processing such permits which shall be paid at the time application is made. If it is found that the person to be cleared is not eligible for a permit, the city clerk shall notify the applicant, and in the case of manager or employee applicants, the applicant's employer, that this person is not eligible for a permit. The applicant who is denied an alcohol handling permit may appeal such ruling to the alcoholic beverage review board. 
(c)  For purposes of this article, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense to which defendant was allowed to avail themselves of the Georgia First Offender Act (Ga. Laws 1968, P. 324) as amended. Except, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored where the defendant violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender treatment or committed another crime and the sentencing court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender. The city clerk or designee shall be authorized to run additional criminal background checks to verify that no violation of probation has occurred. 
(d)  All permits issued hereunder remain the property of the city and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of the chief of police, the city clerk, or an agent designated by either. Such permit shall be present on the premises at all times while the permittee is working. All permits issued through administrative error or through an error in completion of a background investigation may be terminated by the chief of police or the city clerk. 
(e)  No person shall be issued a alcohol handling permit and it shall be considered a violation of this article if it is determined that the person knowingly and willfully falsified, concealed, or covered up any material fact by any device, trick, or scheme while making application to the city clerk for an alcohol handling permit under this article. 
(f)  Wholesalers owners, managers, employees are exempt from alcohol training and permitting requirements. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 10-8-12; Ord. of 12-10-12; Ord. of. 2-9-15, pt. II ; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. III ; Ord. of 2-12-18 ) 
Sec. 3-241. - Alcohol handling permit; renewal. 
(a)  Any permit issued hereunder shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance (two (2) years for owners, managers and non managerial employees of package stores) unless earlier canceled by the city clerk or chief of police. All individuals (if still employed in such establishment) holding alcohol handling permits shall be required to submit an application to renew their permits in advance of the expiration date on forms prescribed by the city clerk. A minimum of seven (7) days shall be required for review prior to issuance of a renewed permit. If such renewal application is not made prior to the expiration date a penalty of fifty (50) percent of the renewal fee shall be imposed. If the permit expiration date falls on a weekend or holiday, no penalty shall be imposed so long as the renewal application is filedwith the office of the city clerk before 5:00 p.m. on the next business day. Handling alcohol without a valid permit is expressly prohibited. 
(b)  The penalty for an individual being convicted or pleading guilty or entering a plea of nolo contendere for a violation of this article shall be punished by a fine of up to but not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) unless otherwise stated. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Secs. 3-242-3-249. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES; LICENSING REQUIREMENTS, REGULATION AND TYPES OF LICENSES 

Sec. 3-250. - License permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises for consumption on the premises. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold for consumption on the premises or distributed for educational or instructional purposes in a wine and malt tasting room except under a license granted by the city clerk, as provided in this article. 
(b)  No license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be granted unless such person, business or proposed business falls under one (1) of the following categories, in accordance with the definitions and regulations set forth in this chapter: 
(1)  Restaurant. 
(2)  Tavern. 
(3)  Brewpub. 
(4)  Private club. 
(5)  Special events facility. 
(6)  Performing arts facility. 
(7)  Hotel. 
(8)  Lounge. 
(9)  Indoor commercial recreational establishment. 
(10)  Golf course. 
(11)  Alcoholic beverage caterer. 
(12)  Growler sales. 
(13)  Grocery store. 
(14)  Ancillary alcohol sales. 
(15)  Temporary special event. 
(16)  In a brewery, provided that only beer and malt beverages are sold and such establishment meets all requirements of O.C.G.A.  3-5-24.1. 
(c)  No license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be granted unless the business or proposed business is located in the CBD, HC-R, HC-A, C-2, M-1 or M-2 zoning classifications. Licenses for performing arts facilities shall not be granted unless such facility is located in the CBD zoning classification and has obtained a special use permit to operate as a performing arts facility. A license shall only be granted for a business that is a permitted use in its particular zoning district. No license shall be granted to any business which operates as an adult entertainment establishment as set forth in article XIV of chapter 7 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. V ; Ord. of 5-9-16 , pt. II; Ord. of 2-12-18 ) 
Sec. 3-251. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An ordinance of September 14, 2015 , pt. VI, repealed  3-251, which pertained to issuance of licenses limited to designated area; occupational tax certificate and derived from ordinances of August 13, 2012; December 9, 2013 and February 9, 2015 ) 
Sec. 3-252. - Nonprofit or civic organization. 
(a)  Nonprofit civic groups may be granted a three-day special event license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or to sell wine at retail for off premises consumption. Nonprofit civic organizations applications must be submitted at least twenty (20) days prior to the planned nonprofit special event. Such organizations are not exempt from the temporary or annual alcohol permit fees or the permit fees for pouring alcoholic beverages. However, nonprofit civic groups shall pay a handling fee of not more than fifteen dollars ($15.00) and shall be exempt from training requirements found in this chapter. 
(b)  To be eligible to apply for a temporary permit to sell alcoholic beverages at an authorized event, a bona fide nonprofit organization must be the applicant; a nonprofit authorization letter (i.e. Federal Form 501-C3) must be produced; any required event permit must be obtained; and the authorized event for which the event permit is issued must be associated with and benefit the cause of a charitable or civic organization. 
    As used in this article, a "nonprofit" civic group or organization means an entity which is exempt from federal income tax pursuant to the provisions of subsection (c), (d), or (e) of 26 U.S.C. Section 501. 
(c)  Pursuant to state law, a temporary permit shall authorize the organization to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption only on the premises or to sell wine at retail for off premises consumption for a period not to exceed three (3) days. Should the event be held on any city or public property, the event producer or business owner shall provide one Duluth Police Officer or other security personnel as approved by the city clerk for every three hundred (300) patrons to prevent alcohol from being removed from premises. Subject to all laws and ordinances regulating the time for selling such beverages; the temporary permit shall be valid only for the place specified in the permit; and no more than six (6) such permits may be issued to the applicant organization in any one (1) calendar year. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 10-8-12; Ord. of. 2-9-15, pt. IV ; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. VII ) 
Sec. 3-253. - Special event temporary permit for profit. 
(a)  An alcohol licensee may apply for a special event temporary permit. A special temporary for profit application must be submitted at least twenty (20) days prior to the planned profit special event. This temporary permit shall authorize the alcohol licensee to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises for a period not to exceed extension of the hours of operation specified in section 3-112. 
(b)  No more than six (6) such permits may be issued to any location in any one (1) calendar year. A for profit desiring to sell alcoholic beverages must apply and submit completed forms furnished by the commissioner of the state department of revenue and a permit from the commissioner authorizing the organization to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages as provided in rule 560-2-2-43 of the rules and regulations of the state department of revenue. Should the event be held on any city or public property, the event producer or business owner shall provide one Duluth Police Officer or other security personnel as approved by the city clerk for every three hundred patrons to prevent alcohol from being removed from premises. 
(c)  Each application for such a temporary permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). The city clerk may issue a permit authorizing the organization to sell alcoholic beverages. The licensee or the licensee's employees shall supervise all aspects of the special event pertaining to the handling and storage of alcoholic beverages and the distribution of alcoholic beverages. The licensee shall be responsible for compliance with all aspects of this article and state law and be liable for infractions thereof. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 12-9-13, pt. VI; Ord. of. 2-9-15, pt. V ; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. VIII ) 
Sec. 3-254. - Restaurants. 
(a)  An establishment may be licensed to sell alcohol for consumption on the premises as a restaurant where the establishment meets all other applicable requirements under this chapter and: 
(1)  Is a public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are actually and regularly cooked and served to the public, without sleeping accommodations. 
(2)  Is equipped with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to cook and serve suitable food for its guests. 
(3)  At least one (1) meal per day shall be cooked on the premises and served at least five (5) days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecorating, and the cooking and service of such meals shall be the principal business conducted by such establishment. 
(4)  Derives from the licensed establishment at least fifty (50) percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-255. - Taverns. 
(a)  An establishment may be licensed to sell alcohol for consumption on the premises as a tavern where the establishment meets all other applicable requirements under this chapter and: 
(1)  is located in the CBD zoning district; 
(2)  Is equipped with direct access to adequate and sanitary bar equipment including but not limited to glassware, dishwashing facilities, and refrigerators; and 
(3)  At the time of the initial application, meets a ratio of one (1) restaurant to one (1) tavern in the CBD zoning district. The subsequent closure of restaurants after the initial granting of a tavern license shall have no negative impact on license renewal for a licensed tavern. 
(b)  Establishments licensed as taverns shall prohibit smoking on the premises. 
(c)  No individual under the age of twenty-one (21) shall enter or be allowed to enter a tavern unless he or she is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or spouse who is twenty-one (21) years of age or older. This subsection shall not apply to an individual while he or she is attending a live musical concert or live presentation of the performing arts for which he or she has paid an admission charge. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 12-9-13, pt. IX; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. IX ; Ord. of 8-8-16 ) 
Sec. 3-255.1. - Reporting of disciplinary actions against tavern licensees. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A.  3-3-2.1, the City of Duluth shall be required to provide notification to the Georgia Department of Revenue within forty-five (45) days of any officer, department, agency, or instrumentality of the municipality taking disciplinary action against any person issued a license to operate any premises at which seventy-five (75) percent or more total gross annual revenue is derived from the sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  The notification required under paragraph (a) of this Code section shall be in the format for the reporting of disciplinary actions set by the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
(c)  For purposes of this code section "disciplinary action" shall have the same meaning as provided for in O.C.G.A.  3-3-2.1(a)(1), which includes any citation or arrest arising out of the violation of any law, rule, regulation, resolution, or ordinance of a governmental entity relating to the manufacture, distribution, sale, or possession of alcoholic beverages against a licensee, any employee of a licensee, or any person holding a financial interest in the license of a licensee on the premises or place of business of any licensee. 
( Ord. of 8-8-16 ) 
Sec. 3-256. - Brewpub licenses. 
(a)  Brewpub is a restaurant in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed subject to state law barrel production limitations for retail sales directly to consumers. No person shall be permitted to own or operate a brewpub without first obtaining a brewpub license and a license authorizing consumption of alcohol on the premises from the city clerk pursuant to the same procedures as are set forth in division 3, and each brewpub license holder shall comply with all other applicable state and local license requirements. 
(b)  A brewpub license authorizes the holder of such license to: 
(1)  Manufacture on the licensed premises not more than ten thousand (10,000) barrels of beer in a calendar year solely for retail sales directly to consumers; 
(2)  Operate a restaurant that shall be the sole retail outlet for such beer. Such outlet may offer for sale any other alcoholic beverages produced by other manufacturers which are separately authorized for consumption on the premises by this article, including wine, distilled spirits, and malt beverages, provided that such alcoholic beverages are purchased from a licensed wholesaler for consumption on the premises only; and, provided, further, that in addition to draft beer manufactured on the premises, each brewpub licensee shall offer for sale commercially available canned or bottled malt beverages from licensed wholesalers for consumption on the premises only; 
(3)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, sell up to a maximum of five thousand (5,000) barrels annually of such beer to licensed wholesale dealers for distribution to retailers and retail consumption dealers; 
(4)  Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter 3, sell growlers of malt beverages manufactured on the licensed premises directly to consumers; and 
(5)  Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter 3, neither barrels of beer sold to licensed wholesaler dealers, as authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A.  3-5-36(2)(D), or growler sales shall be used when determining the total annual gross food and beverage sales. 
(c)  Possession of a brewpub license shall not prevent the holder of such license from obtaining another license authorized under section 3-250 (license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises) for the same premises. 
(d)  A brewpub licensee shall pay all state and local license fees and excise taxes applicable to individuals licensed as manufacturers, retailers, and, where applicable, wholesalers. 
(e)  A brewpub licensee shall measure all beer manufactured on the premises and otherwise comply with applicable regulations respecting excise and enforcement tax determination of such beer as required. There is hereby levied an excise tax on all beer and malt beverage produced by a brewpub as set forth in sections 3-900 and 3-901 herein. 
(f)  Except as set forth above in this section, a brewpub license holder shall be subject to all provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. X ; Ord. of 11-14-16 , pt. II) 
Sec. 3-257. - Performing arts facility. 
(a)  Alcohol may be sold and/or dispensed at a performing arts facility only where the facility meets the definition for a performing arts facility set forth in section 3-103 (establishment located in the CBD zoning classification; has its principal objective or business the presentation of live music, mainline dramatic arts, plays, theatre productions and stand-up comedy; and does not feature, show, allow, promote or advertise adult businesses as defined and regulated in chapter 7, article XIV of the Duluth Code, including but not limited to adult dancing establishments, adult mini-motion picture theatres, adult motion picture theatres, adult motion picture arcades and erotic dance establishments). 
(b)  A business meeting the definition of a performing arts facility under this Code shall be eligible to apply for and be considered for an annual license to allow alcohol consumption on the premises from the city clerk in the same manner as set forth in division 3 of this chapter. 
(c)  A business granted a performing arts facility license for consumption of alcohol on the premises shall be required to obtain all required licenses from the state and to follow all state and local laws, ordinances and rules governing the consumption of alcohol on the premises. 
(d)  Alcohol may also be sold and/or dispensed at a performing arts facility as defined in section 3-103 of this Code by a licensed caterer in the same manner set forth in section 3-260 of this Code without the need for the facility or the caterer to obtain a performing arts facility license. 
(e)  Alcohol may be sold or dispensed at a performing arts facility only at a bar located in the lobby area of the facility or by a waiter or waitress serving patrons within the facility on days where a performance will take place in the facility. 
(f)  In addition to the hours of sale requirements set out in section 3-112 of this division alcohol may not be dispensed at a performing arts facility earlier than one (1) hour before the start of a performance or later than one (1) hour after the performance has ended. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-258. - Indoor commercial recreation establishments. 
(a)  No indoor commercial recreational establishment shall offer alcoholic beverages for sale during the time it is sponsoring events which primarily attract persons under the age of twenty-one (21). 
(b)  Indoor commercial recreation establishments which are licensed to serve alcohol shall only dispense alcoholic beverages at a bar or by a waiter or waitress in the dining or bar areas at tables located therein. Alcoholic beverages shall not be dispensed or served in the areas of the establishment not intended predominately for food or beverage consumption. 
(c)  Indoor commercial recreation establishments shall ensure that no underage person shall be served or shall purchase or acquire alcoholic beverages while in any location within the business. Such establishments shall utilize a method of ensuring alcoholic beverage purchasers and consumers are of legal drinking age by methods including but not limited to requiring patrons of legal drinking age to be identified by arm bands or other clear markings. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-259. - Golf course sales. 
    Sale of malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits are permitted for retail consumption licensees operating a golf course as defined in section 3-103 provided such sales are made in a clubhouse, in an area outside of the clubhouse within the exclusive control of the licensee, or on the golf course itself from a mobile or satellite location between the first and final hole on the course, provided that the area is under the exclusive control of the licensee. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 5-9-16 , pt. III) 
Sec. 3-260. - Alcoholic beverage caterers. 
(a)  License requirements for resident caterers shall be the following: 
(1)  Any resident caterer who possesses a valid license from the city to sell or otherwise dispense malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink at a fixed location within the city may apply for an off-premises permit authorizing sales at authorized catered events or functions. 
(2)  Each off-premises catering permit, authorized herein, shall be valid only for the event for which the license is issued. The fee for each license shall be set by resolution of the city council, and this fee amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on, or conduct the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages off-premises and in connection with a catered event or function without first having obtained a permit and paid a permit fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per event as provided herein. Excise taxes are imposed upon the sale of alcoholic beverages by a resident caterer as provided in article IV of this chapter. 
(b)  License requirements for nonresident caterers. 
(1)  A nonresident alcoholic beverage caterer shall submit an application for an off-premises event permit to the city clerk. The fee for each such permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) as authorized by O.C.G.A.  3-11-3, or such fee as may be authorized by any future amendment or revision thereto. Excise taxes are imposed upon the total of individual alcoholic beverage drinks served by a nonresident caterer in the amounts set forth in article IV of this chapter and shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the catered event or function. 
(2)  Permit requirements for resident and nonresident caterers. 
Applications must be submitted at least three (3) days prior to the planned catered event. An application for an event permit shall include the name of the caterer, the date, address, time, and name of the event and the quantity and type of alcoholic beverages to be transported from the licensee's primary location to the location of the authorized catered event or function. 
(c)  Generally applicable requirements for caterers. 
(1)  While transporting alcoholic beverages in connection with an authorized catered event, the licensee or the employee of the licensed alcoholic beverage cater shall have in their possession: 
a.  A copy of the caterer's valid state alcoholic beverage license; 
b.  A copy of the caterer's valid local alcoholic beverage catering license; 
c.  A copy of the caterer's valid local alcoholic beverage catering event permit. 
(2)  Employees of licensed caterer must be twenty-one (21) years of age or older in order to handle alcoholic beverages at any authorized catered event. It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to distribute, sell, or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages off-premises except as authorized by the event permit. 
(3)  A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may sell or otherwise dispense only that which is authorized by his alcoholic beverage license. For example, if the alcoholic beverage caterer possesses a valid license to sell malt beverages, he may sell or otherwise dispense only malt beverages at the authorized catered event or function. 
(4)  Except as set forth above in this section, an off-premises permit holder must comply with all other provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(5)  No catering permit shall be issued without evidence that the applicant caterer has general liability insurance in an amount of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) to cover their catering activities. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 10-8-12; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. XI ) 
Sec. 3-261. - Bring in your own bottle of wine for consumption. 
(a)  Not withstanding any other contrary provision of the ordinance from which this section derives, any restaurant which is licensed to sell wine for consumption on the premises may allow a patron to bring in and consume one (1) unopened bottle of wine for consumption on the premises, if the patron purchases a substantial meal and consumes a portion of the bottle of wine and the meal on the restaurant's premises. For this provision to apply, the restaurant must establish a policy for permitting this practice and must charge a minimum corkage fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per bottle. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to require a restaurant to allow this practice. 
(b)  A licensee, if licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, may permit a patron and the patron may remove one (1) unsealed bottle of wine per patron from a restaurant, if the patron purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine, whether purchased or brought in under the guidelines of subsection (a), with such meal on the premises. The bottle must be bagged and accompanied by a receipt or corkage fee receipt. The licensee and patron must comply with the provisions of O.C.G.A.  3-6-4 and  40-6-253(2) as they may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 8-8-16 , pt. I) 
Sec. 3-262. - Consumption sales by the drink only. 
    Other than where specifically authorized in this chapter, persons holding a license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall not sell alcoholic beverages by the package. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 3-263. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An Ord. of March 14, 2016 repealed  3-263, which pertained to pitchers and derived from an ordinance of August 13, 2012. 
Sec. 3-264. - Sales restricted to premises only. 
    No retail consumption dealer shall sell or deliver any alcoholic beverages to any person except in said licensee's place of business, except as provided for in section 3-260 (licensed caterers), section 3-259 (outdoor golf course sales), section 3-266 (patio sales) and section 3-265 (open areas/outside consumption). 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. I ) 
Sec. 3-265. - Open areas/outside consumption. 
(a)  Open area means the area directly outside and adjacent to a licensed restaurant or tavern where a licensee may obtain an annual permit authorizing the consumption of alcoholic beverages. Smoking shall not be allowed in permitted open areas. 
(b)  Restaurants licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be eligible for an annual permit authorizing patrons to consume alcohol purchased from the restaurant in a designated area directly outside and adjacent to the licensed establishment. 
(c)  Taverns licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be eligible for an annual permit authorizing patrons who purchase alcohol from the tavern to consume alcohol in a designated and permitted area directly outside and adjacent to the licensed establishment. The permitted open area must be owned or leased by the licensee. 
(d)  A permitted open area shall not include any required parking space or any public or private road, but may include a public area leased to a licensed tavern owner. 
(e)  The city clerk may issue a permit authorizing alcohol consumption in open areas where in the discretion such permit is consistent with the health, safety and welfare of the city. 
(f)  Compliance with the provisions of this section including requiring patrons to remain in the open area while consuming alcohol shall be the responsibility of the licensee. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 12-9-13, pt. IX; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. II ) 
Sec. 3-266. - Patio sales. 
(a)  The city clerk may issue a patio sales license to establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, or establishments seeking such license, to allow alcoholic beverage sales within patios. 
(b)  In order to be eligible for a patio sales license, such patios shall be enclosed by some structure the height of which shall be a minimum of three and one-half (3.5) feet above ground level. Such structure may be constructed of material which permits visibility into and out of the patio. Such structure must comply with all applicable city codes, including, but not limited to, building and fire codes, and shall function to prevent patrons from leaving the patio area with an alcoholic beverage without the knowledge of the licensee. 
(c)  The licensee shall require patrons to enter and exit licensed patio through the licensed establishment's main premises. Licensed patios shall have an approved fire exit for emergency use only, equipped with an audible alarm triggered by unauthorized use of such fire exit. 
(d)  Subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to a motel or hotel licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises which makes sales and allows consumption of alcoholic beverages in ballrooms, meeting rooms, reception rooms, or patio areas of such hotel or motel, provided such functions are in connection with a meeting, reception, conference, convention or similar type gathering at such hotel or motel. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 10-8-12; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. IV ) 
Sec. 3-267. - Special temporary outside events. 
(a)  Establishments duly licensed by the city clerk to sell alcoholic beverages must submit an application and site plan to the city clerk to engage in outside special events. A special event temporary permit shall authorize the alcohol licensee to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises for a period not to exceed extension of the hours of operation specified in section 3-112. The applicant must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The licensed establishment must have an existing license for the sale of alcoholic beverages. All entrances and exits to the event must be controlled access points to allow for easy monitoring of patrons entering and leaving and to prevent alcohol from being removed from the premises. 
(2)  A site plan must be submitted to and approved by the city clerk's office as well as the county fire marshal's office for approval. If the site plan provides for an area to accommodate more than twenty-five (25) persons a crowd control and security plan must be submitted to the city police department for approval. For every three hundred (300) expected patrons, event organizer shall provide one (1) Duluth Police Officer, or other security personnel as approved by the city clerk. The department of community development and fire marshal must approve any temporary structures. 
(3)  A signed and notarized letter from the property owner must be submitted to the city clerk's office authorizing the use of the property for the event. 
(4)  All outside points of sale of alcoholic beverages must be licensed and the required fees paid. The outside event shall not exceed two (2) days. 
(5)  All outside events for an individual licensed establishment will be restricted to two (2) events per year. 
(6)  A nonrefundable fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per event must be paid at the time of filing of the application. 
(7)  Completed application must be submitted to the city clerk's office twenty (20) days prior to the scheduled event. 
    Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to waive or repeal any other requirements ordained under this Code. 
(b)  The licensee or the licensee's employees shall supervise all aspects of the special event pertaining to the handling and storage of alcoholic beverages and the distribution of alcoholic beverages to consumers in the metro Atlanta area. The licensee shall be responsible for compliance with all aspects of this article and state law, and liable for infractions thereof. 
(c)  Mayor and council may waive the requirements set forth in this chapter regarding handling permits for special temporary outdoor city sponsored or city co-sponsored events in cases where it is impractical to require each person pouring alcohol to obtain a permit. 
(1)  Where the mayor and council waives the handling permit requirements for an event under this subsection, the licensed alcohol vendor(s) shall designate pouring managers to supervise volunteers pouring without a handling permit. 
(2)  All pouring managers shall be holders of a valid handling permit in the City of Duluth. 
(3)  All pouring managers and volunteers serving alcohol shall be twenty-one (21) years of age or older. 
(4)  A pouring manager shall be present in any areas where alcohol is being served. A pouring manager may supervise up to twelve (12) volunteers at a time. 
(5)  Prior to allowing a volunteer to pour alcohol at an event without a permit, vendors shall provide basic instruction to volunteers regarding the applicable laws, code and event restrictions. 
(6)  Pouring managers and volunteers serving alcohol shall comply with all of the other requirements set forth by this article and state law. Pouring managers and the licensed alcohol vendor(s) for the event may be held accountable for violations of this code by volunteers. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 3-11-13; Ord. of. 2-9-15, pt. III ) 
Sec. 3-268. - Special provisions and exemptions in downtown district. 
(a)  Red zone events. During special red zone events designated by the mayor and council the public shall be authorized to possess and consume alcoholic beverages or purchase alcoholic beverages sold by those licensed establishments located in the CBD zoning district. Such consumption and possession shall only be allowed within the areas bounded on the north by Hill Street, on the east by the city's right-of-way line for Highway 120, on the west by Hardy Street and on the south by the Norfolk Southern rail road tracks. 
(1)  No possession or consumption of alcohol shall be permitted in the playground at Taylor Park or in the Duluth Cemetery within this designated area. 
(b)  Downtown entertainment district. The public shall be authorized to possess and consume alcoholic beverages in plastic cups where such alcoholic beverages are purchased from a licensed establishment located in the CBD zoning district within the public areas bounded on the north by Hill Street, on the east by the city's right-of-way line for Highway 120, on the west by Hardy Street and on the south by the Norfolk Southern rail road tracks. 
(1)  No possession or consumption of alcohol shall be permitted in the playground at Taylor Park, in the Duluth Cemetery or in parking lots within this designated area. 
(2)  The public shall not be authorized to possess and consume alcoholic beverages in public areas described herein where the alcoholic beverages were not purchased from a licensed establishment located within CBD zoning district. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. I ; Ord. of 5-9-16 ) 
Sec. 3-269. - Solicitation prohibited. 
    No retail consumption dealer licensed to sell alcoholic beverages hereunder shall require, permit, suffer, encourage or indulge any employee or person to solicit in the licensed premises for himself or for any person other than the patron and guest of the patron, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or non-alcoholic, or money with which to purchase the same; nor shall any licensee pay any commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting his establishment or to his agents or manager to solicit for himself or for others, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or non-alcoholic. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-270. - "Happy hour" promotions and sales. 
(a)  No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee, in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall: 
(1)  Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to any person or group of persons; 
(2)  Deliver more than one (1) alcoholic beverage to one (1) person at one (1) time; 
(3)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(4)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages to any person or group of persons on any one (1) day at prices less than those charged to the general public on that day, except at private functions not opened to the public; 
(5)  Encourage or permit on the licensed premises any game or contest which involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as a prize. 
(6)  Require or allow the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased or before the previous alcoholic beverage has been consumed or otherwise discarded. 
(b)  Each licensee shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all alcoholic beverages to be served and consumed on the licensed premises or in a room or part thereof including outdoor or patio sales where permitted. The schedule of prices shall be posted in a conspicuous manner so as to be in view of the paying public. 
(c)  No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsection (a). 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 3-11-13,  1) 
Sec. 3-271. - Ancillary alcohol sales license. 
(a)  The city clerk may grant a license for ancillary alcohol sales where it is determined that the sale, service or consumption of alcohol is not the primary business of the licensed establishment. 
(b)  An ancillary alcohol sales license permits the licensee to sell a patron either two (2) six (6) ounce glasses of wine or two (2) twelve (12) ounce serving of beer or other malt beverage per day. 
(c)  In no event shall a licensee's total annual gross alcohol revenue exceed ten (10) percent of the licensee's gross annual revenues. 
(d)  Ancillary alcohol sales licensees shall be required to obtain a state alcohol license for consumption on the premises and except as expressly provided for herein, shall be subject to all state and local laws, rules and requirements, including licensing requirements and the other provisions of this chapter related to the sale of alcohol for consumption on the premises. Notwithstanding the foregoing, ancillary sales licensees shall not be required as a condition of their license to post signs as required by section 3-206(c) and (d) of this chapter. 
(e)  Notwithstanding other provisions in this chapter regarding penalties for violation of this chapter, upon a determination that a holder of an ancillary sales license has violated any provision of this chapter the license shall be revoked and the holder shall be ineligible to obtain an ancillary sales license for a period of five (5) years following the effective date of the revocation. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 12-10-12; Ord. of 3-11-13,  2) 
Sec. 3-272. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An ordinance of September 14, 2015 , pt. XII, repealed  3-272, which pertained to specialty gift shop licenses and derived from an ordinance of August 13, 2012. 
Sec. 3-273. - Private clubs. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a private club must be a nonprofit association which is organized under the laws of this state and which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one (1) year prior to the filing of its application for a license; 
(2)  Has at least seventy-five (75) regular dues-paying members; 
(3)  Is organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation, and other nonprofit purposes; 
(4)  Owns, hires, or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
a.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; 
b.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
c.  Has no member, officer, agent, or employee directly or indirectly receiving in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages a fixed salary. 
(b)  For purposes of subsection (a)(4)c of this section, the term "fixed salary" means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent, or employee of a private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include any commission or any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. Tips or gratuities added to the bills under club regulations shall not be considered profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be granted to a private club organized or operated primarily for the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  Veterans' organizations, fraternal organizations, and other nonprofit organizations currently having tax exempt status under either the United States Internal Revenue Code or the state income tax law shall not be required to operate a food establishment serving prepared food; provided, however, any such organization selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages shall be subject to all ordinance regulations dealing with general licensing and consumption on the premises establishments. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-274. - Art shop license. 
(a)  The city clerk may grant an art shop license to an establishment which meets each of the following criteria: 
(1)  The business is located in the CBD zoning district; 
(2)  The sale, service or consumption of alcohol is not the primary business of the licensed establishment; 
(3)  The establishment meets the definition of an art shop set forth in section 3-103 of this chapter; 
(4)  The individuals applying for the license on behalf of the business meets all application requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  An art shop licensed under this section may allow customers to bring in a bottle or bottles of wine and beer to be consumed on the premises. Customers must remove any unconsumed wine or beer from the premises. 
(c)  An art shop shall not store, keep, or handle any wine or beer belonging to the customer, and no owner, employee or argent of the art shop shall pour, handle or have any contact with the wine or beer. 
(d)  No customer of an art shop shall consume more than two (2) six (6) ounce servings of wine or two (2) twelve (12) ounce servings of beer during a three-hour period or four (4) six (6) ounce servings of wine or four (4) twelve (12) ounce servings of beer within a single business day. 
(e)  An art shop licensed under this section shall be subject to the other provisions of this code and state law. An art shop shall prohibit any one to consume alcohol who is under twenty-one (21) years of age or who is intoxicated. 
(f)  Art shops licensed under this section shall not be permitted to allow patrons to consume alcohol on the premises on Sundays. 
(Ord. of 3-11-13,  2; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. XIII ) 
Sec. 3-275. - Special event facilities. 
    An establishment licensed as a special event facility may be exempt from the prohibitions of section 3-342 ("brown bagging") in conjunction with a private function where the following criteria are met: 
(1)  Attendance is by invitation of the party renting the special events facility only and not open to the public; 
(2)  All alcoholic beverages served at the private function shall be supplied to invited guests free of charge; 
(3)  The costs of the alcoholic beverage(s) served at a private function are to be paid for by the host renting the special events facility; 
(4)  There is no cost for guests to attend the private function by admission fee, donation, or any other means; 
(5)  Alcohol may be served only in conjunction with the service of meal and food products; 
(6)  Alcohol must be served by a trained alcohol server, who holds either an alcohol handling permit issued by the City of Duluth or another local government jurisdiction; and 
(7)  Alcohol may not be brought onto the premises of a special events facility by a host renting the facility where there is a charge to guests for admission or for food or alcohol. In instances where a charge is required for guests at a special events facility a caterer must be used to supply and serve the alcohol and all applicable ordinances governing catering, including excise tax collection and reporting shall apply. 
( Ord. of 3-9-15, pt. III ) 
Secs. 3-276-3-279. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PACKAGE MALT BEVERAGE AND WINE; LICENSE REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 3-280. - License permitting the retail sale of package malt beverages and wine. 
(a)  The sale of package malt beverages or wine or both is prohibited except under a license granted by the city clerk, as provided in this article. 
(b)  Except as expressly provided herein, no license permitting the retail sale of package malt beverages or wine or both shall be granted unless the applicant falls under one (1) of the following categories, in accordance with the definitions and regulations set forth in this chapter: 
(1)  Specialty gift shop. 
(2)  Grocery store. 
(3)  Convenience store. 
(4)  Growler sales. 
(5)  Deli and food market. 
(6)  Wine tasting room. 
(c)  Except as expressly provided herein, no license permitting the retail sale of package malt beverages or wine or both shall be granted to any applicant hereunder unless the proposed premises is located in the C-1, C-2, HC-R or HC-A zoning districts. A deli and food market and specialty gift shop licensed for the retail sale of package malt beverages or wine or both may be located in the C-1, C-2, HC-R, HC-A or CBD zoning districts. 
Editor's note- An ordinance of September 14, 2015 , repealed the former  3-280, and enacted a new  3-280 as set out herein. The former  3-280 pertained to issuance of licenses limited to designated areas and derived from an ordinance of August 13, 2012. 
Sec. 3-281. - Sale of growlers. 
(a)  The sale of package malt beverages in growlers shall be allowed in an establishment licensed for the sale of growlers located in the C-2 and CBD districts. The sale of package malt beverages in growlers may not be sold at any establishment engaged in the sale of distilled spirits. 
(b)  Sale of growlers under this section shall require that after the growler is filled the growler must be sealed on the licensed premises with a tamper-proof plastic cap and may not thereafter be opened or consumed on the premises. Licensees or employees of the licensed establishment may fill or refill growlers with draft beer at a licensed location for retail package sales as provided herein in a growler not smaller than twelve (12) ounces in volume and not to exceed sixty-eight (68) ounces in volume. 
(c)  Establishments licensed to sell malt beverages in growlers under this section shall be authorized to sell or offer without charge samples of draft beer to patrons over the age of twenty-one (21) years. Samples shall not exceed three (3) ounces in volume nor shall any one (1) individual be offered more than four (4) samples within a 24-hour period. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 12-9-13, pt. VIII; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. XVI ; Ord. of 11-14-16 , pt. III) 
Sec. 3-282. - Wine, beer, and malt beverage tasting licenses in grocery stores. 
(a)  A grocery store holding a package beer and wine license shall be eligible for a wine, beer and malt beverage tasting license to provide samples of wine, beer and malt beverages offered for sale to customers under the conditions set forth in this section. 
(b)  Wine, beer and malt beverage sampling shall be on limited occasions when a customer requests a sample of a wine, beer or malt beverage offered for sale within the premises, or in conjunction with education classes and sampling designed to promote wine, beer and malt beverage appreciation and education. 
(c)  Wine, beer or malt beverage tasting for customers shall be conducted only at a counter area constituting no more than ten (10) percent of the entire floor area of the premises. 
(d)  Such sampling for customers shall be limited to no more than one (1) time per day, on the days of the week authorized by state law to sell beer and wine by the package, for a period of not to exceed two (2) consecutive hours. Samples shall not exceed two (2) ounces, and no customer shall consume more than eight (8) ounces in any two-hour period; and 
(e)  The holder of a wine, beer and malt beverage tasting license may conduct educational classes not to exceed two (2) consecutive hours. All conditions of sampling set forth in this section shall apply to such classes, except for the limitation on floor areas where the classes can be conducted. 
(f)  Wine, beer and malt beverage bottles shall be opened by the licensee or an employee only, and samples shall be poured only by the licensee and/or an employee. 
(g)  No open containers of wine, beer or malt beverage shall be removed from the licensed premises. 
(h)  Holders of a tasting license of wine, beer and malt beverage tasting license shall not charge for samples or tastings, but may accept donations for a charitable organization of their choice. 
(i)  Such sampling and tasting is permitted within the enclosed portion of the premises only. 
(j)  The annual fee for an tasting wine, beer and malt beverage tasting license shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(k)  Wine tastings on Sundays are prohibited. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-283. - Specialty gift shop licenses. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, limited exceptions from this article shall exist for the owners of specialty gift shops provided that the owner obtains a specialty gift shop alcohol license as hereinafter provided; and the only sale of alcohol by the owner is through the sale of gift items as specified and not for consumption on the premises. These exceptions are as follows: 
(1)  In lieu of section 3-204(h) (application fee), subsection (b) of this section shall apply to applications for specialty gift shop licenses; 
(2)  Section 3-211 (distance from schools, churches, residences, etc.), subsections (a) (private residences), (b) (churches), (c) (public libraries), and (f) (another licensee) shall not apply for specialty gift shops. 
(b)  Each application for a specialty gift shop license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check or cash for the full amount of the license fee in accordance with the scale fixed by the city council, together with a separate certified check or cash in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) payable to the city and shall be paid over to the clerk of the city who shall note the payment of such application fee upon the original application for such license. The application fee provided for herein is to be used to defray the investigative and administrative costs and expenses of investigating and considering the application. If the application is denied and the license refused or if the applicant withdraws his application after submission to the city clerk, the application fee provided for herein shall not be refundable, however, the license fee (without interest) shall be refunded. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an employee who sells any gift item containing alcohol must be at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(d)  Except as set forth above in this section, a specialty gift shop alcohol licensee must comply with all other provisions set forth in this chapter. 
( Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. XV ) 
Secs. 3-284-3-299. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - PACKAGE SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR; LICENSE REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATION 

Sec. 3-300. - Applicability of ordinance to those businesses operating both the retail sale of spirituous liquors and package malt beverages and wine. 
    For licensees who wish to operate a business which conducts both the retail sale of spirituous liquors and package malt beverages and wine, in the case of conflict, the provisions of this article regulating the sale of spirituous liquors shall prevail, and compliance with those provisions, rather than the provisions applicable to the license permitting the sale of package malt beverages and wine, is required. The applicant shall be required to complete the application under this article. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. XVII ) 
Sec. 3-301. - Issuance of licenses limited to designated area. 
    No license permitting the retail sale of package spirituous liquors shall be granted to any applicant hereunder unless the proposed premises is located in an area of the city which is zoned for commercial (C-2, HC-R or HC-A) use. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. XVIII ) 
Sec. 3-302. - Consumption prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on premises licensed for the sale of package liquor. For the purpose of this section "premises" shall include the parking area immediately adjoining the premises licensed for the sale package liquor and available for the use of the customers of the licensed premises, whether or not the same are owned or leased by the licensed holder. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on said premises or to sell unsealed (broken) package liquor. If such licensee shall also have a license to sell malt beverages or wine, it shall likewise be unlawful for any such items to be consumed on the premises or to sell unsealed (broken) malt beverages or wine where the sale of alcoholic beverages is license. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-303. - Signs. 
    Each licensee for the sale of spirituous liquors by the package at retail shall abide by all sign restrictions and requirements set forth in the city's Unified Development Code and/or municipal code. 
(Ord. of 12-9-13, pt. VII; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. XIX ) 
Editor's note- An ordinance of December 9, 2013, repealed the former  3-303, and enacted a new  3-303 as set out herein. The former  3-303 pertained to name of licensee to be displayed and derived from an ordinance of August 13, 2012. 
Sec. 3-304. - Prices to be conspicuously displayed. 
    Each licensee holding a license permitting the sale of spirituous liquors shall have conspicuously displayed within the interior of the licensed premises not less than four (4) copies of a printed price list of the liquors offered for sale; provided, however, that a licensee, in lieu of having four (4) copies of a printed list, may have the price placed on the bottle or on the shelf where liquors are exhibited for sale. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-305. - Restrictions on other mercantile establishments. 
    A licensee of a retail establishment permitted to sell spirituous liquors under this article shall not operate such business in connection with any other mercantile establishment, except a retail store selling package malt beverages and wine and then only if such package malt beverages and wine store sells only malt beverages, wine and items of convenience normally associated with the retail sale of package malt beverages, and then only if such package malt beverages and wine is sold only for carry out purposes. No such retailer shall sell, offer for sale, display or keep stocked at his or her place of business where package spirituous liquors are offered for sale any other product or commodity except: 
(1)  Wine (if licensed); 
(2)  Beverages containing no alcohol and commonly used to dilute distilled spirits, but no beverages of any kind may be opened and/or consumed in said place of business; 
(3)  Tobacco products; 
(4)  Malt beverages and beer (if licensed); and 
(5)  Package ice, snacks and supplies as permitted by law. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-306. - Sale or delivery off premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensee of a retail establishment permitted to sell liquors hereunder to make deliveries of any alcoholic beverages by the package beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-307. - Wine tasting rooms. 
(a)  A wine tasting room for purpose of this chapter shall be limited to entities possessing: 
(1)  A duly issued package license (package store); and/or 
(2)  A duly issued retail wine license, as defined in chapter 3 of the Duluth Code. 
    Entities possessing a license for consumption on the premises shall not be eligible for a wine tasting room permit. 
(b)  No wine tasting shall be conducted on the premises of any place of business licensed to sell distilled spirits in the unbroken container. Any wine tasting occurring on the premises of a business possessing a retail wine license shall be limited to a confined area with single means of ingress and egress into such area. The applicant's proposed measures to segregate the wine tasting area along with proposed staffing and oversight shall be submitted to and approved by the city clerk. 
(c)  An eligible licensee may petition the city for a wine tasting room license provided it meets all present requirements of the city's alcohol beverage ordinance and presently maintains a valid package store license and/or retail wine license. A wine tasting room license shall allow the license holder to offer or sell wine samples only if offered or sold in connection with an instructional or educational promotion. 
    A wine tasting room license is intended to allow such activity on a limited basis and shall not be part of the core operations of such establishment or occur on a daily basis. A wine tasting room license shall be subjected to all other laws, rules and regulations of the city and state, including rule 560-2-5-05 of the department of revenue, alcohol and tobacco division, and is subject to license revocation for violation thereof. 
(d)  Said tasting room license need only be applied for once and shall automatically renew when said retail package store/retain wine license is renewed, provided, however, that the city may revoke or suspend such tasting room license and/or impose such conditions on its operation at the city's discretion for violations of this Code or in furtherance of the health, safety, and welfare of the city's inhabitants. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Secs. 3-308-3-319. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - LICENSING REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS WHOLESALERS 

Sec. 3-320. - Requirements of wholesalers generally. 
    All wholesale dealers or distributors shall be licensed by the state revenue department and shall comply with all laws and regulations of the state revenue department before they sell or deliver any alcoholic beverages in the city. Deliveries and sales shall be made only to retailers licensed under the provisions of this article and all deliveries shall be made in conveyances owned and operated by such wholesale dealers or distributors. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-321. - Wholesale licensees prohibited from interest in other licenses. 
    No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at wholesale shall hold or have an interest in a license issued permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises issued under the terms of this and other city alcohol beverage ordinances. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-322. - Other licenses. 
    The licenses and taxes provided for in this article are not levied in lieu of any other license fees or taxes that may be levied upon licensees, but are in addition thereto. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-323. - Wholesalers sales within the city limits. 
    Wholesale dealers or distributors shall not sell nor make deliveries of alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine within the city to retailers except those licensed by the state revenue department. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-324. - Issuance of licenses limited to designated area. 
    No license permitting the wholesale distribution of alcohol shall be granted to any applicant proposing to locate within the city unless the premises is located in an area of the city which is zoned for commercial (C-2, HC-R or HC-A) or industrial (M-1) use. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. XX ) 
Sec. 3-325. - Annual renewal. 
    All licensees holding licenses permitting the wholesale distribution of alcohol shall be required to file their application to renew their licenses by June 1 of each year on forms prescribed by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-326. - Regulations governing retail storage. 
    All licensed retailers shall store all alcoholic beverages on the premises for which the license was issued and at no other place. No wholesaler shall store for any retail dealer those alcoholic beverages which have been ordered or purchased. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-327. - Minimum legal container. 
    No wholesale dealer may sell to a holder of a license for sale of alcohol for consumption on the premises spirituous liquors in containers smaller than seven hundred fifty (750) milliliters. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-328. - Consumption prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on premises located within the city licensed for the wholesale or retail sale of alcohol. For the purpose of this section "premises" shall include the parking area immediately adjoining the premises licensed for the sale package liquor and available for the use of the customers of the licensed premises, whether or not the same are owned or leased by the licensed holder. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on said premises or to sell unsealed (broken) alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-329. - Brewer/brewery. 
(a)  A brewer licensed under this article shall be permitted to manufacture beer and malt beverages with the right to sell the product of the brewer for resale within and outside of the limits of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  The right to sell the manufactured product of the brewer for resale within the city and the State of Georgia may be revoked separately from the right to manufacture and sell the product for resale outside of this state. 
(c)  In accordance with Georgia law, a licensed brewer may sell up to three thousand (3,000) barrels of malt beverages per year produced at the brewer's licensed premises to individuals who are present on such premises for: 
(1)  Consumption on the premises; and 
(2)  Consumption off the premises, provided that such sales for consumption off the premises shall not exceed a maximum of two hundred eighty-eight (288) ounces of malt beverages per consumer per day. 
(d)  A licensed brewer shall be subject to the provisions related to hours and days of sale as set forth in section 3-112 of this chapter based upon the category of activity being performed; (i.e. a brewer shall be governed by section 3-112(a) when engaged in selling alcohol for consumption on the premises). 
(e)  A licensed brewer shall submit excise taxes to the city on a monthly basis and comply with excise tax record keeping and reporting practices in accordance with O.C.G.A.  3-5-24.1 and 3-5-81 and section 3-900 of this chapter. 
(f)  A licensed brewer shall abide by all federal, state and local law, regulation or rules. The failure to comport with such law, regulation or rules may serve as a basis for revocation of the license issued under this article. 
(Ord. of 2-12-18 ) 
Secs. 3-330-3-334. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - FEES 

Sec. 3-335. - Classification of licenses; fees. 
    The licenses listed below are the only licenses authorized to be issued by this article and each such license is a separate and distinct license and shall require the payment of separate license fees as provided for in this chapter. The fee for an alcohol handling permit shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00) and ten dollars ($10.00) per additional handling permit or for a replacement of a lost permit. The types of licenses, the restrictions on the issuance of each, and the fees for such licenses are as follows: 
(1)  License permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00). 
(2)  License permitting the sale of malt beverages and wine only, for consumption on the premises, one-thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(3)  License permitting the sale of wine only, for consumption on the premises, five hundred dollars ($500.00) 
(4)  License permitting the sale of malt beverages only, for consumption on the premises, five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(5)  License permitting the sale of malt beverages and wine only for consumption through outdoor golf course sales, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). Note that this license requires that the licensee also hold a license described in subsection (1) or subsection (2) above. 
(6)  License permitting the sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises, and manufacture or brewing of beer for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form through operation of a brewpub, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Note that this license requires that the licensee also hold a license described in subsection (1) or subsection (2) above. 
(7)  License permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages only for consumption off the premises by a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) and fifteen dollars ($15.00) per event. Note that this license requires that the licensee also hold a license described in subsection (1) above. 
(8)  License permitting the sale of malt beverages and wine only for consumption off the premises by a licensed alcohol beverage caterer, one hundred dollars ($100.00) and fifteen dollars ($15.00) per event. that this license requires that the licensee also hold a license described in subsection (1) or subsection (2) above. 
(9)  License permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages only for consumption through indoor commercial recreational establishment sales, seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Note that this license requires that the licensee also hold a license described in subsection (1) above. 
(10)  License permitting the sale of malt beverages and wine only for consumption through indoor commercial recreational establishment sales, five hundred dollars ($500.00). Note that this license requires that the licensee also hold a license described in subsection (2) above. 
(11)  License permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises for a special events facility, one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). 
(12)  License permitting the sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption at a special event by special events vendor, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(13)  License permitting the sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises of a performing arts facility, one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(14)  License permitting the sale of all alcoholic beverages consumption on the premises of a performing arts facility, three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00). 
(15)  License permitting wine and beer tasting at a grocery store, two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(16)  License permitting the retail sale of package spirituous liquors, five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(17)  License permitting ancillary sales, malt beverages (one hundred dollars ($100.00)), wine (one hundred dollars ($100.00)) or both (two hundred dollars ($200.00)). 
(18)  License permitting the sale of all alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises of a tavern, four thousand dollars ($4,000.00). 
(19)  License permitting the sale of beer and wine only for consumption on the premises of a tavern, twelve hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00). 
(20)  License permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption in an open area, fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(21)  License permitting the offering of wine and beer in a package wine tasting room, one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(22)  License permitting the sale of malt beverages in growlers, five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(23)  Any request to amend any provision of a license granted under this article is subject to an additional one hundred fifty dollar ($150.00) administrative application fee. 
(24)  License permitting retail package malt beverages, five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(25)  License permitting retail package wine, five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(26)  License permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for caterer off the premises by a nonresident, fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(27)  License permitting the sale of package beer and wine in specialty gift shops, one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(28)  Art shop license; two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(29)  Rental fee for alcohol beverage sales advertisement signage twenty-five dollars ($25.00), plus a deposit equivalent to the replacement cost. 
(30)  License permitting wholesaler-Wine only, five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(31)  License permitting wholesaler-Beer and malt, five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(32)  License permitting wholesaler-Beer/wine combination, seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). 
(33)  License permitting wholesaler-Spirituous liquors, five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(34)  License permitting brewery for beer/malt beverages, five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 3-11-13,  4; Ord. of. 2-9-15, pt. VII ; Ord. of 2-12-18 ) 
Sec. 3-336. - Annual fees. 
(a)  All annual license fees herein shall be paid in advance, on or before June 1 of each year and any new license granted hereunder during a calendar year shall pay the full license fee without proration; provided, however, that if a license is granted after January 1, the license fee shall be one-half (1/2) of the annual license for such calendar year. 
(b)  Any person licensed hereunder shall be required to submit a complete application to renew his/her license on the forms prescribed by the city clerk on or before June 1 of each year. For those applicants who fail to submit a complete application and license fee before June 1 but do so on or before June 30, a penalty of ten (10) percent of the license fee shall be imposed for said failure in addition to any other penalties that may be authorized. Further, those renewal applicants who fail to submit a complete application and license fee prior to the June 1 deadline may not receive the new license prior to the expiration of the old license. A minimum of seven (7) days shall be required for review prior to issuance of a renewed license. Unlicensed sales of alcohol are prohibited. 
(c)  Any license holder who fails to submit a complete application for a license renewal prior to June 30 of each year shall be required to undergo the application process as a new license applicant. Unlicensed sales of alcohol are prohibited. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Secs. 3-337-3-339. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROHIBITED ACTS, STORAGE AND LABELING OF ALCOHOL 
DIVISION 1. - DRIVE-IN SERVICE, ALCOHOL IN PUBLIC PLACES, BROWN-BAGGING 

Sec. 3-340. - Drive-in window or curb service. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to sell and dispense alcoholic beverages from a "drive-in" or "service" window. 
(b)  Curb service or other sales of alcoholic beverages outside the building licensed to sell is expressly prohibited except as may be permitted by section 3-260 (licensed caterers), section 3-259 (outdoor golf course sales), and section 3-266 (patio sales). 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-341. - Alcoholic beverages in public places. 
(a)  Except where expressly authorized to do so in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage while in or upon public streets, alleys, sidewalks, parking lots, or other public ways or property. 
(b)  No person shall be in possession of any glass, can or open container containing alcoholic beverages on any thoroughfare, street, sidewalk, alley, parking lot or any other public way or property. 
(c)  No person, firm or corporation licensed to sell alcoholic beverages shall permit any person to remove from such premises, any alcoholic beverage in any open container, unless permitted to do so, as in section 3-265 
(d)  No person shall have in his or her possession an open container containing alcoholic beverages while within or on a motor vehicle, including motorcycles, while parked or standing on a public street or public parking lot in the city, or while such vehicle is in motion. 
(e)  This section does not apply to nor shall it affect the lawful sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by licensees operating under a valid license issued under the terms of the city alcoholic beverage consumption ordinance. 
(f)  This section shall not apply to nor shall it affect the sale of or possession of a partially consumed bottle of wine furnished by a patron to a restaurant under the provisions of Section 3-261 (b) or purchased with a meal from a restaurant and resealed as permitted by O.C.G.A.  3-6-4 and 40-6-253(2). 
(g)  In accordance with section 10.5-28 of this Code, possession and consumption of malt beverages, beer and wine are authorized with a permit at Rogers Bridge Park for events and rentals issued a permit by the department of parks and recreation under such terms and conditions set forth in the permit. 
(h)  This section shall not apply to events where the public consumption of alcohol is permitted for downtown events pursuant to section 3-268 of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. III ; Ord. of 8-8-16 , pt. II) 
Sec. 3-342. - Bring your own bottle "brown bagging" prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring his or her own alcoholic beverage (brown bag) into any establishment which is subject to any of the occupational tax provisions of the city or elsewhere, or specifically exempted from occupational taxes as provided for in the city occupational tax ordinance, whether or not such establishment is licensed or unlicensed to serve alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any corporation, partnership, individual or other entity who maintains a business which is subject to any of the occupational tax provisions of the city, or elsewhere, or specifically exempted from occupational taxes as provided for in the city occupational tax ordinance, to permit, allow or suffer the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverages within any such premises. Subpart (b) of this section shall not apply to nor shall it affect the lawful sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by licensees operating under a valid license issued under the terms of this or other ordinances providing for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, a licensed art shop which operates in accordance with this chapter shall be authorized to allow customers to bring wine and/or beer to the art shop in accordance with the provisions governing an art shop. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, a licensed special events facility shall be authorized to allow customers to bring alcohol on premises on the day of their scheduled event under the provisions of section 3-275. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the foregoing provision, a restaurant licensed to sell wine for consumption on the premises may allow patrons to bring in and consume one (1) unopened bottle of wine for consumption on the premises under the provisions of Code section 3-261. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 3-11-13,  3; Ord. of 3-9-15, pt. II ; Ord. of 8-8-16 , pt. III) 
Secs. 3-343-3-349. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT PROHIBITED 

Sec. 3-350. - Types of entertainment, attire and conduct prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning or operating a commercial establishment located within the boundaries of the city, at which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale: 
(1)  To suffer or permit any person eighteen (18) years of age or older, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to expose to the public view that area of the human female breast at or below the top of the areola thereof. 
(2)  To suffer or permit any person eighteen (18) years of age or older, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate such portions of human female breasts as described in subsection (a)(1). 
(3)  To suffer or permit any person eighteen (18) years of age or older, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, anus, or anal cleft. 
(4)  To suffer or permit any person eighteen (18) years of age or older, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate the genitals, pubic area, anus, or anal cleft. 
(5)  To suffer or permit any person eighteen (18) years of age or older, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to: (i) perform acts or acts which simulate sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation; (ii) touch, caress, or fondle the breasts, anus or genitals, or (iii) display pubic hair, the anus or vulva. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person eighteen (18) years of age or older, while on the premises of a commercial establishment located within the boundaries of the city, at which alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to expose to public view that area of the human female breasts at or below the top of the areola thereof, or to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance or simulate such areas of the female breasts as described herein. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person eighteen (18) years of age or older, while on the premises of a commercial establishment located within the boundaries of the city, at which alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, anus, or anal cleft, or to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate the genitals, pubic area, anus or anal cleft. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning or operating a commercial establishment located within the boundaries of the city at which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to hold, promote or allow any contest, promotion, special night or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the above prohibited conduct. 
(e)  Businesses which are licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises by the city are prohibited from permitting totally nude dancing as defined in the city adult entertainment ordinance, chapter 7, article XIV, sections 7-601 et seq. 
(f)  Nothing in this section adopted by the mayor and council of the city shall be construed to apply to the presentation, showing, or performance of any play, drama, ballet, or motion picture in any theater, concert hall, museum of fine arts, school, institution of higher education, or other similar establishment as a form of an expression of opinion or communication of ideas or information, as differentiated from the promotion or exploitation of nudity for the purpose of advancing the economic welfare of a commercial or business enterprise. 
    This article specifically applies to establishments licensed by the city to sell or offer for sale alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises and is intended solely to regulate the conduct of individuals physically present in such establishments. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Secs. 3-351-3-359. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - UNDERAGE PERSONS 

Sec. 3-360. - Age requirements on licensed premises. 
(a)  Age requirements for employees. 
(1)  Package retail and wholesale licensees: Except as provided in this subsection, no wholesale dealer or package licensee shall allow any employee under the age of eighteen (18) years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
a.  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under eighteen (18) years of age who are employed in grocery stores supermarkets, convenience stores, breweries or drug stores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises; however, the licensee shall ensure that said person under eighteen (18) years of age shall be under direct supervision of a person who shall be both employed by said establishment and who shall be over the age of twenty-one (21) years of age and shall be on site at all times during which the underage employee is working. 
(2)  Consumption on the premises licensees and caterers: No consumption on the premises licensee shall allow any employee under the age of eighteen (18) years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. No licensed caterer shall allow any employee under the age of twenty-one (21) years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
a.  The subsection shall not prohibit the employment of persons under the above ages on licensed premises where such persons do not dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
b.  This section shall not apply to those employees who clear tableware between customers, also known as "busboys," nor shall it apply to those employees who are cooks or dishwashers. 
c.  Those employees of a consumption on the premises licensee who are eighteen (18) years of age but younger than twenty one (21) years of age shall be under direct supervision of a person who shall be both employed by said establishment and who shall be over the age of twenty-one (21) years of age and shall be on site at all times during which the underage employee is working. Such employee shall be trained and supervised periodically with respect to the procedure for requesting proper age identification and declining to sell alcoholic beverages to those under twenty-one (21) years of age failing to produce proper identification. 
(b)  Entertainers at licensed establishments. It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age to work as an entertainer in any establishment licensed hereunder without a written notarized consent form from parents or guardian. 
(c)  Loitering at licensed establishments. No licensee shall permit any person under twenty-one (21) to be in, frequent or loiter about the licensed premises unless such person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or custodian; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to persons who are employees under the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-361. - Furnishing of alcoholic beverages to underage persons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase for, attempt to purchase for, or to furnish any alcoholic beverages to any person who has not attained twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-362. - Purchase, sale to, consumption or possession by or for underage persons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to purchase, drink or possess any alcoholic beverages within the city unless otherwise authorized by law. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain a place where any person under twenty-one (21) years of age is allowed or permitted to come and purchase, drink or possess an alcoholic beverage. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any parent or other person to buy alcoholic beverages and furnish the same to persons under twenty-one (21) years of age for consumption unless the parent or guardian gives the alcoholic beverage to the underage person and when possession is in the home of the parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is present. 
(d)  The prohibitions contained in paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase, or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption: 
(1)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; or 
(2)  At a religious ceremony. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-363. - Misrepresentation of age by persons under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to falsely misrepresent his or her age in any manner whatsoever for the purpose of obtaining illegally any alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-364. - Sales to underage or intoxicated persons prohibited. 
(a)  No licensee hereunder shall serve or sell alcoholic beverages to: 
(1)  Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age, 
(2)  Or to any person in an intoxicated condition. 
(b)  No licensee or employee thereof shall sell alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises or permit alcoholic beverages to be consumed thereon on any day or at any time when the sale or consumption is prohibited by law. 
(c)  It shall be a violation not to require and properly check identification to ensure an underage person is not sold, served, or has in his or her possession alcoholic beverages while in a licensed establishment. For the purpose of this subsection "identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph or both, and giving such person's date of birth, including but not limited to a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or identification card authorized under an act to require the department of public safety to issue identification cards to persons who do not have a motor vehicle driver's license. Proper identification shall not include a birth certificate, or any traffic citation and complaint form. 
(d)  The penalty for an individual found in violation of this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense in a 36-month period, a fine of no more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and the permit holder shall be required to re-take the mandatory alcohol training class provided by the city within ninety (90) days of receipt of the notice sent by the city. 
(2)  For the second offense within a 36-month period, a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). In addition, the individual's alcohol handling permit shall be suspended for a period of up to one (1) year. 
(3)  For the third offense within a 36-month period, a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). In addition, the individual's alcohol handling permit shall be revoked. 
(e)  Any licensee who has an establishment where a violation of this section or O.C.G.A.,  3-3-23 has occurred by employees, managers, or owners of a licensee shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  For the first violation within any 36-month period, a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00). In addition, the alcohol license of the establishment may be suspended for a period not to exceed ten (10) days. 
(2)  For the second violation within any 36-month period, a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not greater than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). In addition, the alcohol license of the establishment shall be suspended for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
(3)  For the third violation within any 36-month period, a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). In addition the establishment's alcohol license shall be revoked. 
(4)  In addition to the above penalties, the city clerk shall have the discretion to initiate revocation hearings as outlined in this article. 
(5)  As to the penalties in this subsection, if there is a complete change in the licensed establishment's owners, or a change in partners or stockholders representing seventy-five (75) percent of the outstanding stock or shares of the firm owning the licensed establishment, the violations under the old ownership shall not count against the new owners. 
(6)  For purposes of this subsection, a single event resulting in the issuance of citations to more than one individual shall be counted as one violation. 
(f)  Any licensee who has been suspended under subsection (e) above shall be required to post signs, to be provided by the city clerk, on the exterior doors of the establishment which contains the following language: "An employee or owner of this store has violated state law and City of Duluth Ordinances by selling alcoholic beverages to a minor" for the period of the suspension imposed in subsection (e). 
(g)  Any licensed establishment where a second violation of this section or O.C.G.A.  3-3-23 has occurred by employees, managers, or owners within any 36-month period shall not be used as a vendor by the city for any purchases by the city until such time as there are no violations within the previous 36-month period. 
(h)  The city clerk may relieve the licensee of any penalties that otherwise may be assessed under subsections (d), (e) or (f) of this section if it can be shown to the city clerk's satisfaction that such licensee freely and of its own volition reported such specific violations for which it may be charged to the chief of police or city clerk prior to such violation coming to the attention of the authorities. Such a report must have been specific and not speculative or general in nature. Documented evidence of such activities shall include, but shall not be limited to, written evidence that the licensee has promptly reported such violations or attempted violations of this chapter. In addition, the licensee must have fully cooperated with authorities in correcting such violations and participating in the prosecution of any other violators. 
(i)  The city clerk or chief of police, in accordance with O.C.G.A.  3-3-2.1, shall notify the state department of revenue of any violation (violation being defined as a conviction or entry of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere) of this section or the O.C.G.A.  3-3-23 by any licensee. 
(j)  The provisions of this section shall apply to any violation which has not been fully adjudicated at the time of the effective date of its adoption. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. XXI ; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. II ) 
Sec. 3-365. - Employment of bouncers under the age of twenty one. 
(a)  As used in this subsection, the term "bouncer" means an individual primarily performing duty related to verifying age for admittance, security, maintaining order, or safety, or a combination thereof. 
(b)  No person shall allow or require an individual under the age of twenty-one (21) to serve as a bouncer on a premises or in an establishment where alcoholic beverages are dispensed, served, or sold pursuant to a license issued under this title. 
( Ord. of 8-8-16 ) 
Secs. 3-366-3-369. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of September 14, 2015 , repealed division 4,  3-370 and 3-371, which pertained to gambling, coin operated devices and derived from an ordinance of August 13, 2012. 

Secs. 3-370-3-374. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PURCHASE FROM LICENSED WHOLESALERS; PACKAGE VOLUME 

Sec. 3-375. - Retailers to purchase from licensed wholesalers only; minimum legal container. 
(a)  No licensed retail consumption dealer shall buy, arrange to buy, accept deliveries or in any way affect the transfer of any alcoholic beverages except from a wholesaler licensed by the state revenue department. 
(b)  No retail consumption dealer may purchase spirituous liquors in containers smaller than seven hundred fifty (750) milliliters. The sale of alcoholic beverages by the licensee hereunder in unbroken packages or in any quantity for other than consumption on the premises is expressly prohibited. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Secs. 3-376-3-379. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - STORAGE AND LABELING OF ALCOHOL 

Sec. 3-380. - Storage on unlicensed premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation not holding an alcoholic beverage license granted by the city to store any alcoholic beverages on the grounds of any retail establishment excluding alcoholic beverages for personal consumption in accordance with all applicable provisions of law. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-381. - Keeping or storing without appropriate license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating under a license for the sale of malt beverages or wine or both to store or have therein any spirituous liquors without an appropriate license. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-382. - Regulations governing retail storage. 
(a)  No licensee shall be permitted to enter any type of arrangement whereby alcoholic beverages ordered by licensee are stored by licensed wholesaler. 
(b)  All alcoholic beverages shall be available at all times for inspection by the chief of police of the city, or duly authorized representatives. Any alcoholic beverages found in any retailer's stock that is sold or distributed by a wholesaler who is not licensed in accordance with the laws of the state to make sales and deliveries in the city shall be subject to immediate confiscation and disposal in accordance with applicable law. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-383. - Misrepresentation of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Except as expressly provided for in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for licensees or their agents to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles except for licensed growlers or in any manner misrepresent the quantity, quality, or brand names of any alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Secs. 3-384-3-389. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - KARAOKE AND LIVE ENTERTAINMENT 

Sec. 3-390. - Karaoke and live entertainment. 
(a)  Establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises may allow live entertainment or karaoke in the licensed establishment where the establishment: 
(1)  Offers the live performance or karaoke in an area open and available to the other patrons in the establishment. Offering performances or karaoke in private booths or private rooms is prohibited; 
(2)  Provides entertainment or karaoke which complies with the prohibition on adult entertainment found in this chapter; 
(3)  The provisions of this section regarding the physical premises shall not apply to licensed performing arts facilities. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Secs. 3-391-3-899. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TAXES 

Sec. 3-900. - Tax levied, amount, payment; duties of dealers and wholesalers. 
(a)  Scope of section. In addition to all other taxes or license fees heretofore or hereafter imposed upon retail dealers engaged in the city in the business of selling alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and/or wine, there is imposed and levied upon all hereinafter described dealers within the city an excise tax to be computed and collected as hereinafter set forth. The taxes imposed by this section shall not be levied with respect to the following: 
(1)  Wine sold to and used by established and recognized churches and synagogues for use in sacramental service only; 
(2)  Any sale of wine which is exempt from taxation by the state or under the Constitution of the United States; 
(3)  Wine sold to persons outside the state for resale or consumption outside the state; or 
(4)  Wines or malt beverages which contain less than one-half of one (0.5) percent alcohol by volume. 
(b)  Basis for computation of tax. 
(1)  The tax levied hereunder shall be computed on the basis of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter for spirituous liquors and wine sold or delivered as hereinafter set forth. The twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter shall be pro-rated down on fractional parts of liters, so that each bottle or each individual size container shall be taxed on the basis of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any such licensee to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any liquor or wine on which such tax has not been paid. 
(2)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold from a barrel or bulk container, the tax levied hereunder shall be computed at the rate of six dollars ($6.00) on each container sold containing not more than fifteen and one-half (151/2) gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of fifteen and one-half (151/2) gallons; where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of five cents ($0.05) per twelve (12) ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of twelve (12) ounces shall be imposed. 
(c)  Computations, payment, duties of wholesale dealer and distributor. The tax imposed shall be computed and payable monthly. Each wholesale dealer or distributor selling, shipping, or delivering spirituous liquors or wine and/or malt beverages to any retail dealer in the city shall, as a condition to the privilege of conducting said business in the city: 
(1)  Keep and maintain true and correct records of all sales, shipments or deliveries of spirituous liquors and wine and malt beverages to each retail dealer in the city. Such records are to be preserved for a period of not less than one (1) year and made available on request for the inspection of any duly authorized representative of the city. 
(2)  Collect from each retail dealer in the city at time of delivery of spirituous liquors or wine or malt beverages, the amount of tax due under the terms of this section and hold the same in trust for the city until such tax is remitted to the city as herein provided. 
(3)  On or before the tenth day of each calendar month, each wholesaler shall make a verified and comprehensive report to the city which shall correctly show and reflect all sales and deliveries of alcoholic beverages to or for retail dealers in the city for the calendar month immediately preceding the date of said report. Said report shall show the name and address of each retail dealer, the quantities delivered to each retail dealer, the amount of excise tax collected under the terms of this section, and such other reasonable information as may be requested by the city. Said report shall be accompanied by remittance payable to the city for all taxes collected or due, as shown on said report. 
(4)  The excise tax levied in this section is hereby levied upon the retailer licensed to do business in the city and it is the intent of this article to so levy this tax as to require the payment of the tax at the time of delivery by the retailer to the wholesaler, who shall have the responsibility of remitting the tax to the city on behalf of the retailer on or before the tenth day of each calendar month, as hereinbefore required. Interest calculations that apply to late alcoholic beverage tax payments will be based on an annual calculation of the federal prime rate, plus three (3) percent. Interest rate will change when the federal reserve announces the new bank prime loan rate each January. 
A five (5) percent penalty will be assessed after one hundred twenty (120) days with an additional five (5) percent assessed after each successive one hundred twenty (120) days, to a maximum of twenty (20) percent of the principal amount due until all taxes are collected by the city. 
(d)  Noncompliance by wholesale dealer; distributor. If any wholesale dealer or distributor fails or refuses to make the reports required herein, the city shall notify such dealer or distributor in writing and if the reports are not made and the taxes are not remitted within five (5) days from the date of such notice, such wholesale dealer or distributor shall be prohibited from making any further deliveries in the city and the retail licensees served by such wholesale dealer or distributor for whom the taxes have not been paid shall be subject to having their license suspended or revoked as herein provided. 
(e)  Unlawful retail sales. It shall be a violation of this article for any person, firm or corporation to sell at retail within the city alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine on which the taxes herein provided for have not been paid. 
(f)  Unlawful deliveries. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any wholesale dealer or distributor to deliver any alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine to any retail dealer in report and pay any tax levy hereunder to keep and preserve suitable records of the sales taxable under this section. 
(g)  Violations and penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or who shall assist any retail dealer in alcoholic beverages s in the city to evade or avoid the payment of the taxes herein provided for shall be guilty of a violation of this section and on conviction thereof in the municipal court shall be punished by a fine) and/or sentenced as provided by this Code and any such person so convicted shall also be subject to having his license suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 7-11-16 , pt. I) 
Sec. 3-901. - Excise tax on sale of distilled spirits by the drink. 
(a)  In addition to all other taxes or license fees imposed upon retail dealers engaged in the sale of distilled spirits by the drink there is imposed an excise tax upon the sale of said drinks in the amount of three (3) percent of the total cost of such drink which is charged to the public. Such taxes shall be collected by the licensee under this chapter and any such licensees shall remit the same to the clerk of the city on or before the tenth day of the succeeding month along with the appropriate returns showing a summary of the licensee's gross sales derived from the sale of distilled spirits by the drink. Gross sales shall include all credit card sales and those sales shall be reported and taxes collected thereon shall be submitted to the city clerk to the same extent as required of cash sales. It shall be duty of each licensee required to make a report and pay any tax levy hereunder to keep and preserve suitable records of the sales taxable under this section, and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of the tax due. It shall be the duty of every licensee to keep and preserve such records for a period of three (3) years and to provide such returns and reports as may be required by the city clerk. Licensees collecting the tax provided for in this section shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of deduction should be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under chapter 8 of title 48 as provided in O.C.G.A.  3-4-133. The city clerk is hereby authorized to create such reports and returns as may be necessary to adequately provide for the collection of the excise tax provided in this section. 
(b)  In the event the city clerk deems it necessary to verify the excise tax submitted to the city pursuant to this section, for any month, he or she shall notify the licensee of such need for verification and the licensee shall submit a verified comprehensive report to the city clerk, prepared by an auditor, reflecting all sales under this section by the licensee and the taxes submitted to the city. The licensee shall have thirty (30) days to submit such a report to the city clerk following such a request. 
(c)  Licensees failing to remit excise taxes due and payable to the city as outlined in this section shall be charged the same penalties and interest as set forth in section 3-900 (c)(4) of this Code. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 7-11-16 , pt. II) 
Secs. 3-902-3-909. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION 

Sec. 3-910. - Suspension or revocation; notice of hearing; refund. 
(a)  Any license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city to any licensee may be revoked or suspended by the city clerk for due cause as hereinafter defined beginning thirty (30) days after notification without a hearing unless the licensee appeals such suspension as provided for in this article within fifteen (15) days after such notification. 
(b)  The city manager of the city is hereby authorized to suspend any license issued hereunder for any emergency situation such as civil disorders or natural disasters or in any situation that the city manager deems such immediate suspension necessary for the protection of the health and welfare of the citizens of the city, and such suspension may be made effective immediately and shall remain in force until the license is reinstated by the city manager or the mayor determines that the emergency is over or until the next regular meeting of the mayor and council or a meeting called prior to the next regular meeting at which time such suspension may be ended by a majority vote of the city council. 
(c)  Where a license, identified in subsection (a), is suspended or revoked, the city shall not be required to refund any portion of the license fee to the holder of such suspended or revoked license. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-911. - Suspension/revocation of license; causes. 
(a)  Due cause for the suspension or revocation of the licenses identified in section 3-910 (Suspension or revocation; notice of hearing; refund), shall include a violation of any laws or ordinances regulating such business; or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such business; or for the violation of any state or federal law; or for the violation of any city ordinances other than traffic ordinances or failure of licensee or employees to report promptly to the police department any violation of the law or ordinance, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence occurring inside the premises; or for any other legal and sufficient cause. 
(b)  The violation of any term, condition or provision of this article in any particular, or as to any detail whatsoever, shall be cause for the suspension or revocation of any license as provided for in this article. 
(c)  Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to manufacture or sell, at wholesale or retail, any alcoholic beverages, or suspend or revoke a state retail consumption dealer's license, said action shall automatically serve to suspend the applicable city license issued under the terms of this article pending a revocation as provided for in this article. 
(d)  Any material omission from or untrue or misleading information which is contained in an original, renewal or transfer application for a license permitting the consumption of alcohol on the premises hereunder shall be cause for the denial or refusal of a license, and if any license has previously been granted under such circumstances, the same shall constitute due cause for revocation of such license. Any failure to notify of the change in any relationship as specified in section 3-224 (change in relationships and/or ownership interest) within thirty (30) days within such change is made shall likewise constitute due cause for cancellation, revocation or suspension of a license issued hereunder. Further, failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed under the provisions of this article shall constitute due cause for cancellation, revocation or suspension of a license issued hereunder. 
(e)  Any licensed establishment that is found to be in violation of sections 3-350 (types of entertainment, attire and conduct prohibited) and 3-270 ("happy hour" promotions and sales) of this code shall be subject to immediate license suspension and the city clerk shall take action to revoke the license as provided for in this article, in addition to all other penalties provided for in this article. 
(f)  Except as provided in section 3-364(f) (illegal sales of alcohol to minors), the city clerk shall take action to revoke the license of any licensee whose license has been suspended three (3) or more times in any consecutive 36-month period. 
(g)  The city clerk shall take action to revoke the license for any premises where alcoholic beverages have been sold or distributed during a period of suspension. 
(h)  The city clerk may suspend or revoke the license of any establishment which does not meet the licensing qualifications set forth in this article any time such knowledge becomes known to him or her as provided for in this article. 
(i)  In the case of an act of an employee, rather than the licensee, which presents cause for the suspension or revocation of a license, in determining whether to initiate such suspension or revocation hearings, the city clerk may take into consideration any documented evidence that the licensee has, on prior occasions, undertaken proactive efforts to promote compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including the provisions of this chapter prohibiting the sale or serving of alcohol to minors. Documented evidence of such activities shall include, but shall not be limited to, written evidence that the licensee has promptly reported freely and of its own volition violations or attempted violations of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. XXII ) 
Sec. 3-912. - Removal of signs. 
    When any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages is revoked, all signs indicating that such beverages may be sold or purchased shall immediately be removed from both inside and outside the place of business. Upon receipt by the city clerk of notice of revocation, the code compliance officer shall take the necessary steps to see that this section is enforced. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-913. - Acceptance and consideration of application after rejection or revocation. 
    When any application, license or permit authorizing the consumption of alcohol on the premises is rejected or revoked, it shall be unlawful for the city clerk to accept and/or consider any application from the same applicant for a license within two (2) years from the time of such rejection or revocation. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Sec. 3-914. - Hearings. 
(a)  No license or permit shall be denied, suspended, or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The city clerk shall provide written notice to the applicant, licensee or employee of his or her order or decision to deny, suspend, or revoke the license or permit. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant, licensee, or employee of the right to appeal under the provisions of this article. Any applicant, licensee, or employee who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the city clerk may have a review thereof by appeal to the alcoholic beverage review board. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the city clerk within fifteen (15) days after the final order or action of the city clerk and in order to defray administrative costs must be accompanied by a filing fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00). At the request of the appellant, the city clerk or the alcohol review board, by majority vote, may refund the filing fee. 
(c)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within thirty (30) days of the date of filing with the city clerk, unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the city clerk. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross examine witnesses. All testimony shall be sworn. 
(d)  The written findings of the alcoholic beverage review board shall be forwarded to the city clerk by a member designated by the alcoholic beverage review board after the conclusion of the hearing and it shall be the duty of the city clerk to notify the appellant of the action of the alcoholic beverage review board. 
(e)  In hearings as set forth in this section, the city clerk bears the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence. The findings of the city clerk shall not be set aside unless the alcoholic beverage review board finds them to be: 
(1)  Contrary to law or ordinances; or 
(2)  Unsupported by substantial evidence on the record as a whole; or 
(3)  Unreasonable. 
(f)  The findings of the alcoholic beverage review board shall be final unless appealed within thirty (30) days of the date of said findings by certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. XXIII ) 
Sec. 3-915. - Notice. 
    For the purpose of section 3-910 (suspension or revocation; notice of hearing; refund) and 3-914 (hearings), notice shall be deemed delivered the date when personally served or by the date three (3) days following the date of deposit in the United States mail when such deposit is by registered mail and/or certified mail. 
(Ord. of 8-13-12) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate animals,  1.13(2). 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to provide for animal control, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, Sec. II, Para. III(a)(3); animals generally, O.C.G.A. Title 4. 

ARTICLE I. - ANIMAL CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of September 14, 2015 , repealed the former article I,  4-1-4-24, and enacted a new article I as set out herein. The former article I pertained to animals and fowl in general and derived from ordinances of May 23, 1988; January 14, 2002 and May 27, 2003. 

Sec. 4-1. - Adoption of Gwinnett County Animal Control Ordinance. 
    The city council adopts and incorporates by reference the Animal Control Ordinance, chapter 10 of the Gwinnett County Code of Ordinances, as may be amended from time to time, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing animals, including dangerous dogs and responsible dog ownership, the same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city. 
( Ord. of 9-14-15 ) 
Sec. 4-2. - Enforcement and fees. 
    The city has entered into agreements with Gwinnett County in accordance with the service delivery strategy statutes providing permission and authority to the county to provide animal control services within the corporate boundaries of the city. Additionally, the city hereby authorizes Gwinnett County and the Gwinnett County Animal Control unit to enforce the animal control ordinance, as adopted in section 14-26, to set and collect fees, retain any and all such fees, and to enforce the ordinance in the county's recorder's court or other such court as may have jurisdiction of the enforcement of said duly adopted ordinances. 
( Ord. of 9-14-15 ) 
Secs. 4-3-4-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of January 11, 2016 ,  1, repealed article II,  4-51-4-61, which pertained to dove shoots and derived from Ord. No. 83-11-1, adopted November 14, 1983. 

Secs. 4-51-4-70. - Reserved. 
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate the erection and construction of buildings,  1.13(4). 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 6; soil erosion and sedimentation control, Ch. 12. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, Sec. II, Para. III(a)(12); buildings and housing, O.C.G.A. Title 8. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of August 13, 2018 repealed the former Art. I,  5-1-5-3, and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. The former Art. I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 12-13-82,  1-4. 

Sec. 5-1. - Administration. 
    Provisions of the following chapters, sections and technical codes shall constitute and be known and be cited as the "Duluth Building Code" hereinafter known as "this Code." 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the Duluth Building Code is to provide standards to help protect the public's life, health, and welfare in the built environment through the administration and enforcement of the regulatory codes as adopted in article III of this Code and enforced by the City of Duluth. From time to time as future editions and amendments to these regulatory codes are published and adopted by the State of Georgia, they shall become a part of and/or replacement for these regulatory codes and shall be enforced on the date as mandated by state law. 
(b)  Definitions. The definitions or terminology for the listed international and state codes shall be as described in Chapter 2 of each technical Codes and Chapter 1, Article 100 of the National Electrical Code. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-2. - Code remedial. 
    This Code is hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof - which are public safety, health and general welfare - through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. This amended Chapter 1 is intended to provide for the administrative aspects for each of the referenced International Building Codes, the Georgia State Codes, the National Electrical Code and the International Residential Code. 
(a)  Code update and replacement. As future new editions of the adopted referenced codes are published and adopted by the State of Georgia they shall become at that time the replacement for these codes, and shall become enforceable on the date as mandated by state law. Revisions to these codes shall become enforceable only upon incorporation into new editions of the aforementioned codes, generally in three (3) year cycles, or as mandated by state law. 
(b)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this Code. 
(c)  No representation or warranty. This code shall not create any duty or right of recovery against the City of Duluth's officials and employees. The inspection or permitting of any building or plan by the City of Duluth, under the requirements of this Code, is not intended to be construed as a representation or warranty of the physical condition of such building or the adequacy of such plans. Neither the City of Duluth nor any official or employee thereof shall be liable for damages to person or property for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plans, nor for any failure of any component of such. Neither the City of Duluth nor any of its officials or employees shall have any liability for any act or failure to act pursuant to the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-3. - Scope. 
    This Code shall serve to supplement the scope and administration section of each of the adopted regulatory codes identified in chapter 5, article III of this Code. 
(a)  Building. The provisions of the International Building Code, as amended, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. The provisions of the International Residential Code, as amended, shall apply to one- and two-family dwellings. 
(b)  Energy conservation. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as amended, shall require the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment which will enable the effective use of energy in all new building construction. 
(c)  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as amended, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereof. The provisions of Chapters 34 through 42 of the International Residential Code, as amended, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereof for one- and two-family dwellings. 
(d)  Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as amended, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances, and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories. 
(e)  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as amended, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems. 
(f)  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as amended, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system whether public or private. 
(g)  Swimming Pool. The provisions of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, as amended, shall apply to the protection of the public health, safety and welfare by prescribing minimum standards for the design, construction or installation, repair and alterations of swimming pools, public or private, and equipment related thereto; and shall require permitting and inspection, therefore, providing the administration and enforcement of the standards set forth herein. This Code is not intended to supersede the Swimming Pool and Spa Code as enforced by the Duluth Department of Planning and Development and the Gwinnett County Environmental Health Department nor any state or federal regulations. Whenever there is a conflict between these codes or regulations the stricter shall apply. 
(h)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of this Code shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of adoption of this Code, or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, not shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(i)  Appendices. Only those appendices which are either specifically mentioned in the adopting ordinance and included in the amendments of this Code or specifically referenced in the text of this Code are intended to be enforced. 
(j)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in this Code shall be considered an integral part of this Code without separate adoption. When specific portions of a standard are denoted in the text of this Code, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced; and where provisions of this Code conflict with a standard, the provisions of this Code shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(k)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and energy conservation systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards required by this Code at the time of construction, alteration or repair, shall be maintained in good working order. The party responsible for the continual maintenance of a building, structure, or electrical, gas, mechanical, energy conservation and plumbing systems shall be the owner, or his or her designated agent. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Secs. 5-4-5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING INSPECTION DEPARTMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of August 13, 2018 repealed the former Art. II,  5-31-5-35, and amended the Code with the addition of a new Art. II,  5-4-5-29. However, said provisions have been redesignated as Art. II,  5-21-5-46, at the editor's discretion, for purposes of allowing future expansion of the Code. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 83-11-3,  101-105, adopted November 14, 1983. 

Sec. 5-21. - Enforcement authority. 
    The department of planning and development as referenced in this Code shall be the enforcing authority of this Code. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-22. - Building official. 
    There is hereby designated the office of the building official of the city, which building official shall have the duty to inspect all construction requiring permits within the city limits which inspection shall be conducted in accordance with the applicable building, plumbing, electrical, heating and air conditioning codes of the city to be certain that all such construction is in compliance with the applicable code or code. The building official shall be the director of planning and development, or his or her designee. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-23. - Authority of building official. 
    The building official shall have all of the rights, powers and authorities as provided for the zoning enforcement officer under the Unified Development Code of the city as such provisions may relate to powers of the zoning enforcement officer in connection with construction of improvements on real property within the city limits and shall have all of the powers under the city building, plumbing, electrical, heating, air conditioning and ventilating codes regardless of the title assigned such enforcement officer in any such codes. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-24. - Enforcement of codes. 
    The building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical (heating, air conditioning and ventilating), gas and one- and two- family dwelling codes or other such codes which may be adopted by the city council related to the construction, renovation, maintenance or repair of existing or new buildings or structures located within the city shall be enforced by the building official. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-25. - Approval of forms, applications. 
    Those certain forms used in the administration and enforcement of this chapter, specifically an application for building permit, application for electrical permit, application for heating permit, application for plumbing permit, occupancy permit and monthly reporting statement, are adopted and made part of this article. Such applications shall be accompanied by all other documents required by this code and city ordinance including, but not limited to, the Unified Development Code, the building codes, heating, air conditioning and ventilation code, the electrical code and the plumbing code of the city. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-26. - Records. 
    The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. These records shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-27. - Existing buildings. 
    The provisions of the International Existing Building Code, as amended, shall apply to matters governing the repair, alterations, change of occupancy, addition to and relocation of existing buildings as identified below. 
(a)  Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building or electrical, gas, mechanical, energy conservation and plumbing systems without requiring the existing building, structure or electrical, gas, mechanical, energy conservation and plumbing systems to comply with all the requirements of this Code; provided that all new alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of this Code for new construction. The building official shall also determine the extent to which any of the existing systems shall be made to conform to the requirements of this Code for new construction. 
(b)  Change of occupancy. Whenever the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is proposed to be changed, the building, structure, or gas, electrical, mechanical, plumbing and energy conservation systems shall be made to conform to the intent of this Code for new construction. Complete plans shall be submitted and reviewed by the building official prior to the issuance of the building permit. 
(c)  Special historical buildings. The provisions of this Code relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified by local, state or federal agencies as historic buildings, when such buildings or structures are judged to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within the jurisdictional area of the City of Duluth. The extent of codes compliance shall be determined jointly by the building official and the Gwinnett County Fire Marshal prior to any work starting. The applicant shall submit complete architectural and engineered plans, with specifications, bearing the seal and signature of a professional architect or engineer registered with the State of Georgia for review by the building official prior to the issuance of the building permit. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-28. - Powers and duties of the building official. 
    The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this Code, which includes the technical codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of these Codes, which are consistent with their spirit and purpose. The building official shall reserve the right to confer with other applicable departments or agencies before rendering a decision, whenever the work being done also involves their respective areas of enforcement. 
(a)  Right of entry. Any owner, applicant or agent thereof, upon submitting a request for a permit and/or accepting the permit issued pursuant to this Code shall constitute an agreement of consent to allow the building official, or his or her authorized representative, to conduct an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this Code; or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, or electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and energy conservation systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous; or construction occupied, without proper written releases, the building official, or his or her authorized representative, may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by this Code; provided that is such building or premises is occupied, he or she shall first present the City of Duluth I.D. badge or proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure or premises is unoccupied, he or she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner, his or her agent or other persons having charge or control of such to request entry and obtain consent to enter. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(b)  Prompt entry. When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner, or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this Code. No person shall in any way obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative of the building official while in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. Refusal of entry or access, or interference with the representative of the building official, shall be deemed in violation of this construction code and shall result in penalties as prescribed herein. 
(c)  Stop work orders. The building official is hereby authorized to suspend or invalidate such permits, order that all unauthorized or improper work be stopped, direct correction of deficiencies, issue summons to any court of competent jurisdiction, or take any other legal or administrative action appropriate to the severity of the violation and degree of threat to the public health, safety and welfare. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, or electrical, gas, mechanical, energy conservation and plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of this Code or the technical codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. The building official shall cause to be issued a "stop work order" for the entire project. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work on the entire project may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Whenever other city or county agencies issue similar "notice of violations" or "stop work orders" the Department will respect the same. Erosion control measures shall be effectively in place and maintained throughout the course of construction by the owner or prime contractor or "notice of violation" warnings and "stop work orders" shall be issued. 
(d)  Revocation of permits. The building official is hereby authorized to revoke a permit or revoke written release for any of the following. 
(1)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official is hereby authorized to revoke a permit or revoke written release when issued under the provisions of this Code whenever there has been any false statement or false payment of permit fees or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or written release was based. 
(2)  Violation of Code provisions. The building official is hereby authorized to revoke a permit whenever the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure or electrical, gas, mechanical, energy conservation and plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this Code and shall result in penalties as prescribed herein. 
(3)  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structure or electrical, gas, mechanical, energy conservation and plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe building or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures, energy conservation or service systems are hereby illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the City of Duluth Property Maintenance Code. 
(4)  Requirements not covered by Code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, or electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing system, or for the public health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this Code, including the technical codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(e)  Alternative materials and alternate methods of construction. The provisions of this Code, including the technical codes, are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this Code, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall authorize the use of any such alternate, provided he or she finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the provisions of this Code, and that the material, method of application or work offered is for the purpose intended and at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this Code, for quality, effectiveness, strength, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate all claims that may be made regarding the alternate. If in the opinion of the building official, the evidence and proof are not sufficient to justify approval, the applicant may appeal. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-29. - Permit applications. 
    The building official shall receive applications, review construction documents and issue permits for the erection, alteration, demolition and moving of buildings and structures, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of this Code. 
(a)  When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or prime contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, energy conservation, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this Code, including the technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the department of planning and development, and obtain the required building permit for the work being done after paying the required fees. 
(b)  Permit exemptions. Unless specifically addressed in this Code section, the City of Duluth adopts the exemptions identified in Chapter 1 of each adopted regulatory code. Exemptions from permit requirements of this Code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work being done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this Code or any other laws or ordinances of the City of Duluth. 
Permits shall not be required for the following: 
(1)  Retaining walls which do not exceed three (3) feet in vertical height and provided that the slope of backfill materials does not exceed a one (1) foot rise in three (3) feet length. Retaining walls which exceed three (3) feet in vertical height shall require a permit and shall be constructed in compliance with the development regulations and shall be designed by a registered professional engineer. 
(2)  Signs which are exempted from permits by the Unified Development Code. 
(3)  One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses without electrical, mechanical or plumbing system provided the floor area is not great than one hundred twenty (120) square feet and the structure meets all applicable zoning requirements. 
(4)  Fences which do not exceed three (3) feet in height. 
(5)  Walls which do not exceed three (3) feet in height. 
(6)  Monuments and freestanding art pieces which do not exceed four (4) feet in height. 
(7)  Basketball goals which are stand alone and not part of a basketball court. 
Although the structures listed above are exempt from requiring a permit, the listed structures shall meet the requirements of all other applicable codes, ordinances, regulations and resolutions governing the same. 
(c)  Work authorized. A building permit, with properly completed and submitted affidavits and on file with the department for electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems, shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and not covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate trade permit shall be required. 
(d)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs under three hundred dollars ($300.00) in total cost may be made, with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of this Code, including the technical codes. 
(e)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the department of planning and development on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his or her authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official and the department of planning and development. 
(f)  Time limitations. Plans and specifications for projects reviewed by the building official and the department of planning and development shall be permitted within thirty (30) days of the formal review date to be valid for obtaining a building permit or the project shall be deemed to have been abandoned. A building permit shall expire one hundred eighty (180) days from issuance whether or not construction has been initiated. A building permit shall also expire if the permittee fails to request and pass a required inspection during any ninety (90) day period after the date of permit issuance. The Building Official is authorized to grant one time extension not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days during which time the permittee shall request and pass a required inspection. A request for an extension shall be made prior to permit expiration, shall be in writing and shall demonstrate justifiable cause. No refund of the permit fee shall be given for an expired permit unless authorized by the city council. A new permit to re-initiate construction activities shall be secured and a fee shall be charged for the new permit in accordance with the most recent fee ordinance adopted by the city council. 
(g)  Drawings and specifications. 
(1)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two (2) or more copies of the specifications, and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with this Code. Such information shall be specific, and this Code, including the technical codes, shall not be cited as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specification and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(2)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official and/or Georgia State Law to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal of stamp and signature. 
(3)  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his or her official seal or stamp and signature to said drawings, specifications and accompanying documents for the following. 
i.  All Occupancies of Group "A" - Assembly, "E" - Educational and "I" - Institutional definition. 
ii.  Building and structures three (3) stories or more high. 
iii.  Buildings and structures five thousand (5,000) square feet or more in area or one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) or more in building cost. For all buildings or structures that do not require the designer to be legally registered under Georgia State Law, he or she shall certify on the drawings that such state registration is not required for this project with the reason. 
iv.  Plans for interior finish work which encompass more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in area or three (3) stories or more in height shall also require sealed or stamped plans by a Georgia registered architect or engineer. 
v.  Single family residences two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or more. 
vi.  Single family residences under two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet utilizing engineered lumber. Such lumber shall be approved with the design application by a design professional. 
(4)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistive integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a require fire resistant wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, energy conservation, mechanical, plumbing and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire and structural integrity will be maintained where required fire resistant floors intersect the exterior walls, as well as any additional information and details the building official and/or Gwinnett County Fire Marshal shall require. 
(5)  Site drawings. Drawing shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The department may also require a boundary survey prepared by a qualified surveyor in accordance with the City of Duluth codes, ordinances and resolutions. 
(6)  Hazardous Occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
i.  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not limited to the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading area, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage area shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
ii.  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale which shall include, but not limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class of the hazardous materials stored. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-30. - Examination of documents. 
    The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of this Code and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. A plan review fee shall be paid in accordance with the current fee ordinance adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-31. - Issuing permits. 
(a)  Action on permits. The department of planning and development shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in the permit application and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of this Code and other pertinent laws and ordinances, a permit shall be issued to the applicant by the department. 
(b)  Refusal to issue permit. If the permit application and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of this Code or other pertinent laws or ordinances, a permit shall not be issued. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reasons for refusal. 
(c)  Special foundation permit. When contract documents, including complete plans and specifications have been submitted to the department and are currently under review for the issuance of a building permit, and a development permit has already been issued, the building official may, at his or her discretion, issue a "foundation only" permit. This "foundation only" permit shall prohibit the installation of electrical or plumbing rough-in, the placing of concrete for the floor slab on grade and all above ground masonry or steel erection. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at their own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted not that corrections will not be required in order to meet the provisions of this Code, including the technical codes. 
(d)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be issued by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect exterior walls, bays, colonies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the department of planning and development and complies with this Code and all other applicable codes. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-32. - Contractor's responsibilities. 
(a)  General contractor. It shall be the duty of every general contractor doing work for a developer or homeowner who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs to a building, structure, or electrical, gas, mechanical, energy conservation and plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, and every contractor or builder making such contracts and sub-letting the same, or any part thereof; to provide the department of planning and development with proof of current business license as issued by any city or local jurisdiction within the State of Georgia. The general contractor shall furnish to the department of planning and development the duly issued number of his or her business license and affix it to the building permit application. 
(b)  Subcontractor. It shall be the duty of every individual or firm prior to doing electrical, mechanical and/or plumbing work under contract with a general contractor or homeowner to have a proper affidavit on file with the department of planning and development using the forms provided by the department. This subcontractor shall also provide the department with proof of a current business license, as issued by any city or local jurisdiction within the State of Georgia or other states with reciprocity, as well as a valid state license for his or her respective trade. Those licenses honored from other states are as follows: HVAC-North Carolina, South Carolina and Texas only; Electrical-Alabama, South Carolina and Florida only; and Low Voltage-Florida only. The filing of this affidavit shall be done prior to any work being started and will allow a subcontractor to do permitted work for a general contractor or homeowner. Persons or corporations failing to follow this procedure shall be in violation of this code and shall result in penalties as described herein. 
(c)  Homeowners. It shall be the duty of every homeowner doing electrical, mechanical and/or plumbing work under a homeowners permit, for their own personal one- and two-family dwelling, to have proper permits or affidavits on file with the department, and shall include their current name, address and phone number. The homeowner, building or contracting out work for their own personal one- and two-family dwelling, will not be required to have a business license in order to obtain a building permit. All general contractors and all subcontractors doing work for a homeowner shall comply with their responsibility requirements as previously outlined in this section. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-33. - Conditions of the permit. 
(a)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of this Code, including the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this Code. The permit shall become invalid whenever work is not started or continued in accordance with the provisions of the current fee ordinance as adopted by the city council. 
(b)  Plans. Before the department of planning and development issues a permit for all commercial work, there shall be endorsed in writing or by stamp, on two (2) sets of plans, "REVIEWED CITY OF DULUTH", with the signature of the building official and date of approval. One (1) set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained for the building official by the department of planning and development and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his or her duly authorized representative, otherwise, fees for re-inspection shall be levied in accordance with the provisions of the current fee ordinance adopted by the city council. 
(c)  Site maintenance. Construction sites shall be maintained at all times. The ground shall be free of debris, garbage, trash and construction debris. Dumpsters shall be provided on site for construction activity. Garbage trash, refuse and construction debris shall not be buried on sites where there is construction activity. Construction site shall be maintained in a safe and reasonable manner to facilitate inspections. Scheduled inspections shall not be conducted on sites determined unsafe. The tracking of mud, dirt or sediment on public streets and sidewalks from a construction site shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-34. - Fees. 
(a)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed in this section have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the square footage or estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, gas, plumbing, mechanical, energy conservation systems, have been paid. 
(b)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person or firm starting any work on a building, structure, or electrical, plumbing, mechanical, energy conservation and gas systems before obtaining the necessary permit shall be subject to a penalty of one hundred (100) percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. The payment of such fees shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this Code in the execution of the work not from any other penalties prescribed herein. 
(c)  Accounting. The business office shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other monies collected, along with the date and amount thereof. All returned checks shall be assessed a service charge of twenty dollars ($20.00), as mandated by the O.C.G.A, Title 16, Chapter 9, Article 20(J). Two (2) returned checks by the same applicant may result in a "cash only" policy when paying future permit fees. 
(d)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, or electrical, plumbing, mechanical, energy conservation and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the current fee ordinance as adopted by the city council. 
(e)  Building permit valuations. The permit valuation shall be calculated based on the building valuation data, as amended, published by the International Code Council and including the local multiplier, as adopted by the city council. Permit values shall be calculated by square footage, type of construction and occupancy type. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-35. - Inspections. 
(a)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, or electrical, gas, mechanical, energy conservation and plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install or change the occupancy. He or she shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, energy conservation and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He or she shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(b)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official, he or she shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacturer or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of this Code, including the technical codes. 
(c)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by this section. He or she may accept report of inspectors or recognized "third party" inspection services provided that after investigation he or she is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of this Code shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible office of such service. 
(d)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, energy conservation or plumbing system upon completion, prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. A certificate of completion, shall be issued for "shell" buildings and uninhabitable structures. 
(e)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a building permit shall not start until the permit holder, or his or her agent, posts the building permit placard in a conspicuous place at the front of the premises. The permit holder is responsible for this placard. All damaged, lost or stolen placards shall be replaced before further inspections shall be made. This placard shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the officials of all required and listed department and agencies to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This placard shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion has been issued. 
(f)  Required inspections. The building official, upon notification from the permit holder or his or her agent, shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder, or his or her agent, of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with this Code by issuance of a "correction notice" and noting such action on the placard. 
(1)  Building inspections. 
i.  Footing/foundation inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated and forms are erected and all reinforcing steel (if required) is in place. 
ii.  Underfloor inspection. Rough plumbing, electrical and mechanical inspection must be approved prior to a slab inspection. 
iii.  Slab inspection. Plumbing, electrical, and mechanical inspections must be signed off first - gravel (if required), vapor barrier and wire mesh (if not fiber concrete) must be installed before footing approval by the building official. 
iv.  Framing inspection. To be made after mechanical, plumbing and electrical roughs are complete and signed off; all framing complete; fireblocking and bracing complete; fireplace must be set, vented through roof and capped. Wall sheathing, as applicable, to be in place. Insulation shall not be installed in exterior walls or roof prior to this inspection. 
v.  Firewall inspection. All commercial and multi-family construction with firewalls and fire rated assemblies after gypsum board is installed but before mudding and taping has started. This will be performed in conjunction with the Gwinnett County Fire Services Department. 
vi.  Final building inspection. To be made after final electrical, plumbing and mechanical inspections have been signed off; interior and exterior is complete; landscaping is completed; smoke detectors in sleeping areas; one hundred (100) percent fire marshal's signature; sewer signature; health signature; building to be complete and ready for occupancy, with all holds released, if any. 
vii.  Erosion control measures and energy code inspection. To be made in conjunction with the above building inspections. 
(2)  Electrical inspections. 
i.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
ii.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. Electrical panel set in place; all wiring installed and terminated in approved boxes or fittings; service cable installed and meter can set; all splices and taps made up and all wire fastened or stapled according to code. 
iii.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected and protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
iv.  Erosion control measure and Energy Code inspection. To be made in conjunction with the above electrical inspections. 
(3)  Plumbing inspections. 
i.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
ii.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and all soil, waste, and vent piping is complete, and prior to installation of wall or ceiling membranes. Waste lines and vent installed; wasteline braced and strapped as required; water test on waste lines; water piping installed; water piping braced and strapped as required; water or air test on water piping. 
iii.  Final inspection. To be made after building is complete, all required plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected and protected, and structure is ready for occupancy. 
iv.  Erosion control measures and energy code inspection. To be made in conjunction with the above plumbing inspections. 
(4)  Mechanical inspections. 
i.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
ii.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to installation of wall or ceiling membranes. Boot stackheads in; furnace vents roughed in; thermostat wire in place; bath fans vented; test on concealed gas line. 
iii.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
iv.  Erosion control and Energy Code inspection. To be made in conjunction with the above mechanical inspections. 
(5)  Gas inspections. 
i.  Rough piping inspection. To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
ii.  Final piping inspection. To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
iii.  Final inspection. To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes, to ensure compliance with all the requirements of this Code and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
iv.  Erosion control measures and Energy Code inspection. To be made in conjunction with the above gas inspections. 
(6)  Swimming pool inspections. 
i.  Site inspection. Prior to any land disturbance. Limits of disturbance and pool location to be staked off. 
ii.  Reinforcing steel or basket inspection, plumbing, electrical bond. 
iii.  Erosion control inspection. To be made in conjunction with the above. 
iv.  Final inspection. All swimming pool installations must be completed with all fences, gates, decks, pumping equipment, filters, heater and appliances in place. The pool shall be completely filled with water and in operation before final inspection. 
(7)  Erosion control inspections. Erosion control measures shall be effectively in place and maintained throughout the course of construction by the general contractor or homeowner. Failure to do so shall result in warnings, stop work orders or citations being issued in accordance with the Duluth Unified Development Code. 
8.  Roofing inspections. 
i.  Roof replacement. Sheathing inspection and final inspection. 
ii.  Roof recovering. Final inspection. 
(9)  Irrigation system inspections. Final inspection; verification of mandated systems including rain sensors, shut off switches, freeze sensors, protection of potable water supply against backflow, by an atmospheric type pressure vacuum breaker, a double check backflow prevention assembly or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. 
(10)  Additional inspections. These may be required as determined by the building official to ensure compliance with the requirements of the City of Duluth Construction Code and other applicable city ordinances. 
(g)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure or electrical, gas, mechanical, energy conservation and plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release on the placard from the building official or his or her designee. Such written release on the placard shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing inspections. 
(h)  Reinforcing steel and structural frames. Reinforcing steel or structural frame work of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a written release from the building official or his or her designee. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-36. - Certificates. 
(a)  Building certificate of occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, energy conservation, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official, or his or her designee, after all required signature releases have been affixed to the building permit placard and all fees assessed to the project have been paid in full. 
(b)  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical, energy conservation and plumbing systems in accordance with the technical codes, reviewed plans and specifications, after the final inspection and all fees assessed to the project have been paid in full, the building official or his or her designee shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of this Code. The written releases of all other applicable departments and agencies shall have been obtained previously and affixed to the placard. 
(c)  Temporary/partial/limited occupancy. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for the conditional use of a limited portion or portions of a building or structure which may safely used without an occupancy load prior to final completion of the building. Such request shall be made to the building official by the owner, or his or her agent, general contractor or the homeowner. Issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy shall in no way grant occupancy to the general public or use of the structure. 
(d)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a shell or uninhabited structure that may include electrical, gas, mechanical, energy conservation or plumbing systems, a certificate of completion shall be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be temporarily connected to a utility system. The certificate of completion does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building or habitable structure, such as a shell building, to a permanent utility system, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-37. - Service utilities. 
(a)  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by this Code, including the technical codes, for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion has been issued. 
(b)  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by this Code, including the technical codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility and, whenever possible the owner and/or occupant of the building structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner and/or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-38. - Posting floor pads. 
(a)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he or she is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(b)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of Group "S" and Group "F" occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record with the department at the time of permitting. An affidavit shall only be required when plans are not sealed, stamped and signed by a registered designer. 
(c)  Sign plates required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates of approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of a building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed, or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building immediately. Failure to have such plates in place at all times shall be deemed a violation of this Code and shall result in penalties as prescribed herein. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-39. - Tests. 
    The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his or her agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-40. - Appeals. 
    In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code, the City of Duluth shall utilize the interpretation services provided by the International Code Council. 
(a)  Decision of the building official. The International Code Council shall have the power to amend an administrative decision made by the building official. 
(b)  Notice of appeals. Notice of appeals shall be in writing, using the appropriate form as furnished by the building official, within the time limitations as established by the city council. 
(c)  Appeals procedures. The procedures of appeals regarding the establishment of rules and regulations and the rendering of decisions shall be as established by the city council. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-41. - Adoption. 
    This Code shall become effective upon adoption of this Code by the city council and shall be incorporated into the Code of Ordinances of the City of Duluth, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-42. - Severability. 
    In any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase or provision of this Code, including the technical codes, is for any reason unintentionally held to be unconstitutional or void, the validity of the remaining portions shall not be affected thereby, it being the intent of the city council in adopting this building code that no portion thereof or provision of this Code contained herein shall become inoperative or fail by reason of the unconstitutionality or invalidity of any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase, or provision of this Code or the technical codes. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-43. - Liability. 
    Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this Code, nor the compliance with the provisions of this Code shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law not impose any liability upon the City of Duluth for damage to any person or property. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-44. - Conflicting regulations. 
    All regulations or parts of regulations of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Duluth, Georgia, in conflict with this Code shall be and the same are hereby repealed in their portions so in conflict. Provided, however, that it is not the intent to repeal or affect any law of the State of Georgia, or any Code of Ordinance of the City of Duluth adopted as a requirement of state law, in which case the most restrictive shall control. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-45. - Laws, codes, ordinances and resolutions. 
    Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate or assist in the violation of a provision of this Code, including the technical codes, or fail to comply herewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, energy conservation or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, structure, or electrical, gas, mechanical, energy conservation or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance, and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state and local laws. Each person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code, including the technical codes is committed or continued; and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state and/or local law. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-46. - Penalties. 
    Any responsible party of other persons convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this code shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the City of Duluth and shall be punished either by a fine not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day, or by a sentence of imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days in jail, or both a fine and jail or work alternate. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(a)  Court power and authority. The court shall have the power and authority to order the violation corrected in compliance with the requirements of this Code and the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law. 
(b)  Right of city. In any case in which any building or structure is used or proposed to be used, or activities are undertaken in violation of this Code or any amendment thereto adopted by the city council, the city, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may petition for a restraining order, injunction, abatement, or take any other appropriate legal action or proceeding through a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate such unlawful use or activity. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Secs. 5-47-5-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATORY CODES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of February 24, 2014, repealed the former  5-55-5-61.7, and enacted new  5-55-5-61.5 as set out herein. The former  5-55-5-61.7 pertained to similar material. See the Code Comparative Table for the ordinance history of these sections. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, Sec. II, Para. III(a)(12). 

Sec. 5-55. - Building code. 
    The International Building Code, current edition as adopted by the Department of Community Affairs, with all appendices (with the exception of appendix A, B, D and K), and with Georgia Amendments, is hereby adopted in and for the city. 
(Ord. of 2-24-14; Ord. of 3-13-17 ) 
Sec. 5-56. - Property maintenance code. 
    The International Property Maintenance Code, current edition as adopted by the Department of Community Affairs, with Georgia Amendments, is hereby adopted in and for the city. 
(Ord. of 2-24-14; Ord. of 3-13-17 ) 
Sec. 5-57. - Electrical code. 
    The National Electrical Code, current edition as adopted by the Department of Community Affairs, with annex. A, is hereby adopted in and for the city. 
(Ord. of 2-24-14; Ord. of 3-13-17 ) 
Sec. 5-58. - Mechanical code. 
    The International Mechanical Code, current edition as adopted by the Department of Community Affairs, with all appendices (with the exception of appendix B), and with Georgia Amendments, is hereby adopted in and for the city. 
(Ord. of 2-24-14; Ord. of 3-13-17 ) 
Sec. 5-59. - Fuel gas code. 
    The International Fuel Gas Code, current edition as adopted by the Department of Community Affairs, with all appendices, and with Georgia Amendments, is hereby adopted in and for the city. 
(Ord. of 2-24-14; Ord. of 3-13-17 ) 
Sec. 5-60. - Plumbing code. 
    The International Plumbing Code, current edition as adopted by the Department of Community Affairs, with all appendices (with the exception of appendix A), and with Georgia Amendments, is hereby adopted in and for the city. 
(Ord. of 2-24-14; Ord. of 3-13-17 ) 
Sec. 5-61. - Residential code for one- and two-family dwellings. 
    The International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, current edition as adopted by the Department of Community Affairs, with all appendices (with the exception of appendix I and L), and with Georgia Amendments, is hereby adopted in and for the city. 
(Ord. of 2-24-14; Ord. of 3-13-17 ) 
Sec. 5-61.1. - Energy conservation code. 
    The International Energy Conservation Code, current edition as adopted by the Department of Community Affairs, with all appendices, and with Georgia Supplements and Amendments, is hereby adopted in and for the city. 
(Ord. of 2-24-14; Ord. of 3-13-17 ) 
Sec. 5-61.2. - Fire code. 
    The International Fire Code, current edition as adopted by the Department of Community Affairs, with all appendices, and with Georgia Amendments, is hereby adopted in and for the city. 
(Ord. of 2-24-14; Ord. of 3-13-17 ) 
Sec. 5-61.3. - National green building standard. 
    The National Green Building Standard, current edition as adopted by the Department of Community Affairs, with Georgia Amendments, is hereby adopted in and for the city. 
(Ord. of 2-24-14; Ord. of 3-13-17 ) 
Sec. 5-61.4. - Existing building code. 
    The International Existing Building Code, current edition as adopted by the Department of Community Affairs, with Georgia Amendments, is hereby adopted in and for the city. 
(Ord. of 2-24-14; Ord. of 3-13-17 ) 
Sec. 5-61.5. - Swimming pool code. 
    The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, current edition as adopted by the Department of Community Affairs, with Georgia Amendments, is hereby adopted in and for the city. 
(Ord. of 2-24-14; Ord. of 3-13-17 ) 
Sec. 5-62. - Enforcement officer generally. 
    The enforcement officer shall be the chief building inspector for the city who shall have all of the rights, powers and authorities corresponding to those of the named officials in any of the foregoing standard codes identified in sections 5-55 through 5-61 inclusive wherever such named official in such standard codes shall be identified as the responsible official insofar as inspecting and enforcing the provisions of such codes. In addition, the chief building inspector shall have all the rights, powers and authorities as provided for the zoning enforcement officer under the zoning ordinance of the city as the provisions may relate to the power of the zoning enforcement officer in connection with construction of improvements on real property within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 83-11-4,  121, 11-23-83) 
Sec. 5-63. - Enforcement authority of inspector. 
    The chief building inspector, of the city shall have the authority to issue stop work orders and to revoke any permit issued pursuant to any of the codes adopted by this article as provided for in such codes. The chief building inspector shall further be an ex-officio police officer of the city and shall have authority to issue summonses and complaints for violations of this chapter. The building enforcement officer shall not have the power of arrest. 
(Ord. No. 83-11-4,  122, 11-23-83) 
Sec. 5-64. - Notice of deficiency, warning notice. 
    The chief building inspector, upon determining that work on any building or structure or part thereof is being done contrary to the provisions of any of the codes adopted by and in force in the city, shall issue a written notice of deficiency which shall be given to the owner of the property or to his agent or to the person doing the work and shall state the nature of the deficiency and the corrections required. The owner, his agent or the person doing the work shall have ten (10) days from the date of such notice of deficiency to correct such deficiency. Upon correcting the deficiency, the owner, agent or the person doing the work shall request a reinspection of the deficient work. If upon reinspection such work is still deficient, the chief building inspector shall advise wherein such work is still deficient and the chief building inspector may require a lesser amount of time for the correction of such deficiency. After the first reinspection of such deficient work where such deficient work does not comply with the provisions of the applicable building code, an additional reinspection fee shall be charged and shall be paid at the time that the owner or owner's agent, or person doing the work requests the second reinspection. 
(Ord. No. 83-11-4,  123(a), 11-23-83) 
Sec. 5-65. - Stop work order; revocation of building permit. 
    If any deficient work is not cured within the times provided in section 5-64, the chief building inspector shall have the authority to issue an order in writing which will stop all work on any building or structure and such written stop work order shall be given to the owner of the property or to his agent or to the person doing the work and shall state the reasons for the issuance of such stop work order and shall further state the conditions under which work on such building may resume. In the event that the deficient work giving rise to the stop work order is not corrected within ten (10) days from the date of the stop work order, the chief building inspector shall have the authority to revoke the building permit and all permits related to such building permit (electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating and air conditioning and other such permits related to the same job) and shall issue a summons charging a violation of this chapter and the related building codes applicable to the violation requiring the owner and any individual contractor or subcontractor who has applied for any related building code permit relating to the primary building permit whose work is deficient and has not been corrected and is the cause of the issuance of the stop work order to be and appear in answer to such summons in the recorder's court of the city subject to the provision of section 5-72. 
(Ord. No. 83-11-4,  123(b), 11-23-83) 
Sec. 5-66. - Emergency stop work orders. 
    Where an emergency exists, the written notice herein shall not be required to be given by the chief building inspector and the chief building inspector may orally order all work stopped until such emergency condition is cured provided, however, that the chief building inspector shall follow up with a written stop work order. 
(Ord. No. 83-11-4,  123(c), 11-23-83) 
Sec. 5-67. - Corrective work allowed after issuance of stop work order. 
    After the issuance of a stop work order and/or the revocation of the building permits, the only work allowed to be performed shall be that work which is necessary and required to correct the deficiencies in construction which have lead to the issuance of a notice of deficiency and the stop work order. Upon correction of such work, the building permits may be reissued so that work on the building or structure may be completed as in the case of an original permit provided, however, that the owner shall be required to pay an additional building permit fee equal to one-half the amount of all original permit fees in connection with such work. 
(Ord. No. 83-11-4,  123(d), 11-23-83) 
Sec. 5-68. - Right of appeal from decisions of inspector. 
    Any person aggrieved by the decision of the chief building inspector shall have a right of appeal to the mayor and council. A written notice directed to the mayor and council must be filed in the office of the city clerk by any person aggrieved by a decision of the chief building inspector prior to the expiration of ten (10) days from the date of the decision of the chief building inspector in the issuance of any notice of deficiency, stop work order or revocation of a building permit or other decision of the chief building inspector authorized under the terms and provisions of any of the codes adopted by the city or under the terms and provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city. Such written notice of appeal to the mayor and council shall identify the building permit number as well as any other permit number applicable, the resident's address, shall identify the decision of the chief building inspector complained of and shall state the reasons why the aggrieved party believes that the chief building inspector is in error in his decision. 
(Ord. No. 83-11-4,  125, 11-23-83) 
Sec. 5-69. - Hearing on appeal. 
    The mayor and council shall hold a hearing on the appeal within fourteen (14) days from the date that the notice of appeal is filed with the office of the city clerk unless the fourteenth day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, when the appeal shall be heard not later than the next regular business day following such Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. At such hearing, all matters relating to the decision of the chief building inspector shall be inquired into and the mayor and council shall have the authority to reverse the decision of the chief building inspector, to affirm the decision of the chief building inspector or to modify and make such other decision and order as the mayor and council deem best in the exercise of their sound discretion. 
(Ord. No. 83-11-4,  125(a), 11-23-83) 
Sec. 5-70. - Attendance at hearing. 
    The chief building inspector, the aggrieved party filing the appeal and any contractor or subcontractor whose work has been questioned shall be personally present and in attendance at the hearing on appeal before the mayor and council from any decision of the chief building inspector. Any party may call such other witnesses as they may desire and if requested any party may obtain subpoenas from the office of the city clerk demanding and requiring that a witness be and appear at the hearing before the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 83-11-4,  125(b), 11-23-83) 
Sec. 5-71. - Notice of hearing. 
    The city clerk shall give notice to the chief building inspector and the aggrieved party filing notice of appeal at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the hearing before the mayor and council which notice shall be in writing and shall be deemed delivered if such notice is personally delivered, or if it is placed in the United States mail with sufficient postage thereon to ensure delivery to the party to whom such notice is directed. 
(Ord. No. 83-11-4,  125(c), 11-23-83) 
Sec. 5-72. - Penalties for violation. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. Each day such violation continues shall be considered to be and shall constitute a separate offense. The judge of the municipal court shall assess a fine under the provisions of this section equivalent to the total number of days from the date of the issuance of the summons that such offense continues, and may impose an additional fine for each day past the regularly scheduled court date that such violation is not corrected without the necessity for additional summonses or citations to be issued. 
(Ord. No. 83-11-4,  124, 11-23-83) 
Secs. 5-73-5-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MULTIFAMILY RENTAL HOUSING 

Sec. 5-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building official. The building inspector for the City of Duluth. 
    Certified building inspector. Any person inspecting for compliance with this article who is certified pursuant to section 5-105. 
    Code compliance certificate. A certificate, executed by a certified building inspector and stating compliance with those minimum standards described in the inspection report. 
    Inspection report. The report attached to the code compliance certificate describing minimum requirements for inspection of each multifamily rental unit in the premises. 
    Lease. Any written agreement which sets forth any and all conditions concerning the use and occupancy of multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units. 
    Multifamily rental dwelling. Any structure, building, or other facility containing four (4) or more multifamily rental units that is leased to a tenant or tenants for use as a home, residence, or sleeping unit. This definition includes, but is not limited to, multiple-family dwellings, multiple-family apartment units, boardinghouses, rooming houses, group homes, and flats. 
    Multifamily rental unit. Any one (1) area, room, structure, flat, apartment, or facility of a multifamily rental dwelling that is being leased or rented to only one (1) tenant, group of tenants, or family under one (1) lease, or under terms of joint and severable liability. 
    Occupant. All tenants, lessees and persons residing within a multifamily rental unit. 
    Owner. Any person, agent, firm, corporation or other entity having a legal interest in a premises. 
    Owner-occupied. Any part of a structure used as living quarters by the owner of said structure where other parts of the structure are used as multifamily rental units. Example: Two-family dwelling, owner occupies one (1) flat; rooming house, owner occupies one (1) unit. 
    Premise. Any lot or piece of land that includes a multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental units. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-102. - Fee and certificate required. 
(a)  Occupation Tax. All owners of multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units within the City that receive income for use of four (4) or more such dwellings or units and meet the requirements of O.C.G.A.  48-13-5 for having a location or office within the city (i) shall obtain an Occupational Tax Certification from the city pursuant to chapter 7 of the Duluth Municipal Code and (ii) shall provide to the City, prior to January 1, 2020, a code compliance certificate covering one hundred (100) percent of the multifamily rental units within the twelve (12) month period immediately preceding the date of the certification. Said code compliance certificate shall be certified by the owner that all units inspected are in compliance with those standards contained in the code compliance certificate and inspection report. When a newly constructed or significantly renovated multifamily rental dwelling receives a certificate of occupancy, additional inspections on said unit pursuant to this section are not required for five (5) years. The building official shall determine if renovated units qualify for the five (5) year grace period based on the scope of renovations. After five (5) years has elapsed, regular annual inspection of twenty (20) percent of units shall commence and continue as required by this section. 
(b)  Inspection. Upon initial inspection of such dwellings or units, should a certified building inspector determine that further work is necessary to comply with the minimum standards set forth herein, an acceptable plan shall be submitted to the building official outlining the time and scope of work necessary to bring the units into compliance. If such plan is accepted by the building official as reasonable and justified, an extension may be granted for up to one (1) year for completion of repairs and compliance with this division. No extension shall be granted if life safety issues are involved and any such units shall not be leased until brought into compliance. 
(c)  Compliance certificate. After submission of the initial code compliance certificate, each owner shall submit a code compliance certificate annually, commencing on January 1, 2020, with their Occupational Tax Certificate renewal. Such subsequent code compliance certificate shall cover at least twenty (20) percent of the units, provided all units shall be inspected, at a minimum, every five (5) years. All units inspected shall be listed individually on the code compliance certificate submitted to the City by the certified building inspector. Furthermore, exterior inspections shall cover at least twenty (20) of the buildings, provided all buildings shall be inspected, at a minimum, every five (5) years. All units inspected shall be listed individually and submitted to the city by the certified building inspector. 
(d)  Written record of inspection. Furthermore, each owner and certified building inspector shall keep a written record of all inspections for each unit including the date of the inspection, items inspected and all violations, if any, observed. Such records shall be presented to the City within ten (10) business days after such request is made in writing to the inspector. Failure to provide such records shall nullify the code compliance certificate for those units. 
(e)  Authority to inspect. The building official or its designee shall have the authority to inspect the interior of those units that are included in each annual code compliance certificate submitted to the city pursuant to this section when there is probable cause to believe there has been a violation of this chapter or other applicable code sections. Said inspection may, at the discretion of the building official, include such number of submitted units included in the code compliance certificate as determined by the building official or its designee. Once determined that an audit inspection will be conducted, the building official shall give written notice to the certified building inspector issuing the code compliance certificate, the owner and/or the property management company of the date of the inspection which inspection shall take place, which shall be no sooner than seven (7) days from the date of the notice and shall be conducted on from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. during weekdays, other than nationally recognized holidays. The written notice shall state that the owner and/or property management company shall have the right to refuse the inspection and the building official or designee's right to seek issuance of an inspection warrant in the event of any such refusal. The owner, the certified building inspection or a member of the property management company shall be available to accompany the building official during the inspection. In the event the owner and/or property management company refuses inspection, the building official or designee shall have the right to seek issuance of an inspection warrant from a judge of the municipal court. 
(Ord. of ; 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-103. - Failure to provide code compliance certificate. 
(a)  Failure to provide the code compliance certificate as provided herein shall be a violation of this chapter and is subject to those penalties contained herein and in section 1-6. 
(b)  Further, said failure, upon a judicial determination, shall be a condition constituting probable cause, and may subject said multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental units to inspection by the building official, at a fee as determined by the governing body of the city, that includes all costs of such inspection by the city. Said inspection by the city, if required, shall be performed at the sole cost of the owner and failure to pay said cost shall result in a lien being placed on the premises as provided for in city Code. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the city from enforcement of the state minimum standard codes as provided in this chapter during the city's inspection of the multifamily rental units. 
(c)  Failure to pay the occupational tax as provided herein shall be a violation of chapter 7 and is subject to those penalties set forth in chapter 7 and as otherwise provided in the Code. 
(Ord. of 8-13-18(2)) 
Sec. 5-104. - Penalty for false certification and false inspection. 
(a)  An owner who knowingly furnishes a code compliance certificate to the city which contains a false certification that any multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental unit inspected are in compliance with those standards contained in the code compliance certificate shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter for each multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit for which the code compliance certificate is shown to be false and can be fined by the court for each violation up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each dwelling or unit. 
(b)  A certified building inspector who knowingly, recklessly, or negligently furnishes an inspection report which contains fraudulent information that a multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit meets the minimum standards of this chapter, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code and can be fined, by the court for each violation up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each dwelling or unit. In addition, the certified building inspector's right to submit inspection reports to the City shall be suspended for a stated period of time, up to five (5) years. 
(c)  A property manager who knowingly furnishes a code compliance certificate to the city which contains a false certification that any multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit inspected are in compliance with those standards contained in the code compliance certificate shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter for each multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit for which the code compliance certificate is shown to be false and can be fined by the court for each violation up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each dwelling or unit. 
(Ord. of ; 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-105. - Certified building inspector requirements. 
    All inspectors wishing to submit or participate in the city's multifamily rental housing evaluation program must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  The inspector must be a licensed design professional (architect or engineer) or hold one (1) of the following certifications from the International Code Council (ICC): property maintenance and housing inspector, housing rehabilitation inspector, building inspector, building plan examiner or commercial combination inspector. 
(2)  The inspector must submit a copy of his business license or occupational tax certificate and certificate of insurance of liability insurance. 
(3)  The inspector must meet with the building official to present the qualifications noted in subsections (1) and (2) of this section for approval prior to performing any inspections pursuant to this chapter. Upon completion of this meeting, an inspector determined to be qualified by the building official will be placed on a list of approved certified building inspectors to be maintained by the city. 
(4)  From time to time, mandatory meetings will be called by the city building official which all certified building inspectors participating in the program must attend, except as permitted on an individual basis by the building official due to extenuating circumstances. Ample notice will be provided by the city to the contact address provided by the certified building inspector no less than two (2) weeks prior to the date of the meeting. 
(Ord. of ; 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 5-106. - Interior and exterior evaluations of multifamily properties. 
(a)  Interior evaluations will be conducted to ensure compliance with the latest adopted edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, the Life Safety Code and the International Fire Code and other referenced standards contained herein. 
(b)  Exterior evaluations will be conducted to ensure compliance with the latest adopted edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, the Life Safety Code and the International Fire Code and other referenced standards contained herein. 
(c)  The city shall maintain a checklist of interior evaluations and a checklist of exterior evaluations in the department of planning and development. The checklists shall include, at a minimum, the required standards of the latest adopted edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, the Life Safety Code and the International Fire Code and other referenced standards contained herein. 
(Ord. of ; 8-13-18 ) 
Secs. 5-107-5-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of June 8, 2015,  C(1) , repealed article V,  5-151, which pertained to floodplain management and derived from ordinances of February 8, 1988; February 9, 1998 and September 10, 2001. 

Secs. 5-151-5-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of November 14, 2005, amended the Code by repealing former art. VI,  5-201-5-205, 5-211-5-215, 5-221-5-227, 5-231-5-234, and 5-241. Former art VI pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from an ordinance of April 26, 1999. 

DIVISION 1. - TITLE, PURPOSE, SCOPE, INTERCHANGEABILITY AND DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 5-201. - Title. 
    The title of this article shall be the "City of Duluth Property Maintenance Ordinance" and may be cited hereinafter as "this article." 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-202. - Purpose. 
    The purpose and intent of this article is: 
(1)  To establish minimum requirements and standards for premises and structures in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, convenience, order and general welfare of the citizens of the city; 
(2)  To enhance and promote the maintenance of real property and by so doing, improve the livability, appearance and the social and economic conditions of the community; 
(3)  To ensure that real properties do not reach such a state of deterioration or disrepair as to cause the depreciation of the value of surrounding property or be materially detrimental to nearby properties and improvements; 
(4)  This article is not to be used as a vindictive or malicious tool by one person against another. City officials shall use discretion in acting upon repeated and trivial complaints that do not reflect the intent and purpose stated in this section. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-203. - Scope. 
    This article shall apply to all existing structures and premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for existing structures and premises. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-204. - Interchangeability. 
    Words stated in the present tense include the future. Words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter. Words stated in the singular number include the plural and the plural the singular. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-205. - Definitions. 
    Terms not defined herein shall have their meaning as defined in the zoning ordinance, the development regulations, health and sanitation ordinance, buffer, landscape and tree ordinance, and the building code, or in the absence of such definition, words shall have their common dictionary definition. Whenever the words "dwelling unit," "premises," "building," "rooming house," "rooming unit" or "story" are stated in this article, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
    Automobile, inoperative or junked. Includes, but is not limited to, any automobile, motor vehicle, vehicle or trailer in one (1) or more of the following conditions: 
(1)  Abandoned; 
(2)  Discarded; 
(3)  Dismantled; 
(4)  Inoperative; 
(5)  Does not have a valid license plate attached thereto; 
(6)  Partially dismantled; 
(7)  Wrecked. 
    Basement. The portion of a building located partly underground, but having less than one-half (1/2) of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Bathroom. A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower. 
    Boarding house. A building containing one (1) or more dwelling units but not more than twenty (20) dwelling units, all of which offer non-transient lodging accommodations. Meals, if provided, may only be provided from a single central kitchen and compensation for such meals shall be included in the rental rate. No restaurant, meeting, reception or banquet facilities shall be provided. 
    Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods or material of any kind. 
    Cellar. The portion of a building having more than one-half (1/2) of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Director. The director of planning and development or his or her designee. 
    Dwelling. Any structure which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by humans occupants, whether or not such structure is occupied or vacant. 
    Dwelling unit. One (1) or more rooms designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as a separate living quarter with sleeping and bathroom facilities provided within the unit for the exclusive use of a single-family maintaining a household. 
    Exterior property. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property under control of the owners or operators of such premises. 
    Floor area. The gross heated horizontal areas of the floors of a building, exclusive of open porches and garages, measured from the interior face of the exterior walls of the building. 
    Garbage. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the preparation, cooking and serving of food and the storage of produce, tin cans, glass containers and newspapers. 
    Habitable room. A space in a building for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. A cellar, bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces and similar areas are not considered habitable rooms or spaces. 
    Maintenance. The act of keeping property, structures or vegetation in a proper condition so as to prevent their decline, failure or uncontrolled growth. 
    Motor vehicle, inoperative or junked. See "Automobile, inoperative or junked." 
    Occupant. Any individual living or sleeping in a building; or having possession of a space within a building. 
    Operator. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy. 
    Owner. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state or county as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
    Premises. A lot, plot or parcel of land including any structures thereon. 
    Rooming house. See "boarding house." 
    Sewage. Liquids, solid waste or waste matter carried off by sewage disposal systems or drains. 
    Sewage disposal systems. A system designed and intended to dispose of sanitary and domestic wastes including all liquid and solid wastes from the flush toilet, lavatory, bathtub or shower and clothes washing machine. 
    Trash. Combustible and noncombustible waste material, excluding garbage, including paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, cans, metals, bricks, lumber, concrete, mineral matter, glass crockery, and including the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible material. 
    Workmanlike condition of maintenance and repair. In order to be competed in a workman like condition, maintenance and repair shall be made in a reasonably skillful manner and in accordance with the requirements of all applicable manufacturer's specifications, ordinances and laws. 
    Weeds. All rank vegetative growth including but not limited to kudzu, poison ivy, jimsonweed, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, dandelion, plants of obnoxious odors, or other similar unsightly vegetative growths; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers, fruits and vegetables, and gardens. 
    Yard trimmings. All leaves, brush, grass, clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping or maintenance activities. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Secs. 5-206-5-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 5-211. - Automobiles or motor vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to retain in the city an inoperative, wrecked or junked automobile or other motor vehicle for more than seventy-two (72) hours. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-212. - Fences and walls. 
    Fences and walls shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition and in good repair. Fences and walls shall be free from loose or rotting materials to the extent that they have become unsafe and an eyesore and shall have braces and supports attached to or fastened in accordance with common building practices. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-213. - Grading and drainage. 
    All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon with the exception of approved retention areas and reservoirs. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-214. - Grass, weeds and uncultivated vegetation. 
    Premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from grass, weeds or uncultivated vegetation in excess of twelve (12) inches in height by the owner, tenant, occupant, or other designated authority. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner, occupant, tenant, or other designated authority to cut and remove grass, weeds or uncultivated vegetation as often as may be necessary, provided that the removing and cutting of same at least once every thirty (30) days shall be deemed in compliance with this article and to use every precaution to prevent the same growing on such premises as to become a nuisance. Property shall be maintained to side and rear property lines and to the curb or edge of pavement. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Undeveloped property one (1) acre or greater in size which shall maintain weeds a minimum of twenty (20) feet from all property lines; 
(2)  Property zoned RA-200 (residential agriculture district) which shall maintain weeds a minimum of twenty (20) feet from all property lines. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-215. - Open and outdoor storage. 
    The open or outdoor storage of any used or damaged lumber, building materials, junk, trash, garbage, debris, scrap metal, concrete, asphalt, cans, bottles, glass, tires, salvage materials, boxes, containers, bins, and abandoned, discarded, inoperative, or unusable furniture, stove, refrigerator, freezer, sink, toilet, cabinet or other household appliances or fixtures, yard waste or equipment (excluding residential law maintenance equipment), shall not be permitted for more than twenty-four (24) hours. Refer to the city health and sanitation ordinance for additional requirements on the storage of garbage, rubbish, refuse and other litter being stored on private property. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Property where outdoor storage is authorized by the zoning ordinance; 
(2)  Cut wood which is neatly stacked in lengths not to exceed three (3) feet and is for the personal use of the owner or occupant. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-216. - Parking. 
    Parking or storing any motor vehicle, boat, RV, trailer, camper, camper top, machinery, mobile equipment or automobile shall not be allowed in the front yard, side yard or rear yard of a dwelling unless said motor vehicle, boat, RV, trailer, camper, camper top, machinery, mobile equipment or automobile is parked on a concrete or gravel driveway. Therefore, it shall be unlawful to park or store any such named item or similar item on the grass, lawn, or dirt areas in the yard of any dwelling located within the corporate boundaries of the city. No more than thirty-five (35) percent of a combination of the front, side and rear yards may consist of a concrete or gravel driveway or parking area and the remaining percentage shall be grass or landscaped areas. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-217. - Rodent harborage. 
    All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent reinfestation. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-218. - Sanitation. 
    All exterior property areas and the interior of every dwelling shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of trash, rubbish or garbage. The storage and disposal of refuse shall be in accordance with the City Code, health and sanitation ordinance, as amended. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-219. - Sidewalks and driveways. 
    All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-220. - Swimming pools. 
    Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and in good repair. Stagnant water in swimming pools conducive to the breeding or harboring of mosquitoes or other insects shall not be permitted or maintained on any premises. A finding by the code enforcement officer or a health official of the county environmental health department shall constitute prima-facie evidence that stagnant water in a swimming pool is conducive to the breeding or harboring of mosquitoes or other insects. 
    All outdoor swimming pools, private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing water more than twenty-four (24) inches (two (2) feet) in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier around the exterior of the pool that shall be at least sixty (60) inches above grade of the pool measured on the side of the fence or barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. Gates to the fence or barrier shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  All gates shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Self-closing and self-latching gates shall be maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when released from an open position of six (6) inches or more from the gatepost. 
(2)  Pedestrian access gates shall open outward away from the pool. 
(3)  Where the release mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than fifty-four (54) inches from the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism and openings shall comply with the following: 
a.  The release mechanism shall be located on the pool side at least three (3) inches below the top of the gate, and 
b.  The gate and fence or barrier shall have no opening greater than one-half (0.5) inch within eighteen (18) inches of the release mechanism. 
No existing pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-221. - Trees. 
(a)  Hazardous trees. There shall be no dead, dying, damaged, diseased or hazardous trees, shrubs, ground cover or weeds likely to harbor vermin or insects, restrict or impede access to or public use of adjacent sidewalks and streets, obstruct traffic-control signs and devices and fire hydrants, or pose a risk of physical injury to the public. 
(b)  Tree stumps. Tree stumps visible from a public street greater than twelve (12) inches in height above ground level shall not be permitted or maintained on any premises for more than thirty (30) days after the tree has been cut. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Property covered by a valid land disturbing permit; 
(2)  Property one (1) acre or greater in size; 
(3)  Property zoned RA-200 (residential agriculture district). 
(c)  Tree debris. Felled trees, slash, removed tree limbs, or other portions of any tree shall not be permitted or maintained on the ground on any premises for more than thirty (30) days. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Property covered by a valid land disturbing permit; 
(2)  Property one (1) acre or greater in size; 
(3)  Cut wood which is neatly stacked in lengths not to exceed three (3) feet; 
(4)  Property zoned RA-200 (residential agriculture district). 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-222. - Abandoned wells. 
    All abandoned wells within the city must be filled, capped, or enclosed so as to prevent any hazard to the public health or safety. Any person who fails to fill, cap or enclose an abandoned well within ten (10) days after receiving written notice from the city council to fill, cap or enclose such abandoned well shall be subject to the penalties provided for in division 4 of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, ch. 9. 
Secs. 5-223-5-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 5-231. - Building interiors. 
(a)  Freedom from dampness. Every building shall be maintained free from dampness to prevent conditions conducive to decay, mold, electrical hazards or deterioration of the structure. 
(b)  Structural members. The supporting structural members of every building shall be structurally sound, showing no evidence of deterioration or damage that would render them incapable of carrying the imposed loads. 
(c)  Interior wall, ceilings, floors, stairways and handrails. All interior walls, ceilings, floors, stairways and handrails shall be structurally sound, in good repair, free from defects and painted, decorated or properly covered. 
(4)  Bathroom and kitchen floors. Every kitchen and wet floor areas of bathrooms shall be covered and protected by non-absorbent floor coverings. Dressing areas my transition to carpet. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-232. - Building security. 
    Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, rooming units or housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to provide security, such as deadbolt locks or professionally monitored security/alarm systems, for the occupants and property within. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-233. - Decorative features. 
    Cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in a good repair with proper anchorage in a safe condition. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-234. - Dwelling space. 
(a)  Required space in dwellings. Each dwelling shall contain at least six hundred fifty (650) square feet of floor area for the first occupant thereof and at least one hundred (100) additional square feet of floor area per additional occupant. 
(b)  Required space in sleeping rooms. In every dwelling of two (2) or more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one (1) occupant shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one (1) occupant shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof. 
(c)  Sleeping area requirements. No kitchen, bathroom, toilet room, hall, closet, cellar or utility or storage area shall be used as a sleeping space. No more than seventy (70) percent of a dwelling can be used as sleeping space. 
(d)  Conditions on inhabiting basement. No cellar or basement shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless: 
(1)  The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and surface runoff water and are adequately protected against dampness; and 
(2)  All sleeping rooms shall have an emergency escape window or door leading directly to the exterior. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-235. - Dwelling units. 
    Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water closet (toilet) and kitchen sink which shall be maintained in a sanitary, safe, working condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which such water closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute for the required lavatory. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-236. - Exhaust vents. 
    Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private property or that of another tenant. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-237. - Exterior doors and frames. 
    Exterior doors of buildings shall be maintained so that they fit reasonably well within their frames so as to substantially prevent rain and wind from entering a building. Exterior door-jams, stops, headers and moldings shall be securely attached to the structure and maintained in good condition without splitting or deterioration. Additionally, exterior doors shall be provided with proper hardware and maintained in proper working condition. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-238. - Exterior stairways, decks, porches and balconies. 
    Exterior stairways, decks, porches, elevated floors and balconies, and all appurtenances attached thereto, of buildings shall be maintained so that they are structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-239. - Exterior surface treatment. 
    All exterior surfaces, included but not limited to doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, and trim shall be maintained in good repair. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints shall be maintained weather resistant and water tight. 
    All graffiti, vulgar language, gang related symbols or other painting on the outside of a building that is not related to a sign permitted by the city shall be covered with paint, washed off or removed by other means of removing the vandalism. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-240. - Fire protection systems. 
    All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-241. - Fire safety/means of egress. 
    A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-242. - Foundation and exterior walls. 
    Every foundation, exterior wall, chimney and all other exterior surfaces shall be maintained free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials; shall be maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated as needed to prevent deterioration. The foundation elements shall adequately support the building at all points. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-243. - Handrails and guards. 
    Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-244. - Kitchen sink. 
    Every dwelling shall contain a kitchen sink apart and separate from the room with a water closet and related lavatory. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-245. - Locked doors. 
    All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-246. - Overhang extensions. 
    All overhang extensions including, but not limited to canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-247. - Premises identification. 
    Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property or on a mailbox visible from the right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-248. - Plumbing fixtures. 
    All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional condition. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-249. - Roofs. 
    Roofs of buildings shall be maintained so that they are structurally sound and in a safe condition and have no defects, which might admit, rain or cause dampness in the interior portions of a building. All portions, additions or sections of a roof including, but not limited to, the fascia, eaves, soffit, sheathing, rafter tail, barge rafter, vent screening, gutter, downspout, roof jack, lead or metal flashing, shall be complete with all trim strips, moldings, brackets, braces and supports attached or fastened in accordance with common building practices. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that interferes with the use and enjoyment of another's property. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-250. - Sanitary toilet requirement. 
    All dwellings and living quarters located in the city limits shall have sanitary toilets using a septic tank, drain field or sanitary sewer and running water. No person shall maintain any unsanitary outside toilet after being given thirty (30) days written notice delivered personally or sent via certified mail by the code enforcement officer or the department of planning and development to remedy the situation. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-251. - Smoke alarms. 
    Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in dwellings, regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations: 
(1)  On the wall or ceiling outside of each separate sleeping area, in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms. 
(2)  In each room used for sleeping purposes. 
(3)  In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-252. - Water closet, bathtub or shower requirements. 
    Every dwelling shall contain within its walls at least one (1) room, separate from the habitable rooms, which affords privacy and is equipped with a toilet and a lavatory. Every dwelling shall contain at least one (1) room which affords privacy to a person and which is equipped with a bathtub or shower. There must be at least one (1) toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower (a full bathroom) for each five (5) persons living and sleeping in a dwelling. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-253. - Water heating facilities. 
    Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a temperature of not less than 110F (43C). A gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided. An approved combination temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-254. - Windows 
    Windows of buildings shall be fully supplied and maintained with glass windowpanes or with a substitute approved by the code enforcement officer, which are without open cracks, broken glass or holes. Screens, if provided, shall be securely fastened to the window. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Secs. 5-255-5-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ENFORCEMENT, SUBPOENA POWER, UNLAWFUL ACTS AND NOTICE OF VIOLATION 

Sec. 5-266. - Enforcement. 
    This article shall be enforced by the director or his/her duly authorized representative or by any other agency or individual designated by the city council to enforce this article. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-267. - Transfer of ownership. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a citation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or citation issued by the code compliance official and shall furnish to the code compliance official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or citation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or citation. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-268. - Owner's right of entry. 
    Every occupant of a building, dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or the owner's agents or employees, access to any part of such building, dwelling or dwelling unit or its premises, at all reasonable times, for the purpose of maintenance, improving or making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this article or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-269. - Right of entry. 
    No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city who has reason to believe that a health or safety threat exists and who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his/her official duties. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-270. - Subpoena power. 
    Any duly authorized enforcement personnel shall have the power to issue subpoenas requiring occupants, residents, owners, or parties-in-interest of buildings under inspection, investigation, or who have been accused of a violation this article to appear in municipal court. The duly authorized enforcement personnel shall also have the power to issue subpoenas to occupants, residents, owners, or parties-in-interest to produce written records related to the property under inspection or investigation. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-271. - Unlawful acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with, or in violation of, this article. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-272. - Notice of violation. 
    Enforcement shall begin with a written notice of violation provided to the owner, occupant, or party in interest. The notice shall contain a deadline of, no less than two (2) days and not more than thirty (30) days for compliance, which may be extended by the director. If the violation continues past the deadline, the director may issue a citation or take such other legal action authorized under this article. If the owner, occupant or party in interest has received a notice of violation of any provision of this chapter within the preceding twenty-four-month period no additional notice of violation under this section shall be required before issuing a citation for any subsequent alleged violation of this chapter. 
    If any person fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of section 5-214 of this article within the specified deadline of the director, the city, through its agents and employees, may go upon such property and do or cause to be done the work necessary to obtain compliance with this article. The expense incurred in correcting this condition on such property and any administrative costs involved shall be paid by the city and charged to the owner of such property. A bill for such services shall be promptly sent to the owner of the property on which such services where performed by the department of planning and development. Should said amount go unpaid for a period of thirty (30) days following the mailing of said bill via certified mail, the city may institute a law suit or place a lien on said property to seek recovery of the amounts expended by the city including applicable interest and attorney's fees. This provision is not exclusive of any other rights and remedies available to the city under its charter and laws of the state. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05; Ord. of 5-14-07) 
Sec. 5-273. - Noncompliance. 
    If any person fails to comply within the time specified in the notice of violation, the director shall issue a citation for the violator to appear in municipal court. The citation shall specifically allege that section violated and the nature of such violation. The citation shall be served by either personal service or certified mail. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05; Ord. of 5-14-07) 
Secs. 5-274-5-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 5-281. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine or imprisonment, upon conviction in the municipal court, and each and every day that the premises shall remain in a condition in violation of the terms of this article shall constitute a separate offense. This section shall be in addition to the provisions of the abatement of said nuisance and the charge of the cost of the same against the owner of the premises by the city. A fine imposed under this article shall be no less then two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per offense. A sentence of imprisonment under this article shall not exceed sixty (60) days per offense. At the discretion of the municipal court judge, any sentence may be probated, altered or amended. 
(Ord. of 11-14-05) 
Sec. 5-282. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - VACANT, FORECLOSED, AND DELINQUENT PROPERTY REGISTRATION SYSTEM 

Sec. 5-283. - Title. 
    This division shall be known as the "Duluth Vacant and Foreclosed Property Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 9-10-12) 
Sec. 5-284. - Findings and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this division is to establish minimum requirements and standards for registration of vacant, foreclosed and/or delinquent property in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, convenience, order and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(b)  The council finds that: 
(1)  There is a need to establish a registration system for vacant, foreclosed and delinquent property in order to protect property values for all property owners and to encourage proper upkeep and maintenance of such properties. 
(2)  Due to the lack of adequate maintenance and security of vacant, foreclosed and delinquent properties, the property values and quality of life of neighboring properties are negatively impacted. 
(3)  Improperly maintained and secured properties can become a hazard to the health and safety of neighboring properties. 
(4)  Difficulties often arise in locating the person responsible for the condition of vacant, foreclosed and delinquent property. This registration system will require owners and agents to provide the city with official information for contacting the party responsible for bringing the property into compliance with applicable provisions of state and local laws and regulations. 
(Ord. of 9-10-12) 
Sec. 5-285. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agent means an individual with a place of business in this state at which he or she is authorized to accept inquires, notices, and service of process on behalf of a vacant, foreclosed, or delinquent real property owner. 
    Delinquent real property means any improved or unimproved real property on which there have been repeated violations of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Duluth that remain uncorrected for at least ninety (90) days. 
    Director means the director of the department of planning and development or his designee. 
    Foreclosed real property means improved or unimproved real property for which a land disturbance permit has been issued and is held pursuant to a judicial or nonjudical foreclosure of a mortgage, deed of trust, security deed, deed to secure debt, or other security instrument securing debt or obligation owed to a creditor or a deed in lieu of foreclosure in full or partial satisfaction of a debt or obligation owed to a creditor. 
    Street address means the street or route address and shall not mean or include a post office box. 
    Vacant real property means real property that: 
(1)  Is intended for habitation, has not been lawfully inhabited for at least sixty (60) days, and has no evidence of utility usage within the past sixty (60) days; or 
(2)  Is partially constructed or incomplete, without a valid building permit. 
    This term shall not include a building or structure containing multiple units with common ownership that has at least one (1) unit occupied with evidence of utility usage. 
(Ord. of 9-10-12) 
Sec. 5-286. - Registration required. 
(a)  The owner of any vacant, foreclosed, or delinquent real property shall maintain an agent for said property in the State of Georgia and shall register the property and the name of the agent with the director within fourteen (14) days of the property becoming vacant, foreclosed, or delinquent as defined in this division. 
(b)  The registration shall utilize a copy of the form developed by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, as may be amended. 
(c)  If the property is acquired by foreclosure under power of sale or through a deed in lieu of foreclosure, the owner may file a copy of the deed transferring ownership of the property in lieu of submitting a registration of the required form in the following circumstances: 
(1)  The deed contains the information specified in subsection (b) above; 
(2)  The deed is filed with the clerk of superior court within sixty (60) days of the transfer; 
(3)  The filing date stamp or a receipt showing payment of the required filing fee with the superior court is provided along with a copy of the entire deed. 
(4)  A filing in this manner shall be exempt from the registration fee required in subsection (e) below. 
(d)  All information required in subsections (b) or (c) shall be kept up to date and therefore any change to that information shall be updated through a revised filing with the director within thirty (30) days of the change in such information. 
(e)  Any owner or agent of a vacant or foreclosed real property which is required to be registered with the city under this division shall be required to make a payment for administrative fees that reasonably approximate the cost to the city of the establishment, maintenance, operation, and administration of the registry. Such fees shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) per registration and shall be established by resolution of mayor and city council. 
(f)  The submittals required by this division shall be submitted in paper format until such time as the director develops a method for electronic submissions. If the director develops a system for electronic registration under this division, the director shall determine whether to continue to accept registrations in paper format. 
(g)  Except for the forms created by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, the director shall create the forms necessary to carry out the provisions of this division. The owner shall be required to utilize the forms created by the director. 
(Ord. of 9-10-12) 
Sec. 5-287. - Removal from registry. 
    The owner of a property may apply to have the property removed from registration by providing an application and proof that the property is occupied and that all pertinent utility accounts have been established and are being utilized. The city shall either grant or deny the application for removal from the registration list within thirty (30) days of the date of receipt of the application by the city. If no action is taken by the city within thirty (30) days, the application shall be deemed granted. 
(Ord. of 9-10-12) 
Sec. 5-288. - Penalties. 
    Any person found to have violated any provision of this division shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. of 9-10-12) 
Sec. 5-289. - Appeal of decision of department of planning and development. 
(a)  Any decision of the director required by this division shall be subject to appeal and review by the Municipal Court of the City of Duluth. 
(b)  Any decision required to be made by the director by this division shall be in writing and a copy shall be provided to the owner of the property. 
(c)  Any appeal taken under this division shall be in writing and shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the decision in question with the Clerk of Court of the Municipal Court of the City of Duluth. 
(d)  Upon receipt of the written appeal, the clerk of court shall notify the director of the appeal and the director shall, within ten (10) days, transmit all papers constituting the record to the clerk of court. The clerk of court shall schedule a hearing on the appeal. 
(e)  The municipal court's review shall be limited to determining whether the decision of the director constitutes an abuse of its discretion in its application and enforcement of this division. 
(Ord. of 9-10-12) 
Sec. 5-290. - Conflicts, severability and effective date. 
(a)  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the ordinance from which this division is derived are hereby repealed. 
(b)  If any section, clause, sentence or phrase of the ordinance from which this division is derived is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this division. 
(c)  The ordinance from which this division is derived shall become effective immediately upon its adoption by the city council. 
(Ord. of 9-10-12) 
Chapter 6 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to prescribe fire safety regulations,  1.13(9). 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; nuisances, Ch. 9; burning garbage,  13-41; burning trash,  13-42. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to provide for fire protection, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, Sec. II, Para. III(a)(1); fire protection and safety, O.C.G.A. Title 25. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Fire hydrants-Minimum sizes, location. 
(a)  In the city single-family approved subdivisions, at least eight-inch pipe shall be installed, six-inch pipe may be used when it constitutes a good gridiron and then only up to six hundred (600) feet in length between interconnecting mains. Fire hydrants shall be spaced not to exceed six hundred (600) feet. Two-way hydrants may be used in single-family subdivisions. 
(b)  In multifamily residential subdivisions or multifamily apartment complexes, at least eight-inch or larger pipe shall be installed, six-inch pipe may be used when it constitutes a good gridiron and then only up to six hundred (600) feet in length between interconnecting mains. Fire hydrants shall be three-way hydrants and shall be spaced not to exceed five hundred (500) feet with additional fire hydrants located as necessary to permit all portions of buildings to be reached by hose lays of not more than four hundred (400) feet. 
(c)  In industrial and commercial areas, including motels, hotels, nursing homes, hospitals, educational buildings and office buildings, eight-inch pipe or larger water line shall be installed to provide a water flow of over one thousand (1,000) gpm or larger if flow is required. Fire hydrants shall be spaced not to exceed three hundred (300) feet. 
(d)  In mobile home parks, fire hydrants shall not exceed five hundred (500) feet with a minimum of a six-inch water line installed to provide a water flow of seven hundred (700) to one thousand (1,000) gallons per minute. Where county water is not available, water supplies for fire department operations should be provided to permit the effective operation of a minimum of one and one-half-inch hose streams on any fire in a mobile home or elsewhere in the mobile home park. "Effective operation" means the ability to deliver at least seventy-five (75) gallons per minute to each of two (2) nozzles, held four (4) feet above the ground, at a flowing pressure of at least thirty (30) pounds per square inch at the highest elevation in the park. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  14) 
Sec. 6-2. - Same-Specifications. 
(a)  Water mains and fire hydrants shall be installed, under water pressure and ready for firefighting before any sheating may be installed on walls and roofs of buildings other than fire resistive construction. 
(b)  Hydrants, fittings, valves and fire department connections shall be approved by the city water and county fire departments. Fire department connections shall be not less than eighteen (18) inches nor more than thirty-six (36) inches above the level of the adjoining ground or paving. The thread of such connections shall be uniform with that used by the fire department. 
(c)  Hydrants shall meet the requirements of NFPA No. 24, Fire Hydrants for Outside Protection, and have not less than six-inch connection with the mains. The number, size and arrangement of the outlets, the size of the main valve opening and the size of barrel shall be suitable for protection to be provided and shall be approved by the city water and county fire departments. For average conditions hydrants should be placed fifty (50) feet from the buildings protected. Where it is impossible to place them at this distance, they may be put nearer, provided they are set in locations where the chance of injury by falling walls is small, and from which men are not likely to be driven by smoke or heat. 
(d)  The size and shape of the operating nut, as well as the direction the hydrant stem operates shall be uniform with hydrants in the city water distribution system specifications. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  15) 
Sec. 6-3. - Same-Obstruction. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct with building materials or in any other manner whatsoever an area within fifteen (15) feet of any cistern or fire hydrant which would obstruct approaches to the same by any member of the fire department. No person shall put any post or installation of any nature whatsoever nearer than eighteen (18) inches to any fire hydrant without first obtaining written permission from the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  16) 
Sec. 6-4. - Persons allowed in the vicinity of fire. 
    No person except fire fighters, members of the mayor and council, members of the county or city police departments, the owners of the property, their agents, and the agents of insurance companies shall be allowed within the immediate vicinity of any fire without being ordered there by the fire chief or the officer in charge at the time. Any person refusing to obey the orders and directions of the fire chief or other person in the fire department in charge of a fire shall be in violation of this section. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  17) 
Sec. 6-5. - Following fire apparatus. 
    The driver of any vehicle other than one (1) on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five hundred (500) feet, or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  18) 
Sec. 6-6. - Crossing fire hose. 
    No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department when laid down on any street, roadway or private driveway, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  19) 
Sec. 6-7. - Open burning. 
(a)  Prohibited; exceptions. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit open burning in any area located within the corporate boundaries of the city at any time except as follows: 
(1)  The burning is for the purpose of carrying out recognized agricultural procedures necessary for production or harvesting of crops; 
(2)  The burning is for the cooking of food for immediate human consumption in a grill, barbeque pit or like cooking apparatus or involves the use of a chiminea or similar outdoor fireplace; 
(3)  The fire is set for the purpose of training fire fighting personnel and has been authorized by the appropriate government entity and the guidelines set by the state department of natural resources and other appropriate government agencies are strictly observed; 
(4)  The fire is in connection with the operation of devices using open flames such as tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters and other flame making equipment; 
(5)  The fire is a small fire established and maintained by a contractor or tradesman which is necessary for activities such as street paving work or installation or repair of utilities. All such fires shall be kept small in size, shall produce no smoke emissions exceeding forty (40) percent opacity and shall comply with all other regulations which may prohibit or regulate all such activities; 
(6)  The fire is for the disposal of packaging materials previously containing explosives and is used in accordance with U.S. Department of Labor Safety Regulations. 
(7)  Burning of leaves, limbs and other natural vegetation that may fall on one's own property, provided that said burning is conducted during daylight hours when prevailing winds are not in excess of fifteen (15) m.p.h. and the fire is located at least two hundred (200) feet from the nearest property line. 
(8)  Following a tornado, natural disaster, severe storm, or other similar occurrence, the mayor and council or the city manager may suspend the prohibitions set forth in this ordinance to allow for the disposal of leaves, limbs, trees or other natural vegetation which has fallen on one's own property. 
(b)  Enforcement. This section may be enforced by the city manager and the city manager's designees including, but not limited to, the staff of the planning and development department. In addition, the city police department will have concurrent enforcement authority and may summarily abate any conditions which are in violation of any other provisions of this section or which may constitute an immediate threat to life or property. 
(c)  Adoption of county regulation. The city expressly adopts and incorporates by reference the regulation of open burning set forth in Gwinnett County Code article II, section 46-54 entitled "Rules and regulation for outdoor and open burning," to the extent that said provisions are consistent with the restrictions contained in this section. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  20; Ord. of 5-8-2006) 
Editor's note- City administrator changed to city manager at the direction of the city. 
State Law reference- Air quality control programs authorized, Ga. Const. art. IX,  II,  III(a)(13). 
Sec. 6-8. - Setting fire to vehicle, notice required. 
    No person shall set fire to an automobile, truck or any other type vehicle without first obtaining written permission from the chief of the fire department. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  21) 
Sec. 6-9. - Burning certain materials prohibited. 
    No material or substance which emits noxious or poisonous gases, such as nitrogen dioxide, hydrogen cyanide or chlorine or other poisonous gases that will not readily dissipate in the atmosphere, may be burned within the city limits. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  22) 
Sec. 6-10. - Chief and officers vested with police powers. 
    The chief of the fire department or other authority acting under him shall be sworn in as police officers with the powers to make arrests pertaining to arson within the city. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  23) 
Sec. 6-11. - Authority to cut electric wires. 
    The chief of the fire department or other authority acting under him is hereby authorized to cut any electric wire which he shall deem necessary on the occurrence of any fire, without expense to the city for so doing; nothing herein contained shall imply that the city authorized any person to undertake the risk of cutting any such wires or renders itself liable for any injury to the person doing so. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  24) 
Sec. 6-12. - Obstructing fire station. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or knowingly to put any trash or obstruction of any nature whatsoever in front of any engine house or hook and ladder house or place where fire department equipment is located. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  25) 
Sec. 6-13. - False alarms. 
    No person shall intentionally make, turn in or give a false alarm of fire or of need for police or ambulance assistance, or aid or abet in the commission of such act. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  26) 
Sec. 6-14. - Accessibility for firefighting equipment. 
(a)  Reasonable accessibility shall be provided to and around all buildings for firefighting equipment, including ladder trucks on multiple story projects. 
(b)  Accessibility for firefighting equipment shall be maintained throughout all stages of construction. 
(c)  Minimum widths of access driveways, excluding parking, shall be twenty (20) feet. Minimum turning radius shall be thirty-two (32) feet. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  28) 
Sec. 6-15. - Fire-extinguishing equipment in restaurants, etc. 
(a)  Approved fire-extinguishing equipment of the following types shall be installed in restaurants or other public food facilities having commercial cooking appliances, such as ranges, deep-fat fryers, grills and broilers. 
(b)  The standards for approval shall comply with NFPA No. 96, 1973 found in Volume 4 of the National Fire Codes of NFPA. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  30) 
Sec. 6-16. - Roof construction. 
(a)  Combustible roof construction shall comply with section 705 of the Standard Building Code. 
(b)  Attic spaces shall be provided with interior access opening not less than twenty-two (22) inches by thirty-six (36) inches. Access openings shall be readily accessible every two thousand (2,000) square feet. Access shall be provided with a lid or device of noncombustible material that may be easily removed or operated. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  31) 
Sec. 6-17. - Mobile homes. 
(a)  Mobile homes used as portable classrooms for educational or religious purposes shall provide adequate support for the placement in tie-downs of such portable rooms of buildings thereby securing the superstructure against sliding, uplift, rotation and overturning. 
(b)  Such portable building shall be provided with anchors and tie-downs such as cast-in place concrete dead-men, eyelets embedded in concrete slabs, or runways, screw augers, arrowhead anchors or other devices to be used to stabilize the portable building used for educational or religious purpose. 
(c)  Anchors and tie-downs shall be placed at each corner of the portable building and shall be able to sustain a minimum load of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  32) 
Secs. 6-18-6-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 6-41. - Adoption. 
    There is hereby adopted by the mayor and council for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, the International Fire Code, with Georgia amendments, 2000 edition, as amended, and the Gwinnett County Fire Prevention and Protection Code, 2000 edition, and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are deleted, modified or amended, of which code not less than three (3) copies have been and are now filed in the office of the city clerk and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and the provisions shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  1; Ord. of 9-11-95; Ord. of 3-11-96; Ord. of 6-24-96; Ord. of 6-9-97; Ord. of 3-26-01; Ord. of 5-12-03) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to adopt fire codes, O.C.G.A.  25-3-4. 
Sec. 6-42. - Establishment, duties of bureau of fire prevention. 
(a)  The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention in the fire department of the county and which shall be under the supervision of the chief of the county fire department. 
(b)  The chief in charge of the bureau of fire prevention shall be appointed by the chief of the county fire department on the basis of examination to determine his qualifications. 
(c)  The chief of the county fire department may detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The chief of the fire department shall recommend to the county board of commissioners the employment of technical inspectors, who, when such authorization is made, shall be selected through an examination to determine their fitness for the position. The examination shall be open to members of the fire department, and appointments made after examination shall be for an indefinite term with removal only for cause. 
(d)  A report of the bureau of fire prevention shall be made annually and transmitted to the mayor and council. It shall contain all proceedings under this article, with such statistics as the chief of the fire department may wish to include therein. The chief of the fire department shall also recommend any amendments to the code which, in his judgment, shall be desirable. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  2) 
Sec. 6-43. - Definitions. 
(a)  Whenever the word "municipality" is used in the fire prevention code, it shall be held to mean the City of Duluth. 
(b)  Whenever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the fire prevention code, it shall mean the attorney for the City of Duluth. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  3) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 6-44. - Where storage of explosives, blasting agents prohibited. 
    The limits referred to in section 12.5B of the fire prevention code, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, shall comply with the rules set forth by the state safety fire commissioner, chapter 120-3-10, Rules and Regulations for Explosives for Blasting Agents. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  4) 
Sec. 6-45. - Where storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks prohibited. 
    The limits referred to in section 16.22a of the fire prevention code in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is restricted shall comply with city zoning regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  5) 
Sec. 6-46. - Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases restricted. 
    The limits referred to in section 21.6 of the fire prevention code, in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted shall comply with city zoning regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  6) 
Sec. 6-47. - Modifications. 
    The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall have power to recommend or modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the fire prevention code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modifications when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of the bureau of fire prevention thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  7) 
Sec. 6-48. - Appeals. 
    Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire prevention code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the fire department by filing a notice of appeal in writing to the mayor and council within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision appeal. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  8) 
Sec. 6-49. - New materials, processes, occupancies which may require permits. 
    The mayor and council, the chief of the fire department, the building department, and the chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes, or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the fire prevention code. The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  9) 
Sec. 6-50. - Penalties. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire prevention code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build a violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the mayor and council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with section 1-6. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  10) 
Chapter 7 - LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate and license businesses, occupations, etc.,  1.13(5); authority to levy occupation or business taxes,  6.12. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3. 
State Law reference- Specific business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A.  48-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of August 8, 2011, in effect repealed the former Art. I,  7-1-7-25.18, and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. The former Art. I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from ordinances of December 12, 1994; February 12, 1996; June 23, 1997; August 8, 2005; November 23, 2009 and July 12, 2010. 

Sec. 7-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the term: 
    Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
    Dominant line, service or product means the type of business within a multiple line business from which the greatest amount of income is derived. 
    Gross receipts means: 
(1)  The total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation the following: 
a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods sold or expenses incurred; 
b.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets or instruments of indebtedness; 
c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods or services; 
d.  Proceeds from fees charged for services rendered; and 
e.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty or dividend income. 
(2)  The term "gross receipts" does not mean and shall not include the following: 
a.  Sales, use or excise tax; 
b.  Sales returns, allowances and discounts; 
c.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C.  1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C.  1563(a)(2), between or among a parent corporation, wholly owned subsidiaries of such parent corporation, and any corporation in which such parent corporation or one (1) or more of its wholly owned subsidiaries owns stock possessing at least thirty (30) percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of such partially owned corporations, or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent for services which contributed to the gross receipts in issue; and 
e.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions or the interest income derived from such funds, received by a nonprofit organization which employees salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this chapter, if such funds constitute eighty (80) percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
f.  Proceeds from sales of goods or services which are delivered to or received by customers who are outside the state at the time of delivery or receipt. 
    Location of office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
    Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business and enacted by a local government as a revenue-raising ordinance or resolution. 
    Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
(1)  The term "practitioner of profession and occupation" shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if the business pays an occupation tax. 
    Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee does not include an administrative fee or registration fee. The city may require an occupation tax in connection with a regulatory fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A.  36-71-2 (8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-2. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
    The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A.  48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-3. - Imposition of administrative and regulatory fees generally. 
(a)  Except for entities exempted by section 7-13(d) of this article, a non-prorated, non-refundable administrative fee shall be required on all business occupation tax accounts for the initial start up, renewal or re-opening of those accounts. The amount of the administrative fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(b)  A regulatory fee may be imposed on any business or practitioner of profession or occupation as provided under O.C.G.A.  48-13-9. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-4. - Occupation tax levy; registration and issuance of occupation tax certificates. 
(a)  As provided in this article and in accordance with state law, an occupation tax is hereby levied and assessed against all persons, sole proprietors, firms, corporations, partnerships, or any other form of business organization engaged in or operating any business, trade, profession or occupation in the City of Duluth, Georgia. In the case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia which exerts substantial efforts within the state and city pursuant to O.C.G.A.  48-13-7 or that owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located in the city, an occupation tax shall be levied and assessed on such businesses, trades, professions, or occupations. 
(b)  All persons, sole proprietors, firms, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization engaged in or operating any business, trade, profession or occupation in the City of Duluth, Georgia, or any form of business otherwise identified in subsection (a) above, are hereby required to: 
(1)  Register their business or office with the city, 
(2)  Pay the amount now or hereafter fixed as taxes and fees as authorized under the provisions of this article and O.C.G.A.  48-13-1 et seq., and 
(3)  Obtain an occupation tax certificate or occupation tax exemption certificate for their business or office. 
(c)  Each business shall identify on the registration form, all lines of business associated with the conduct of the business, including the dominant line. 
(d)  No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the city clerk and that line of business having been noted by the city clerk upon the occupation tax or occupation tax exemption certificate. 
(e)  The tax certificates herein provided shall be issued by the city clerk or the clerk's authorized agent, 
(f)  The occupation tax certificate shall serve as proof of registration and full payment of the occupation tax. Additional regulatory fees may be required as established by the city. 
(g)  All certificates granted under this article shall expire on January 30 of each year. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-5. - Occupation tax structure; restrictions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, the occupation tax shall be based upon the gross receipts of the business or practitioner in combination with the profitability ratio for the type of business, profession or occupation. 
(b)  The occupation tax amount shall be determined by the sum of the following: 
(1)  An administrative fee; 
(2)  A gross receipts tax calculated using a tax class table based on profitability ratios for the type of business, profession or occupation as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications or other information published by the United States Office of Management and Budget, the United States Internal Revenue Service or successor agencies of the United States in combination with the gross receipts for each business, trade, profession, or occupation. The tax class table ranges are based on the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) Code of the business as established by ordinance as follows:. 
Profitability Ratio/Tax Rate Tax Class on Gross Receipts Class PM% NAICS 1  3.95 0.0005 2  5.85 0.0006 3  6.84 0.0007 4  9.57 0.0008 5 16.41 0.0009 6 Above 0.0010  
(c)  A listing of businesses and their assigned tax classes along with a listing of the NAICS code applicable to each business is available for inspection in the city clerk's office during regular business hours. 
(d)  On an annual basis and by April 30 of each year, practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A.  48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one (1) of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax resulting from application of the other provisions of this article; or 
(2)  A fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such as to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this paragraph shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(e)  Lawyers as described in O.C.G.A.  48-13-9(c)(1) subject to payment of an occupation tax, as elected in subsection (d) of this section, shall not be subject to the penalties described in section 7-17 of this article; however, the city clerk shall seek to enforce payment of an occupation tax due the city by lawyers through any and all available legal remedies afforded by law. 
(f)  For businesses or practitioners with more than one type of service or product, the industry class for the calculation of the occupation tax on the gross receipts of the business, profession or occupation shall be based on the dominant line, service, or product. 
(g)  Out of state businesses with no location in the state shall be required to pay occupation tax to only one (1) local government in this state, the local government for the municipal corporation or county in which the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by the individual business or practitioner. 
(1)  Gross receipts of a business or practitioner with no location in Georgia shall include only those gross receipts which are reasonably attributable to sales or services in the State of Georgia. 
(h)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one (1) occupation tax for each of its locations, except that the entire gross receipts for businesses or practitioners with multiple services or products shall be taxed according to the dominant service or product. 
(i)  No occupation tax will be required for more than one hundred (100) percent of a business's gross receipts when occupation taxes of all local governments are added together. 
(j)  No occupation tax will be required on gross receipts on which such tax has been levied in other localities or states. 
(k)  No occupation tax shall be prorated. 
(l)  The minimum amount of taxes due under this article shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). The maximum amount of taxes due under this article is twelve thousand five hundred dollars ($12,500.00) per year. 
(m)  The city shall not require the payment of a fee by whatever name in any amount by a business or practitioner for the cost of ascertaining whether such a business or practitioner has paid occupation tax to another local government. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-6. - Occupation tax on real estate brokers. 
(a)  No occupation tax shall be levied upon real estate brokers except at the place where any such real estate broker shall maintain a principal or branch office. Payment of the occupation tax by the real estate broker shall permit the broker and the broker's affiliated associate brokers to engage in all of the brokerage activities described in O.C.G.A.  43-40-1 without further taxing. No additional occupation tax shall be required of the broker's affiliated associate brokers or salespersons; provided however, that subject to the limitations of subsection (b) below, the city shall have the power to levy and collect an occupation tax upon real estate brokers transacting business within the boundaries of the taxing jurisdiction, which tax shall be based upon gross receipts derived from transactions with respect to property located within the municipal boundaries. 
(b)  The city may impose an occupation tax upon real estate brokers based upon gross receipts only for real estate transactions with respect to property located within its corporate limits. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-7. - Tax certificate and/or exemption certificate to be displayed for inspection. 
    The occupation tax certificate and/or occupation tax exemption certificate shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such occupation tax certificate or occupation tax exemption certificate shall be shown, upon request, to a city police officer, the city clerk, or the city clerk's authorized agent. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-8. - Application for registration; filing of return showing actual gross receipts during calendar year. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person, sole proprietor, firm, corporation, partnership, nonprofit or any other form of business organization engaged in or operating any business, trade, profession or occupation subject to this article, to file with the city clerk or clerk's designee an application for registration prior to the commencement of business in the city. An occupation tax return, including full payment of taxes and fees shall, be filed with the clerk or clerk's designee by the due date for payment of occupation taxes as specified in section 7-11. The initial application for registration under this article shall set forth all activities of each business, its North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) code, its estimated gross receipts, computation of the amount of tax due, including the administrative fee, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk or designee to properly administer this article. 
(b)  Subsequent returns shall be made on such forms as the city clerk or designee may specify and set forth the actual amount of the gross receipts of such business during the preceding calendar year, all activities of the business, including the dominant line of business activity, computation of the amount of tax due, including the administrative fee, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk or designee to properly administer this article. 
(c)  For businesses or practitioners with more than one (1) type of service or product, the entire gross receipts shall be classified according to the dominant service or product based upon the information provided on the application or return. 
(d)  The city clerk or designee may require a taxpayer subject to the provisions of this article to provide a copy of the profit and loss statement, a statement from a Certified Public Accountant, or a copy of a federal or state income tax return at the time of filing the occupation tax return. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-9. - The number of businesses considered operating in city; separate business locations. 
(a)  Where a business or practitioner conducts business at more than one (1) fixed location in the city, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of the occupation tax levy. 
(b)  Each person, firm, or corporation operating under various trade names must secure a separate occupation tax certificate for each trade name issued. In addition, a separate occupation tax certificate must be secured for each business location. 
(c)  Certificate applicants for trade names and for separate business locations shall pay the non-refundable administrative fee imposed hereby, in addition to the occupation tax levied by this article. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-10. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. 
(a)  Each business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one (1) jurisdiction, including business or practitioners with one (1) or more locations or offices in Georgia and one (1) or more locations outside the state, the city shall allocate the gross receipts for occupation tax purposes in accordance with one (1) of the following methods: 
(1)  Where the business or practitioner can reasonably allocate the dollar amount of gross receipts of the business or practitioner to one (1) or more of the locations or offices on the basis of the product manufactured in that location or office or the sales or other services provided in that location or office, the city shall tax the gross receipts generated by the location or office within the jurisdiction of the city; or 
(2)  Where the business or practitioner cannot reasonably allocate the dollar amount of gross receipts among multiple locations or offices, the business or practitioner shall divide the gross receipts reported to all local governments in this state by the number of locations or offices of the business or practitioner which contributed to the gross receipts reported to any local government in this state, and shall allocate an equal percentage of such gross receipts of the business to each location or office. 
(b)  In no instance shall the sum of the portions of the total gross receipts of a business or practitioner taxed by all local governments exceed one hundred (100) percent of the total gross receipts of the business or practitioner. 
(c)  In the event of a dispute between the business or practitioner and the city as to the allocation under this section, the business or practitioner shall have the burden of proof as to the reasonableness of this allocation. 
(d)  Upon request, businesses or practitioners with a location or office situated in more than one (1) jurisdiction shall provide to any local government authorized to levy an occupation tax upon such business or practitioner the following: 
(1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business's or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
(e)  When more than one (1) local government levies occupation tax on a business or practitioner which has locations encompassed by more than one (1) local government and the other jurisdictions use different criteria for taxation, the city shall not tax any greater proportion of the gross receipts than authorized by law. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-11. - When tax due and payable; delinquency. 
(a)  All occupation taxes shall be due and payable annually on January 30. 
(b)  In the event that any person commences business on any date after January 30, the occupation tax shall be due and payable thirty (30) days following the commencement of business. 
(c)  Each new business or professional practitioner, commencing business in the city and subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article, shall pay to the city as its occupation tax an amount based upon the business' estimated gross receipts for the calendar year in which it commences business, at the office of the city clerk. If such tax remains due and unpaid for ninety (90) days from the due date, the business will be subject to penalties and interest for delinquency on the unpaid tax. 
(d)  Penalties for delinquency on any unpaid tax as prescribed in this article shall be assessed according to section 7-17. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-12. - Overpayment or underpayment; refunds. 
(a)  If the occupation tax on the actual gross receipts for the preceding calendar year are less than the occupation tax on the estimated gross receipts paid by such business in the preceding calendar year, the difference in such amount shall be applied to the amount of occupation tax to be paid to the city for the calendar year. If a credit exists after full payment of the occupation tax has been received by the city, such amount may be refundable, upon written request by the business pursuant to the section 2-2. 
(b)  If the occupation tax on the actual gross receipts for the preceding calendar year are more than the occupation tax on the estimated gross receipts paid by such business in the preceding calendar year, the difference in such amount shall be due to the city on January 30 of the current calendar year, and shall be subject to penalties for delinquency if paid later than April 30. 
(c)  Occupational taxes are refundable pursuant to the section 2-2. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-13. - Exceptions; businesses not covered by this chapter. 
(a)  No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose unless such charitable nonprofit organization provides proof of a federal nonprofit identification number. 
(b)  The occupation tax shall not apply to any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state or instrumentality of the United States, the state or a municipality or county of the state. 
(c)  The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article, but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or city: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A.  46-3-1 et seq. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A.  2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A.  33-8-8, et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A.  46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A.  48-5-355. 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the State of Georgia governed by O.C.G.A.  48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A.  48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A.  48-13-55. 
(d)  Specifically exempt from occupation taxes, regulatory fees, and administrative fees are the following: 
(1)  Disabled veterans and the blind as provided in O.C.G.A.  43-12-1 et seq. An applicant seeking such exemption must be a resident of Georgia and must be exempt from Georgia income taxes. Applicants seeking an exemption as a disabled veteran must provide a certificate of eligibility, specifying the applicant's intended occupation or profession, issued by a probate judge or the commissioner of veteran services. Applicants seeking an exemption as a blind person must present certification from a physician or optometrist confirming the applicant's visual impairment. 
(2)  Any state or local authority, nonprofit organization, or vendor operating under a contract with a tax-exempt agricultural fair, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A.  2-2-8. 
(3)  Duluth Fall Festival, sponsored by the Duluth Fall Festival committee. 
(4)  Any festival sponsored by the city. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-14. - Change of location; change of name. 
    Any business required to register with the city shall notify the city clerk or clerk's designee of any change in location or change in name prior to the day of the move or the effective date of the change. Any business moving to a new location within the city or changing their business name shall pay an administrative fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to the city clerk or clerk's designee for the processing and issuance of a new occupation tax certificate. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-15. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the Secretary of State pursuant to Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the occupation tax certificate may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-16. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
    All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary tax certificate for said business as described in this article. For those businesses required to identify a registered agent under the Code of Duluth, those persons liable for occupation taxes and in default thereof shall cause the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons to be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a tax certificate. Every person commencing business in the city shall likewise obtain the tax certificate herein provided and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city any kind of business, trade, profession or occupation to which this article applies without first having so obtained said tax certificate, shall be in violation of this article and be subject to penalties as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-17. - Penalty of article violation. 
(a)  If any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain an occupation tax certificate shall be delinquent in payment of taxes or fees due under this article, such offender, upon conviction of the municipal judge, shall be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this section. 
(b)  The city shall assess a penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent of the amount owed for each calendar year or portion thereof for: 
(1)  Failure to pay occupation taxes and administrative fees ninety (90) days from the date such taxes and fees are due; 
(2)  Failure to file a return and pay all taxes and fees postmarked or received by April 30 of any calendar year, when the business or practitioner was in operation the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  Occupation taxes and fees not paid within ninety (90) days of the due date are subject to interest at a rate of one and one-half (1.5) percent per month. 
(d)  Payments required by the article herein may be collected in any suit at law or equity, or the city may cause executions to issue against the person, firm or corporation liable for the payment. Executions shall be levied and sold together with all costs thereof, by the city, or city's designees, as the county ex officio sheriff. In addition, any person whose duty it is to register any business or practice and obtain any occupation tax certificate and fails to do so, or who fails to pay the occupation tax or administrative fee required by this article, or who makes any deliberate or substantial and material false statement on an application or provides materially false information in support of an application, shall be denied an occupation tax certificate, shall be required to surrender any existing such occupation tax certificate and be deemed to have no such occupation tax certificate for purposes hereof, and shall be punished in accordance with the city ordinances or as otherwise allowed by state law. 
(e)  If the taxes and fees required under this article remain unpaid after the due date, the business or practitioner shall not collect any gross receipts. The provisions of this subsection may be enforced by appropriate injunctive or other relief upon the application of the city to the county superior court. 
(f)  Practitioners of law may collect gross receipts without applying for and obtaining an occupation tax certificate. However, practitioners of law must pay the occupation tax levied herein. 
(g)  The Duluth municipal court shall impose a fine for failure to pay the occupation tax, if said payment is not made in accordance with this article. Such civil fine shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and may be enforced by the contempt power of the court. 
(h)  The Duluth Municipal Court is empowered to prosecute persons violating the municipal ordinances of the city by failing to pay the special taxes, occupational taxes or regulatory fees of the city. This remedy shall be in addition to all other remedies provided for by local law or by state law. There shall be no imposition of criminal penalties upon those professions licensed by the state. 
(i)  In addition to the above remedies, the city clerk or authorized agent may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(j)  All other violators of this article, upon conviction by the municipal judge, shall be punished according to the power of the court under section 4.13. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-18. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
    An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of Georgia or of the United States. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-19. - Occupation taxes levied on business to be transacted during calendar year; filing of returns showing gross receipts during preceding calendar year. 
(a)  All occupation taxes levied by this article are levied on the amount of business to be transacted during the calendar year. However, for convenience of both the city and the taxpayer and to eliminate the necessity of making numerous returns, those businesses subject to the occupation tax levied in section 7-4 hereof shall, on or before the times hereinafter set forth, file with the city clerk the returns hereinafter specifically provided for, showing the gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year. This return shall be used as an estimate for making payments on the occupation tax for current calendar year. 
(b)  The owner , proprietor, manager, secretary, or other authorized officer of the business subject to said occupation tax of the current calendar year shall, at the end of the preceding year, and on or before January 30 of the current calendar year, file with the city clerk of the city on a form furnished by the city clerk, a signed return setting forth the amount of gross receipts of such business for the entire preceding calendar year to be used as an estimate of the gross receipts for the current year. Such other additional and supporting documentation as may be required by the city clerk under this section or by state law shall also be provided to the city clerk along with the signed return. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-20. - Returns confidential. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, information on gross receipts received by a business or practitioner of an occupation or profession provided to a local government for the purpose of determining the amount of occupation tax for the business or practitioner is confidential and exempt from inspection or disclosure. 
(b)  Violation of the confidentiality provision in subsection (a) of this section shall be unlawful and upon conviction shall be punished as an ordinance violation. 
(c)  Information on gross receipts received by a business or practitioner of an occupation or profession provided to a local government for the purpose of determining the amount of occupation tax for the business or practitioner may be disclosed to the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collection of occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay occupation tax. 
(d)  In the event a taxpayer completes one (1) or more forms in order to comply with a local government's ordinance or resolution imposing either an occupation tax or a regulatory fee and any such form fails to disclose the social security number or the appropriate federal or state taxpayer identification number, or other identification numbers, if required by the local government, such omission shall be reported in a timely manner to the state revenue commissioner. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-21. - Inspections of books and records. 
    In any case the city clerk, through its officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books of the person or business for which the returns are made. The city clerk shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city, and upon demand the city clerk such books and records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within thirty (30) days. Failure of submission of such books or records within thirty (30) days shall be grounds for revocation of the occupation tax certificate currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination by the city clerk at his or her discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of under reporting, a penalty of ten (10) percent of tax due over ninety (90) days will be assessed for the period delinquent. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-22. - Revocation of occupation tax certificate for failure to pay tax or fees, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
    Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax, fees, or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent or upon failure to make any of said returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as provided in this article, any tax certificate granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of said business to do business in the city for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new occupation tax certificate shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax or fees herein provided is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city clerk in accordance with provisions found in section 7-21. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-23. - Effect of failure to comply with article provisions; continuing in business after tax registration revocation. 
(a)  The following shall be in violation of this article and shall be subject to penalties as authorized under this article: 
(1)  Any persons, managers, agents, or employees, who do business in said city after the registration for said business has been revoked; 
(2)  Any persons, managers, agents, or employees, hereby required to make returns, showing the amount of gross receipts and who fail to make said returns within the time and manner provided in this article, or refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns; and 
(3)  Any persons, their managers, agents or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees or representatives of the city request such inspection during the city's business hours for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, 
(b)  Those practitioners for whom the local government cannot suspend the right to conduct their business who are delinquent in payment of their occupation taxes shall be subject to civil penalties and other sanctions as are available to the city. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-24. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
(a)  In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of occupation taxes or regulatory fees due the city from persons subject to said taxes or fees who fail or refuse to pay the taxes or fees, the city clerk or the clerk's authorized agent, may issue executions against the delinquent taxpayers for any or all of the following: 
(1)  The amount of the taxes or fees due when the taxes or fees become due; 
(2)  A penalty of ten (10) percent interest on the tax and fee after ninety (90) days from the due date of the tax or fee as provided in this article. 
(3)  Interest in the amount of one and one-half (1.5) percent interest per month as provided under section 7-17. 
(b)  The lien shall cover the taxpayer's property located within the city as provided by the city's ordinances and charter and the laws of Georgia. 
(c)  The lien of said occupation tax or regulatory fee shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or fee becomes delinquent. The execution may be levied by the city clerk, the clerk's authorized agent, or the city police department upon the property of defendant located in said city, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by the city's ordinances and charter and the laws of Georgia, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the city's charter and the laws of Georgia in regard to tax executions. 
(d)  When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the city clerk against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him or her as though he or she had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-25. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
    This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-25.1. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
    This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed that provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-25.2. - Enforcement of provision. 
    It is hereby made the duty of the city clerk, the clerk's authorized agent, and the police department to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the Duluth municipal court. It is hereby made the further duty of the city clerk, the clerk's authorized agent, the chief of police, the members of the police department, and their assistants, to inspect all occupation tax certificates and occupation tax exemption certificates issued by the city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the certificate held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-25.3. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by council. 
    This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the council. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax or fee herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes or fees have been paid in full. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-25.4. - Public hearings. 
(a)  The city shall conduct at least one (1) public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution regarding the occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(b)  In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year, the city shall hold one (1) or more public hearings as part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-25.5. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
    The council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one (1) or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for improving economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious and the reasons shall be set forth in such subsequent ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-25.6. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
    Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-25.7. - Severability. 
    If any section, provision or clause of any part of this article shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this article as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to effect the portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or the application of this article to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent that this article would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-25.8. - Effective date. 
    This article shall become effective upon passage by the city council, and shall remain in full effect thereafter. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-25.9. - Occupation tax registration certificates not transferable. 
    Occupation tax certificates are not transferrable. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-25.10. - City clerk to determine disputes. 
    Where any question arises as to the amount of occupation tax or regulatory fees due which may be applicable to any person, firm or corporation, the matter shall be presented to and decided by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-25.11. - Occupations and professions subject to regulatory fees and occupation taxes. 
    In addition to occupation taxes, some businesses may be required to obtain a regulatory permit. The amount of the regulatory fee is stated in the city ordinances which regulate those occupations and professions. In accordance with O.C.G.A.  48-13-9, the following are examples of businesses or practitioners of professions or occupations which may be subject to regulatory permit fees: 
Auto and motorcycle racing; 
Boarding houses; 
Boxing and wrestling promoters; 
Building and construction contractors, subcontractors, and workers; 
Burglar and fire alarm installers; 
Business which provide appearance bonds; 
Carnivals; 
Dealers in precious metals; 
Door-to-door salespersons 
Escort services; 
Firearms dealers; 
Food service establishments; 
Fortunetellers; 
Garbage collectors; 
Handwriting analysts; 
Health clubs, gyms, and spas; 
Hotels and motels; 
Hypnotists; 
Landfills; 
Locksmiths; 
Massage parlors; 
Modeling agencies; 
Newspaper vending boxes; 
Nude club/adult entertainment establishments; 
Nursing and personal care homes; 
Parking lots; 
Pawnbrokers; 
Peddlers; 
Pool/billiard establishments; 
Scrap metal processors; 
Shooting galleries and firearm ranges; 
Stables; 
Tattoo artists; 
Taxicab and limousine operators. 
    Businesses or practitioners of professions or occupations subject to regulatory permit fees shall not commence business until all regulatory permit fees have been paid. Regulatory fees may be paid after commencing business or the practice of a profession or occupation when: 
(1)  The work done or services provided are necessary for the health, comfort, or safety of one (1) or more individuals or protection of property. This paragraph shall apply to, but not be limited to, the repair, service, or installation of heating, ventilation, and air conditioning equipment or systems; 
(2)  The work done or services provided have no adverse effect on any other person; 
(3)  Regulatory fees are tendered to the local government within two (2) business days after commencing business or the practice of a profession or occupation and any and all required inspections are made in order to ensure compliance with applicable codes; and 
(4)  The work is commenced or the services are provided within twenty-four (24) hours of receiving the request for such work or service and it is not possible for the person conducting the work or providing the service to obtain a permit prior to commencing due to the hours of operation of the local government's offices. 
(Ord. of 8-8-11) 
ARTICLE II. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 7-26. - Applicability. 
    Pursuant to authority granted to municipalities under O.C.G.A. Title 48, the city council declares that the provisions of this article shall govern the prosecution of individuals who fail to pay special taxes, occupation taxes or license fees, pursuant to the various license, occupation tax, or business regulation ordinances, to the city. 
(Ord. of 6-18-90,  1; Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-27. - Issuance of citations. 
    To ensure compliance with the provisions of this Code and the ordinances of the city that require the payment of special taxes, occupational taxes, and license fees, the city police department and/or the city clerk and/or a duly authorized agent of the city clerk are hereby empowered to cite violators for the various ordinances of the city providing for license fees, occupation taxes and special taxes related to certain businesses to the municipal court. Such citations shall state the provision of the specific ordinance allegedly violated by the individual cited. 
(Ord. of 6-18-90,  2(a); Ord. of 3-8-93; Ord. of 7-12-10; Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-28. - Prosecution of violators. 
    The municipal court of the city is empowered to prosecute persons violating the provisions of this Code and ordinances of the city by failing to pay the special taxes, occupation taxes or license fees or in any other way violating the license, occupation tax, or business regulation ordinances of the city. This remedy shall be in addition to any other remedies provided for by local law or by state law. 
(Ord. of 6-18-90,  2(b); Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-29. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates any provisions of the license, occupation tax, or business regulation ordinances of the city may, upon conviction, be punished as provided in such ordinance or in the absence of such provision, by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense and/or imprisonment for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. of 6-18-90,  3; Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Secs. 7-30-7-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BILLIARD ROOMS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Billiard rooms, O.C.G.A.  43-8-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-51. - Applicability. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted to municipalities under O.C.G.A.  43-8-1, the council declares that the provisions of this article shall govern the operation of billiard rooms within the incorporated areas of the city. 
(Ord. of 6-18-90(2),  1) 
Sec. 7-52. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverages shall mean and include all alcohol, spirituous liquors, beer, malt beverages, wine or fortified wine, as more particularly defined in the chapter 3 of this Code. 
    Billiard room means any public place where a person is permitted to play the game of billiards and for which a charge is made for use of equipment or for which no charge is made for use of equipment. 
    Billiards means any of the several games played on a table surrounded by an elastic ledge of cushions with balls which are impelled by a cue and shall include, but shall not be limited to all forms of the game known as "carom billiards," "pocket billiards," and "English billiards." 
(Ord. of 6-18-90(2),  2) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 7-53. - General operating provisions. 
(a)  No gambling or other games of chance shall be permitted in any business or premises in which a billiard room is operated or located. 
(b)  All establishments which have three (3) or more pool tables shall have a manager, or designated employee on duty during operating hours whose responsibility is the operation of the billiard tables. 
(c)  No billiard room licensed under this ordinance shall be kept open, nor shall the playing of billiards at the licensed location be permitted between the hours of 12:00 midnight thru 6:00 a.m. 
(d)  No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any billiard room or establishment within which a billiard room is operated licensed pursuant to this article unless the billiard room or the establishment in which the billiard room is operated meets the following requirements: 
(1)  The establishment within which a billiard room is operating and which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink shall meet either the definition of a "restaurant" or the definition of an "indoor recreation establishment" as such terms are defined in chapter 3 of this Code. 
(2)  At the end of the establishment's third and fourth quarters after obtaining a billiard license pursuant to the provisions of this article, each such establishment having a license shall provide the city with an audited statement of gross revenues designating what percentage of revenues were derived from the sale of alcoholic beverages, what percentage of revenues were derived from the sale of prepared food, and what percentage of revenues were derived from the sale of products and services other than alcoholic beverages and prepared meals or food. This audited statement shall be provided to the city by the fifteenth day of the month following the end of the quarter. Should the audited statement provided to the city following the fourth quarter of operation demonstrate that in the case of licensees licensed as an "indoor recreation establishment" the establishment has failed to derive at least seventy (70) percent of its revenue from the sale of products or services other than alcoholic beverages for that quarter or in the case of licensees licensed as a "restaurant, the establishment has failed to derive at least fifty (50) percent of its revenue from the sale of prepared meals or food for that quarter, this fact shall be grounds for revocation or nonrenewal of the billiard license issued pursuant to this article. Thereafter all establishments issued a billiard license under the provisions of this article shall provide with its application for renewal of its billiard license an audited statement for the prior four (4) quarters of operation. Failure of that audited statement to demonstrate that the requirements of subsection (d)(1) have been satisfied by the establishment during the prior four (4) quarters shall be grounds for nonrenewal of the billiard license. 
(e)  This article in no way relieves any person from complying with the licensing requirements and other regulations contained in the alcoholic beverage ordinance nor should this article be read to amend such ordinance. 
(Ord. of 6-18-90(2),  8; Ord. of 1-14-91; Ord. of 11-10-97; Ord. of 7-13-98,  1, 2) 
Sec. 7-54. - Inspection of licensed establishments. 
    Sworn officers of the police department shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this article during the hours in which the premises are open for business. Such inspection shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this article. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city official to conduct inspections authorized by other ordinances in effect within the city. 
(Ord. of 6-18-90(2),  9) 
Sec. 7-55. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article may, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-6. 
(Ord. of 6-18-90(2),  13) 
Secs. 7-56-7-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 7-66. - Required; application. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a billiard room without a valid license issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  All persons desiring to operate a billiard room shall make application for a business license on a form prescribed by the city clerk. 
(c)  The application shall include the name and address of the owner-applicant; the address of the licensed establishment; if the owner-applicant is a corporation, the names of the officers; the name and address of the agent for service of process; the name of the manager; and the name of all shareholders holding more than ten (10) percent of any class of corporate stock outstanding, or other entity having a financial interest in each entity which is to own or operate the licensed establishment. If the manager changes, the owner-applicant must furnish the clerk and the police department with the name and address of the new manager and other information as may be requested within ten (10) days of such change. 
(d)  All applicants shall furnish data, information and records as required by the clerk in order to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. Failure to furnish data shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. 
(e)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths in the state. 
(f)  In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this article, the applicant may not reapply for a license for at least one (1) year from the date of denial. 
(g)  All licenses herein shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state. 
(h)  All licenses issued hereunder shall have printed on the front the words clearly "THIS LICENSE IS A MERE PRIVILEGE SUBJECT TO BEING REVOKED AND CANCELLED, AND IS SUBJECT TO FUTURE ORDINANCES WHICH MAY BE ENACTED." 
(Ord. of 6-18-90(2),  3) 
Sec. 7-67. - Qualifications. 
(a)  Where the owner-applicant is a partnership or corporation, the provisions of this section shall apply to all its partners, officers, managers and majority stockholders (those holding ten (10) percent or more of the outstanding stock issued by such corporation). In the case of a corporation, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and to the majority stockholder, if an individual. Where the majority stockholder is not an individual, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and its agent registered under the provisions of this section. In the case of a partnership, the license will be issued to and in the name of one (1) of the partners. 
(b)  Where the owner-applicant is a partnership or corporation, the provisions of this section shall apply to all its partners, officers, managers and majority stockholders (those holding ten (10) percent or more of the outstanding stock issued by such corporation). In the case of a corporation, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and to the majority stockholder, if an individual. Where the majority stockholder is not an individual, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and its agent registered under the provisions of this section. In the case of a partnership, the license will be issued to and in the name of one of the partners. 
(c)  No license shall be granted to any person who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within ten (10) years prior to the filing of the application for such license. 
(d)  No license shall be granted to any person convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony within ten (10) years prior to the filing of application for such license. 
(e)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this article to be served upon licensee or owner may be served. This person shall be a resident of the county. The licensee shall file the name of such individual along with the written consent of such individual to serve as the registered agent, with the clerk in such form as may be prescribed by the clerk. 
(f)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this article to be served upon licensee or owner may be served. This person shall be a resident of the county. The licensee shall file the name of such individual along with the written consent of such individual to serve as the registered agent, with the clerk in such form as he may prescribe. 
(Ord. of 6-18-90(2),  4; Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-68. - Display. 
    The license required by the terms of this article shall be displayed at all times in an open and conspicuous place in the location for which it was issued. 
(Ord. of 6-18-90(2),  5) 
Sec. 7-69. - Expiration, renewal, transfer. 
(a)  All licenses granted under the provisions of this article shall expire on January 30 th of each year. 
(b)  Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file application, with all applicable fees, with the clerk on the form provided for renewal of the license. Application for renewal must be filed before January 1 st of each year. After December 31 st , applications for renewal licenses shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. No renewal license may be granted after January 30 th . 
(c)  Applications for licenses made after October 1 st shall include a prorated license fee at the rate of one-half (1/2) the regular fee. License fees are not refundable. 
(d)  No license shall be transferred without prior approval of the clerk. 
(Ord. of 6-18-90(2),  6; Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Sec. 7-70. - Fee. 
    Before a regulatory permit required by this ordinance shall be granted, the applicant shall comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the mayor and council and shall pay an annual regulatory fee in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per location. 
(Ord. of 6-18-90(2),  7; Ord. of 8-14-95,  1) 
Sec. 7-71. - Suspension or revocation. 
    A license required by this article may be suspended or revoked by the clerk for failure of a licensee to comply with the provisions of this article or where the licensee furnishes fraudulent or false information in the license application. 
(Ord. of 6-18-90(2),  10) 
Sec. 7-72. - Appeals. 
(a)  No license required by this article shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing. 
(b)  The clerk shall provide written notice to the owner-applicant and licensee of his decision to deny, suspend or revoke the license granted pursuant to this article. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the owner-applicant and licensee of the right to appeal under the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The owner-applicant may appeal the decision of the city clerk to deny, suspend, or revoke the license granted pursuant to this section by making such showing as he may deem proper at a hearing before the city manager. After such hearing, the city manager may accept the recommendation to suspend or revoke such license, if, in their discretion, it is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(d)  For the purpose of this article, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served, or when served by mail, within three (3) days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
(Ord. of 6-18-90(2),  11, 12; Ord. of 8-8-11) 
Secs. 7-73-7-94. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT MACHINES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of October 14, 2013, repealed the former Art. IV,  7-95-7-107, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to coin-operated amusement machines and derived from ordinances of June 8, 1981; October 9, 1989; August 14, 1995; June 24, 1996; June 9, 1997; May 12, 2003 and August 8, 2011. 

Sec. 7-95. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Duluth, Georgia Bona Fide Coin Operated Amusement Machine Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 10-14-13,  1) 
Sec. 7-96. - Gambling devices prohibited. 
    Gambling devices, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A.  16-12-20(2) are prohibited in the city, and the ownership, use, or transport thereof shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to state law, except as exempted pursuant to O.C.G.A.  16-12-35(a) through (k). 
(Ord. of 10-14-13,  1) 
Sec. 7-97. - Gambling places prohibited. 
    Gambling places, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A.  16-12-20(3) are prohibited in the city, and the operation thereof shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. of 10-14-13,  1) 
Sec. 7-98. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Amusement game room means any location as provided in O.C.G.A.  16-12-35(b), (c) or (d) where one or more bona fide coin operated amusement machines are operated that permit non-cash redemption as provided in O.C.G.A.  16-12-35(d)(1)(B), (C), or a combination thereof. 
    Bona fide coin operated amusement machine means the same as this term is defined in O.C.G.A.  50-27-70(b)(2)(A) and (B) and any applicable regulations of the State of Georgia. Examples of bona fide coin operated amusement machines include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Pinball machines; 
(2)  Console machines; 
(3)  Video games; 
(4)  Crane machines; 
(5)  Claw machines; 
(6)  Pusher machines; 
(7)  Bowling machines; 
(8)  Novelty arcade games; 
(9)  Foosball or table soccer machines; 
(10)  Miniature racetrack, football or golf machines; 
(11)  Target or shooting gallery machines; 
(12)  Basketball machines; 
(13)  Shuffleboard machines; 
(14)  Kiddie ride games; 
(15)  Skee-Ball&reg; machines; 
(16)  Air hockey machines; 
(17)  Roll down machines; 
(18)  Trivia machines; 
(19)  Laser games; 
(20)  Simulator games; 
(21)  Virtual reality machines; 
(22)  Maze games; 
(23)  Racing games; 
(24)  Coin operated pool table or coin operated billiard table as defined in O.C.G.A.  43-8-1(3); and 
(25)  Any other similar amusement machine which can be legally operated in Georgia. 
    The term "coin operated amusement machine" does not include the following: 
(1)  Coin operated washing machines or dryers; 
(2)  Vending machines which for payment of money dispense products or services; 
(3)  Gas and electric meters; 
(4)  Pay telephones; 
(5)  Pay toilets; 
(6)  Cigarette vending machines; 
(7)  Coin operated vending machines; 
(8)  Coin operated scales; 
(9)  Coin operated gumball machines; 
(10)  Coin operated television sets which provide cable or network programming; 
(11)  Coin operated massage beds; and 
(12)  Machines which are not legally permitted to be operated in Georgia. 
    Location means a business within the city that has complied with the provisions of the ordinances of the city relating to occupation taxes and business licenses and the entire office or area of the business in any one location owned or leased by the same proprietor or proprietors where the lessor or lessors allow the space to be used for business purposes. 
    Location owner or location operator means an owner or operator of a business where one (1) or more bona fide coin operated amusement machines are available for commercial use and play by the public, or shall have the same definition as found in the O.C.G.A.  50-27-70, should that definition differ. 
(Ord. of 10-14-13,  1) 
Sec. 7-99. - License required. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of an amusement game room, as the term is herein defined, without first having obtained an amusement game room license, without first having paid the applicable occupation tax and obtained an occupational tax certificate required under this article. A separate amusement game room license must be obtained for each location in the jurisdiction in which bona fide coin operated amusement machines are operated. 
(Ord. of 10-14-13,  1) 
Sec. 7-100. - Issuance of license. 
    Application for a license for operating an amusement game room within the corporate limits of the city shall be made to the city clerk upon a form to be supplied by the city clerk for this purpose. The license application shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and age of the applicant and the date of the application; 
(2)  Address or place where the bona fide coin operated amusement machine or machines are to be offered to the public for play and the other business or businesses operated at that place or places; 
(3)  Name and address of the owner of the machine or machines and a copy of the owner's master license; 
(4)  Name and address of any other business owned or operated by applicant within the corporate limits of the city; and 
(5)  List of any other licenses or permits from the city held by the applicant. 
Upon issuing a license for an amusement game room, the city official or employee shall provide the licensee with a copy of this article. The city shall not require a fee for an amusement game room license or registration. A license issued in accordance with this article shall be valid until December 31st of the year in which the license was issued. The owner or operator of an amusement game room shall be required to pay occupation taxes in accordance with chapter 7 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-14-13,  1) 
Sec. 7-101. - Occupation tax required. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of amusement game room, as the term is herein defined, without first having completed the occupation tax certificate application form, paid the required occupational tax and obtained an occupational tax certificate. 
(Ord. of 10-14-13,  1) 
Sec. 7-102. - Minimum distance requirements. 
(a)  Every amusement game room in the city shall comply with the proximity provision for business licensed to sell alcohol set out in O.C.G.A.  3-3-21. At a public meeting, the mayor and council may waive the application of this provision to an individual location if no alcohol is served or sold at such location. 
(b)  Every amusement game room in the city shall comply with the proximity provision for businesses licensed to sell alcohol as set out in chapter 3 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. At a public meeting, the mayor and council may waive the applicability of this provision to an individual location if no alcohol is served at such location. 
(Ord. of 10-14-13,  1) 
Sec. 7-103. - Number of bona fide coin operated amusement machines at a location. 
(Pursuant to O.C.G.A.  50-27-86(1) a local government may prohibit the offering of more than six class B machines by local ordinance. State law, under O.C.G.A.  50-27-84(b)(2) prohibits an operator from having more than nine machines. The local government may change the below restriction from nine to no less than six by local ordinance should it choose to do so.) 
    No amusement game room in the city shall offer to the public more than nine (9) class B bona fide coin operated amusement machines offering non-cash redemption in accordance with O.C.G.A.  16-12-35(c) and (d)(1)(2), or both at the same location. At a public meeting, the mayor and council may, after consideration of the nature and character of the business, waive the applicability of this provision to an individual location. 
(Ord. of 10-14-13,  1) 
Sec. 7-104. - Gross receipts from bona fide coin operated amusement machines and from business. 
(a)  Every amusement game room shall keep records available for inspection by city officials that set out separately annual gross receipts for the class B amusement games and the other products and services sold at the location. 
(b)  Any location owner or location operator subject to O.C.G.A.  50-27-84(b)(1) is hereby required to provide a monthly report to the city clerk. Such report shall indicate the monthly gross retail receipts for each business location located within the jurisdiction of the city and shall be due by the twentieth [20 th ] day of each month, subsequent to the month in which the sales have taken place. In addition, each owner or operator must allow the local government an annual audit of the reports from the owner or operator to the Lottery Corporation. 
(c)  No location owner or location operator may derive more than fifty (50) percent of such location owner's or location operator's monthly gross retail receipts for this business location in which the class B machines are situated from such class B machines and any location owner or location operator found in violation of such provision may be fined and may have any city issued license suspended or revoked as allowed under this article. Compliance with this section requires both the availability of records for inspection and compliance with the fifty (50) percent of gross retail receipts requirement. Any violations of this provision shall be reported to the Georgia Lottery Corporation. 
(Ord. of 10-14-13,  1) 
Sec. 7-105. - Notice requirements. 
(a)  Every amusement game room shall post a conspicuous sign with the following or substantially similar language: 
"GEORGIA LAW PROHIBITS GIVING OR RECEIPT OF ANY MONEY FOR WINNING A GAME OR GAMES ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR FREE REPLAYS WON ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY WON ON ANY AMUSEMENT MACHINE; OR AWARDING ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY OF A VALUE EXCEEDING $5.00 FOR A SINGLE PLAY OF AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE." 
(b)  Every amusement game room shall post the license issued by the city conspicuously and permanently. 
(c)  The owner or proprietor of each amusement game room shall inform every employee of the acts and omissions prohibited by O.C.G.A.  16-12-35 and by this article, and of the penalties for violation of O.C.G.A.  16-12-35 and this article. 
(Ord. of 10-14-13,  1) 
Sec. 7-106. - Compliance with O.C.G.A. provisions relating to master licenses, location licenses, and stickers for individual machines. 
    Bona fide coin operated amusement machines may be used in an amusement game room within the city only if the machines are owned by a person who holds a valid master license in accordance with O.C.G.A.  50-27-71, and each machine offered to the public for play has a valid permit sticker in accordance with O.C.G.A.  50-27-78. In addition, the business owner where the machines are available for play by the public must pay a location license fee in order to obtain a valid location license in accordance with O.C.G.A.  50-27-71(a.1) and (b). The city official in charge of issuing business licenses shall notify the state commissioner of revenue of any observed violation of O.C.G.A.  50-27-71 or  50-27-78. 
(Ord. of 10-14-13,  1) 
Sec. 7-107. - License suspension and revocation. 
(a)  The city may suspend or revoke the city issued license of any location owner or location operator to manufacture, distribute, or sell alcoholic beverages as a penalty for the conviction of the business owner or business operator of a violation of the O.C.G.A.  16-12-35(e), (f), or (g). 
(b)  The city may suspend or revoke the license of any location owner or location operator of any other license granted by the municipality as a penalty for the conviction of the business owner or business operator of a violation of the O.C.G.A.  16-12-35(e), (f), or (g). 
(c)  The suspension or revocation of licenses under this Code section shall be in accordance with the following guidelines of due process: 
(1)  No license which has been issued or which may be issued pursuant to this article shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause and after providing the licensee with an opportunity for a hearing and upon prior three-day written notice to the holder of the license of the time, place and purpose of the hearing and a statement of the charges upon which the hearing shall be held. 
(2)  The term "due cause" for the purposes of this section shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  Conviction of, or the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere by, the licensee or any of his employees or any person holding an interest in the license for any felony, any law, administrative regulation or ordinance involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or narcotics, or tax laws. 
b.  Conviction of, or the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere by, the licensee or any of his employees or any person holding an interest in the license for any sex offense when the licensed business is for on-premises consumption. 
c.  Suspension or revocation of any state license required as a condition for the possession, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages. 
d.  Material falsification of any fact given in an application for a license issued under this chapter or bearing upon the licensee's qualification therefor. Any act which may be construed as a subterfuge in an effort to circumvent any of the qualifications for a license under this chapter shall be deemed a violation of the requirement attempted to be circumvented. 
e.  Failure to meet or maintain any standard prescribed by this article as a condition or qualification for holding a license. 
f.  Any other factor known to or discovered by the city whereby it is objectively shown the licensee, any of the licensee's employees or any person holding an interest in a license, has engaged in conduct at or involving the licensed business or has permitted conduct on the licensed premises that constitutes a violation of federal or state law, local ordinance or administrative regulations involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or narcotics for all alcohol licensed businesses and including any sex offense under state law or local ordinances with respect to businesses licensed for on-premises consumption. With respect to this section, it shall be rebuttably presumed that the violative act was done with the knowledge or consent of the licensee; provided, however, that such presumption may be rebutted only by evidence which precludes every other reasonable hypothesis save that such licensee did not know, assist or aid in such occurrence, or in the exercise of full diligence that such licensee could not have discovered or prevented such activity. 
(3)  Notice of suspension or revocation and the opportunity for a hearing shall be served on the person named as licensee in the application. Notice shall be in writing. The notice may be served personally or by first class mail. If by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the licensee at its address as provided by the licensee to the municipality. The burden shall be on the licensee to provide notice, in writing, of any change of address for service of notices and process. In the case of service by mail of any notice required by this chapter, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Postal Service. 
(4)  The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer appointed by the mayor of the city council. The hearing officer shall be an attorney licensed to practice in the state who is disinterested in the proceeding. 
(5)  Hearings shall be only as formal as necessary to preserve order and shall be compatible with the principles of justice. The city attorney shall present the city's case and bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that due cause exists to suspend or revoke the license. At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to represent itself or be represented by counsel, may cross examine all witnesses offered by the city, and may call witnesses and present evidence in its own behalf. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply to hearings under this section, although the hearing officer shall have the right to exclude evidence which carries no indicia of reliability. All testimony shall be offered under oath or affirmation. 
(6)  The hearing officer shall make his final determination within ten (10) business days of the completion of the hearing. The decision shall be placed in writing and contain the hearing officer's findings of fact, conclusions of law, and decision as to sanction, if any. Such sanction may include one (1) or more of the following: revocation of the license, suspension of the license for no more than twelve (12) months, imposition of a probationary period not to exceed twelve (12) months, and/or a civil monetary penalty not to exceed the amount allowed under the city charter. Progressive sanctions, depending on the severity of the violation, are encouraged but not required. Where the remaining term of the license is less than twelve (12) months, imposition of suspension or probation for a period in excess of the term of the existing license shall be applied to any renewal license. A subsequent violation within a probationary period shall be cause for revocation and/or denial of license renewal. A total of three (3) separate and unrelated violations within twenty-four (24) months, whether or not within a probationary period, shall be grounds for permanent revocation. 
(7)  The hearing officer's decision shall be personally served or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested to the licensee and his attorney, with a copy to the city attorney, within ten (10) business days of the close of the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall constitute final action by the city, subject to review upon petition for certiorari to the superior court. 
(8)  Upon receipt of notice of adverse action against the licensee under this section, the licensee may waive its right to a hearing and stipulate to a sanction, as recommended by the city manager, in consultation with the chief of police. Any stipulation entered under this subsection shall be in writing, signed by the licensee, and non-appealable. 
(Ord. of 10-14-13,  1) 
Sec. 7-108. - Criminal penalties for violations by owners or operators of amusement game rooms. 
(a)  Penalties for violation of the provisions of this article by the owner or operator of an amusement game room, after conviction in the municipal court of the city, or other court of competent jurisdiction are as follows: 
(1)  First offense: Fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. 
(2)  Second offense: Fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation, suspension of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location for not more than three (3) months, or both. 
(3)  Third offense: Fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation, suspension or permanent revocation of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location, or suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the city for not more than six (6) months, or any combination of these penalties. 
(b)  The fines listed in the penalties for violation of this article may be imposed by the judge of the municipal court of the city, or the judge of any other court of competent jurisdiction. Suspension or revocation of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location where the violation occurred, and suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the city may be imposed by the mayor and council after the opportunity for a public hearing as described in section 7-107 of this article. 
(c)  Offering one (1) or more bona fide coin operated amusement machine games in violation of an order suspending or revoking the license for the offering of any amusement game at the location is punishable, after conviction in the municipal court of the city, by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 10-14-13,  1) 
Sec. 7-109. - Penalties for violations by those who play bona fide coin operated machines in violation of law or ordinance. 
    The municipal court of the city, or any other court of competent jurisdiction is authorized to impose the following penalties on any person convicted of receiving money as a reward for the successful play or winning of any bona fide coin operated amusement machine from any person owning, possessing, controlling or overseeing such bona fide coin operated amusement machine or any person employed by or acting on behalf of a person owning, possessing, controlling or overseeing a bona fide coin operated amusement machine. 
(1)  First offense: Fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation. 
(2)  Second and subsequent offense: Fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. 
(Ord. of 10-14-13,  1) 
Sec. 7-110. - Operating regulations. 
    All businesses operating as an amusement game room hereunder shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Devices to be kept in plain view; gambling devices prohibited. All bona fide coin operated amusement machines shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of and open and accessible to any person(s) who may frequent or be in any place of business where such machines are kept or used. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize, permit or license any gambling device of any nature whatsoever. 
(2)  Inspection. The chief of police may inspect or cause the inspection of any location in which any such bona fide coin operated amusement machine(s) are operated or set up for operating, and may inspect, investigate and test such machines as needed. 
(3)  Attendant required. It shall be unlawful for any location owner or location operator to open the location to the public unless an attendant is present. Said attendant shall be of sufficient mental and physical capacity so as to be able to provide aid to patrons if needed or desired. Said attendant shall not be less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(4)  Loitering. As used in this section, "loitering" shall mean remaining idle in essentially one (1) location and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly, and shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation licensed to operate an amusement game room to permit loitering on or in the immediate vicinity of any machine or business premises regulated hereunder in such a manner as to: 
a.  Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace; 
b.  Create or cause to be created any disturbance of the peace, as defined by law; 
c.  Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; 
d.  Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in a public place. 
e.  Shirt and shoes required. All location owners and location operators shall require shirts and shoes to be worn at all times by any person frequenting their location. 
(Ord. of 10-14-13,  1) 
Sec. 7-111. - Licenses and permits nontransferable. 
(a)  Licenses required in this article are nontransferable. All businesses that have bona fide coin operated amusement machines on the premises shall display, in plain view, the current amusement game room license and occupational tax certificate issued by the city. 
(b)  The issued license shall not be transferred to another owner at the same site within the city. A new owner or proprietor must first obtain a new license if they are going to operate in the same or different location in the city. 
(Ord. of 10-14-13,  1) 
Sec. 7-112. - Enforcing officer. 
    The chief of police and city clerk or their designees are hereby designated as the enforcement officers and shall work together to execute all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-14-13,  1) 
Secs. 7-113-7-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Taxation of financial institutions, O.C.G.A.  48-6-90 et seq. 

Sec. 7-131. - Business license tax. 
    Pursuant to O.C.G.A.  48-6-93, there is hereby levied annually upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of twenty-five hundredths (.25) percent of the gross receipts of such institutions. Gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A.  48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this section shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per year. 
(Ord. of 10-10-83,  1) 
Sec. 7-132. - Filing of return. 
    Each depository financial institution in the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Such returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A.  48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in such return. 
(Ord. of 10-10-83,  2) 
Sec. 7-133. - Due date. 
    The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April first of each year. 
(Ord. of 10-10-83,  2) 
Secs. 7-134-7-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - INSURERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of October 22, 2001, amended the Code by repealing former art. VI,  7-156-7-162, and adding a new art. VI,  7-156-7-161, to read as herein set out. Former art. VI pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from ordinances of October 11, 1983; October 12, 1992; and December 11, 1995. 
State Law reference- Insurance, O.C.G.A. Title 33. 

Sec. 7-156. - Insurers license fees. 
    There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 7-157, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company that is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A.  33-3-5. 
(Ord. of 10-22-01; Ord. of 5-9-11) 
Sec. 7-157. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
    For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of thirty five dollars ($35.00) per location for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. of 10-22-01; Ord. of 5-9-11) 
Sec. 7-158. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
    There is hereby levied for the year 2002 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to one (1) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A.  33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A.  33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 7-156 of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-22-01) 
Sec. 7-159. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. 
    There is hereby levied for the year 2002 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in subsection 1 of O.C.G.A.  33-3-5, doing business within the state in an amount equal to two and one-half (2.5) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A.  33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A.  33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 7-156 of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-22-01) 
Sec. 7-160. - Due date for license fees. 
    License fees imposed in sections 7-156 and 7-157 of this article shall be due and payable on the first day of 2002 and on the first date of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. of 10-22-01) 
Sec. 7-161. - Administrative provisions. 
(a)  The city clerk is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of this article to the insurance commissioner of the state within forty-five (45) days of its enactment. 
(b)  This article shall become effective January 1, 2002. 
(c)  In the event any portion of this article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, it is the intention of the city council of the city, that such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this article which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the invalid or unconstitutional section, sentence, clause or phrase were not originally a part of the ordinance. 
(Ord. of 10-22-01) 
Secs. 7-162-7-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of January 11, 2016 ,  1, repealed article VII,  7-186-7-190, 7-201-7-209 and 7-221-7-225, which pertained to limousine service and derived from an ordinance of April 13, 1987; an ordinance of February 25, 1991; an ordinance of August 14, 1995 and an ordinance of February 12, 1996. 

Secs. 7-186-7-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MASSAGE THERAPY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of May 14, 2012, amended the Code by repealing former Art. VIII,  7-246-7-261, and adding a new Art. VIII. Former Art. VIII pertained to masseurs, and derived from an ordinance of March 14, 2011. 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate massage parlors,  1.13(35). 

Sec. 7-246. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to provide for local licensing and regulation of massage therapy businesses, pursuant to the authority to regulate for the general health, safety and welfare as provided in the Duluth Charter section 1.13(12) and O.C.G.A.  48-13-9(b)(17), and O.C.G.A.  43-24A-1 et seq. as amended. 
(b)  A license issued pursuant to this division is a privilege, not a right. 
(Ord. of 5-14-12) 
Sec. 7-247. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
    Act means the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act, enacted by and defined in O.C.G.A.  43-24A-1 et seq. as amended. 
    Board means the Georgia Board of Massage Therapy, enacted by the provisions of O.C.G.A.  43-24A-4. 
    For hire means a reasonable expectation that the person to whom the massage is provided, or some third person on his or her behalf, will pay money, give other consideration, or provide any gratuity therefore. 
    Licensed massage therapist means a person who holds a valid, current, unrevoked, and unsuspended state license in the practice of massage therapy issued by the board pursuant to the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act. 
    Massage therapy means the application of a system of structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding to the soft tissue of the body in which the primary intent is to enhance or restore health and well-being. The term includes complementary methods, including without limitation the external application of water, superficial heat, superficial cold, lubricants, salt scrubs, or other topical preparations and the use of commercially available electromechanical devices which do not require the use of transcutaneous electrodes and which mimic or enhance the actions possible by the hands; the term also includes determining whether massage therapy is appropriate or contraindicated, or whether referral to another health care provider is appropriate. Massage therapy shall not include the use of ultrasound, fluidotherapy, laser, and other methods of deep thermal modalities. Ga. Code Ann.  43-24A-3 (West). 
    Massage therapy business means a business with a location in the city at which any person engages in or offers massage therapy, regardless of the name of the business or the words used to describe the business through signage or advertisement or in filings with the secretary of state. Massage therapy businesses are subject to regulation by a local government, pursuant to O.C.G.A.  48-13-9(b)(17) and O.C.G.A.  43-24A-22(a) as amended. 
    Massage therapist, masseuse, masseur, massage practitioner, or persons practicing massage means a person who performs or engages in the practice of massage. 
    Sexual or genital area means the genitals, pubic area, anus, perineum of any person, or the vulva or breast of a female. 
    State license means a license to practice massage therapy issued by the board, pursuant to the Act. 
(Ord. of 5-14-12) 
Sec. 7-248. - Requirements and application. 
(a)  Requirements. 
(1)  State license. No person other than a licensed massage therapist shall perform or offer to perform massage in a massage therapy business within the city. 
(2)  No license shall be issued to any massage therapy business within the city under this division unless every person who performs or offers to perform massage on its premises is a licensed massage therapist, and it shall be unlawful to operate as a massage therapy business unless all such persons are and remain licensed massage therapists. The city license of a massage therapy business that fails to meet this requirement is subject to revocation. 
(3)  City license. No person shall operate a massage therapy business without a valid, current, unrevoked, and unsuspended license from the city, pursuant to this division. 
(4)  Conviction of a crime. No license under this section shall be issued or renewed to any person who himself or who has a co-owner, partner or manager who has been convicted or shall have entered a plea of nolo contendere for any felony within ten (10) years, or two (2) misdemeanors within five (5) years, other than traffic violations, immediately prior to the filing of the application. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilty or plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond in part or in whole when charged with a crime. Licenses granted to persons who fail to meet this requirement at any time shall be subject to revocation. 
(5)  Age of licensee; education. No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be issued a license to operate a massage therapy business. 
(6)  Personal residency; agent. All applicants for licenses under this chapter and all actual owners of therapy businesses for which licenses are sought shall be bona fide residents of the city or county at the time of the filing of the applications and shall remain bona fide residents of the city or county during all times that the licenses and renewals thereof are in effect, or shall name one (1) or more residents in the city or county as the agent or representative of the licensee, who shall be responsible for any matter relating to such license and who, at all such times, shall be a bona fide resident of the city or county and shall be granted the express authority to accept service of process on behalf of the business. 
(7)  Corporate residency. All applications for licenses under this chapter by a corporation or other business entity shall name in the application one (1) or more residents in the city or county as the agent and representative of the corporation to receive all communications, notices, services of process, or other papers or documents on behalf of the corporation in connection with any matter arising out of or connected with the issuance, holding, suspension, revocation, or other action with respect to any license issued pursuant to this division. The application shall give the mailing address of the person, and the mailing to any such person at such address of any notice required to be given under this chapter or any other law shall be sufficient notice to the corporation. If any such person shall cease to be a resident of the city or county, another person shall immediately be appointed, in writing, in his place, and written notice shall be given the city clerk, stating the name and address of the new agent. 
(8)  Annual regulatory license fee and occupational tax certificate required. An annual regulatory license fee and occupational tax certificate shall be required for each person, firm, corporation or other entity operating a massage establishment. 
Effective June 1, 2012 and continuing, the annual regulatory license fee shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per massage therapy business and in addition the occupational tax shall be paid annually and calculated on annual gross receipts of the business. 
(b)  Application for license. 
(1)  To operate a massage therapy business within the boundaries of the city, the applicant must first make application to the city clerk on a form provided by the city clerk or her designee, and submit to a criminal background check of the applicant along with any co-owners, partners and non-massage therapists who will act as a manager at the business. The applicant after having fully and truthfully completed such form and paying the prescribed fees and having received a license shall maintain and operate such business pursuant to the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state. 
(2)  Upon applying for a license with the city clerk, each applicant shall provide a true and correct copy or original of the state license for each and every massage practitioner, performing or anticipated to perform massage at its location, for inspection and copying. The applicant shall also supply a set of fingerprints taken by the Duluth Police Department for each licensed massage therapist employed by the applicant and two (2) forms of photo identification. Failure of any massage therapy business to provide state licenses or fingerprints of its employees shall automatically result in the denial of the issuance of a city license to the applicant. 
(3)  Subsequent to the city license being issued, the licensee shall, in person, furnish to the city clerk a true and correct copy or original of the state license, fingerprints taken by the Duluth Police Department and two (2) forms of photo identification for each new massage practitioner at the licensee's massage therapy business prior to such person's commencing to perform or offering to perform massage at such massage therapy business. When any massage practitioner discontinues performing massage at a massage therapy business, the licensee shall make the departure known in writing to the city clerk within thirty (30) days of such departure. 
(4)  Each applicant for a license shall make his or her affidavit before the city clerk, on a form provided by the clerk, upon oath, swearing or affirming that all persons practicing massage on the premises of his or her massage therapy business are licensed massage therapists and that all requirements of this division for a license have been met. 
(5)  Each application under this section shall include but shall not be limited to the following information: 
a.  A list of services to be provided. 
b.  The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers where the business is to be conducted. 
c.  The name and residence of each applicant and any agent as required by this chapter. 
d.  Proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
e.  Copy of two (2) forms of photo identification for each applicant such as driver's license or official identification card. 
f.  The name and a copy of the state license of each massage therapist that will be employed by the applicant. 
g.  Copy of two (2) forms of photo identification for each massage therapist that will be employed by the applicant. 
h.  A list of any and all criminal convictions of the applicant other than misdemeanor traffic violations, including the dates of conviction, description of the offense and the court where the conviction was received. 
i.  Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant(s) for the permit. 
j.  Any other state required affidavits or forms, including local benefit receipt affidavits. 
k.  Applicants must be at least eighteen (18) years of age, employ one (1) (which may include him/herself) or more massage therapists licensed in accordance with subsection (a) above, and if a corporation, is an officer of the corporation which is organized and authorized to do business pursuant to the laws of the state. The applicant to operate a massage establishment must be the owner of the premises wherein the business will be conducted or the holder of a lease thereon for the period to be covered by the certificate. 
l.  A set of fingerprints taken by the Duluth Police Department for each massage therapist employed by the applicant. 
m.  A set of fingerprints taken by the Duluth Police Department for each owner, partner, and manager of each massage business. 
(c)  State and national criminal backgrounding of persons engaged in massage therapy. 
(1)  Authority. This subsection is enacted pursuant to O.C.G.A.  35-3-35(a)(1.2), the Georgia Umbrella Statute entitled "Dissemination of information to public agencies, political subdivisions, authorities, and instrumentalities." 
(2)  Fingerprinting required. An individual seeking to receive a massage establishment license shall be fingerprinted as a condition of submitting an application for said license. By filing such application, the applicant consents to the city obtaining their criminal history record information (CHRI) from the Georgia Crime Information Center (GCIC) and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). 
(3)  Access authorized; usage regulations. The city is hereby authorized to access national criminal history record information pursuant to O.C.G.A.  35-3-35(a)(1.2). 
a.  Information obtained and handled for any purposes pursuant to this subsection shall comply with all Georgia laws and the Federal Privacy Act. 
b.  No information given as part of the request for a criminal history and no record obtained pursuant to this section may be entered on any database. 
c.  No information given or obtained pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(4)  Administration; fees; procedures. 
a.  Applicant shall provide his/her fingerprints, which may be taken by the City of Duluth police department or may be taken by the Gwinnett County sheriff's office if the city police department is unable to do so. 
b.  The applicant shall bear the cost of: 
1.  Fingerprinting; 
2.  The charge by the GBI and the FBI for the CHRI history at their latest rate, paid to the city by certified or cashier's check or money order; and 
3.  An administrative fee allowed by statute to be charged by the city, which shall be the maximum allowed by statute, which is currently twenty dollars ($20.00), which fee shall include fingerprinting when carried out by the Duluth police department. 
c.  Upon receipt of the fingerprints and the appropriate fees, the city will transmit said fingerprints and appropriate fees (unless a satisfactory billing arrangement has been entered into between the city police department and the GCIC and/or FBI) to the GCIC. As provided by law, the GCIC will compare the subject's fingerprints against its criminal file and submit the fingerprints to the FBI for a comparison with nation-wide records, unless submission to the FBI is automatic pursuant to the use of live-scan. The results of the FBI check will be returned based on its current procedure, presently being directly to the City of Duluth police department if submissions are made manually to the GCIC, or electronically from both the GBI and FBI where submissions are made electronically to the GCIC. 
d.  In compliance with Federal law 95-544, which provides for the rendering of a fitness determination, the city will decide whether the record applicant has been convicted of, or is under pending indictment for enumerated disqualifiers, as set forth within this chapter. 
e.  A person who has consented to the city for a criminal history based on fingerprinting record may request and receive a copy of the criminal history record report from the city at no additional charge. Should the person seek to amend or correct the record, he or she shall be responsible for contacting the GCIC as to Georgia records and/or the FBI concerning records from other jurisdictions maintained in its file. 
(Ord. of 5-14-12; Ord. of 4-11-16 ) 
Sec. 7-249. - Distance regulation. 
(a)  After June 1, 2012, there shall be no more than three (3) massage therapy businesses per ten thousand (10,000) persons living within the city limits based on the most current U.S. Census and calculated on a pro-rata basis. Further, there shall be a one hundred fifty-foot buffer from any massage therapy business to any residentially zoned property from the front door of the structure where massage business occurs to the nearest parcel boundary line of any residentially zoned property as measured by a straight line on the ground. 
(b)  No application for a massage therapy business license shall be granted unless the business is located in the C-2 zoning district. 
(c)  Upon application for a massage license and/or occupation tax placard, the applicant will provide to the city clerk a survey showing the distances to each residentially zoned property within a one hundred fifty-foot radius of the massage business. 
(d)  The city council recognizes that upon the adoption and effective date of this section, there appear to be active massage therapy businesses with physical facilities in existence in the city limits. Without waiving any illegality of such physically existing structures based on zoning or other laws and without de facto or specifically granting any "grandfathered," "vested," or "legal non-conforming" (as those terms are defined in state zoning law) status by virtue of adoption of this purely regulatory section, it is the intention of the city council to allow the continued operation of the existing massage therapy businesses provided the same otherwise comply with all other applicable laws and regulations of the city and state. 
(e)  Any licensed massage therapy businesses legally operating prior to June 1, 2012 shall be exempt from the distance and population cap regulations of this section until the licensee of such massage therapy business or a new licensee to whom the license is legally transferred as provided for by section 7-260 no longer holds a valid massage therapy license from the City of Duluth. 
(Ord. of 5-14-12) 
Sec. 7-250. - License renewal. 
    Licenses for massage therapy businesses may be renewed on a calendar year basis, provided that the licensee(s) continue to meet the requirements set out in this division and the requirements of the Act. 
(Ord. of 5-14-12) 
Sec. 7-251. - Registry. 
    A registry shall be kept of all persons practicing massage on the premises of such massage therapy business, which shall be available for inspection by an authorized agent of the city including but not limited to the city clerk, the authorized designee of the city clerk and city police officers. The registry required by this section shall be made available for inspection during normal hours of business and must provide the following information: 
(1)  Legal name and any other name(s) the massage practitioner has been or is known as or by; 
(2)  Current address including street and city; 
(3)  State or country of birth; date of birth; 
(4)  Number and expiration date of state license; 
(5)  Position with the massage therapy business or business entity; and 
(6)  Two copies of photo identification for the massage therapist. 
(Ord. of 5-14-12) 
Sec. 7-252. - Posting licenses and rates. 
(a)  Each massage therapy business shall post a legible copy of its license obtained pursuant to this division, along with copies of the state license of each massage therapist operating on the premises of such therapy business, in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep such licenses there at all times. 
(b)  Price rates for all massage therapy services shall be prominently posted in the reception area or other conspicuous location available for all prospective customers. No service shall be allowed or permitted that is not prominently posted with its fees in such location. 
(Ord. of 5-14-12) 
Sec. 7-253. - Record of patrons receiving services. 
    Each massage therapy business shall maintain a list of patrons who received massage therapy services at the business. The list shall include the patron's name, address, telephone number and time and date of service. Entries required under this section shall be maintained for one (1) year. 
(Ord. of 5-14-12) 
Sec. 7-254. - Escort services and adult entertainment prohibited. 
    No massage therapy business shall act as an escort or dating service or conduct any adult business as that term is defined in Duluth Code section 7-602. 
(Ord. of 5-14-12) 
Sec. 7-255. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
    No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, given, dispensed, provided, consumed, or caused or allowed to be sold, served, given, dispensed, provided, consumed by or to any person on the premises of a massage therapy business or kept thereon. Alcoholic beverages mean and include all types and kinds of alcohol as defined in chapter 3 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. of 5-14-12) 
Sec. 7-256. - Hours of operation; inspection; right of entry. 
(a)  Massage therapy businesses shall be open for business only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., inclusive. 
(b)  Any business holding a license issued under this division shall, at any time that the premises are open for business, be open to inspection by an officer of the police department or a duly authorized agent of the city clerk. It shall be unlawful for any person holding a massage facility business license or an employee of such licensee to refuse such inspection officer immediate access to the premises or to hinder such officer in any manner; such refusal or hindrance on the part of any license holder or employee shall be grounds for the immediate revocation or suspension of a massage facility license. 
(c)  As a condition of maintaining a massage business license issued under this division, at any time that the premises are open for business the massage therapy business will require massage therapists in their employment to submit to reasonable verification efforts by authorized city officials to confirm the identity of the massage therapist and to confirm state certification. Verification methods may include, but are not limited to a review of photo identification and/or fingerprinting of the massage therapist. 
(1)  The refusal of any massage therapist to submit to reasonable verification efforts as provided herein shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the massage therapy business license, but shall not result in any citation or adverse consequence for the massage therapist. 
(2)  The scope of any investigation performed under this subsection should be limited to verification of the identity and state certification of a massage therapist and should only take place in common areas open to the public during normal business hours. 
(Ord. of 5-14-12) 
Sec. 7-257. - Name; place of business; sale, transfer, or change of location. 
    No person or business entity granted a location license pursuant to this division shall operate the business under a name not specified in the license nor conduct business at any location or place not specified in the license. No license shall be transferable. Upon the sale or relocation of a massage therapy business, the license thereof shall be null and void. 
(Ord. of 5-14-12) 
Sec. 7-258. - Restrictions on minor's presence. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or persons operating a massage therapy business to permit persons under eighteen (18) years of age to enter any area or room where massage therapy is performed unless such minor is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or other adult with lawful custody or control of the minor or has a written prescription from a physician, surgeon, osteopath, or podiatrist who has a valid current license, issued pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. of 5-14-12) 
Sec. 7-259. - Operating requirements. 
(a)  Every portion of the premises of, and all equipment and supplies of, the massage therapy business shall be kept clean and shall be operated in a sanitary condition. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the massage therapy business, licensed under this article to ensure that any employees involved in any way with massage therapy services or who will be present during massage therapy services are dressed in clean, opaque attire that does not expose to view any sexual or genital areas and covers all areas from the top of the breast line to an area no higher than four (4) inches above the knee line. 
(c)  Laundry. All sheets and towels provided patrons in massage facilities shall be clean and laundered after each use and stored in a sanitary manner. 
(d)  Locked doors. It shall be prohibited for any massage facility business to lock main entrance doors to the business or any door(s) to rooms where massage therapy is being performed. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to place his or her hands upon, to touch with any part of his/her body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage a sexual or genital area, as defined by this ordinance, of any person or to act in a manner intended to arouse, appeal to or gratify the lust or passions or sexual desires. 
(f)  Conduct on premises. All persons holding a massage facility business license shall at all times be responsible for the conduct of business on the licensed premises, and for any act or conduct of any massage therapist utilizing the facility which constitutes a violation of the provisions in this chapter. Any violation of city, state or federal laws committed on the licensed premises by any such holder of a massage facility business license, holder of a massage therapist business license, or employee of the facility that affects the eligibility or suitability of such person to hold a license, may be grounds for suspension or revocation of the city license. 
(Ord. of 5-14-12) 
Sec. 7-260. - Restriction upon transfers. 
(a)  Licenses issued under this chapter shall not be transferable except as otherwise provided for in this section. 
(b)  In case of the death of any person owning a license, or any interest greater than ten (10) percent therein, the license may, with the approval of the city clerk and subject to the terms of this article, be transferred to the administrator, executor or personal representative of the deceased person, or the lawful heirs of the deceased person, if such heirs make application and meet all of the other qualifications contained herein. The license of such deceased person shall be held by the administrator, executor or personal representative of such deceased person only for the time necessary to complete execution of his estate and dispose of the license or his interest therein, but in no event to exceed eight (8) months. In the event of the bankruptcy or in the event that any applicant shall have a receiver appointed by any court of competent jurisdiction, such license shall be transferable to such receiver or trustee in bankruptcy for such period of time as may be granted by the city clerk for the proper liquidation of such assets and stock and goods. 
(c)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one (1) or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership and to assign his/her interest in such partnership to one (1) or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not, however, serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership, unless all provisions of this article are fully complied with, and then only upon the approval of the city clerk. This section shall not prohibit transfer of stock to persons who held more than ten (10) percent of any class of stock in the corporate owner at the time of issuance of the license. 
(d)  A licensee may take in partners or additional stockholders where it is determined that additional capital furnished is to be used exclusively for additional inventory or expanding the facilities of the business or for building new facilities and where it appears that the licensee himself will directly receive none of the additional capital investment. Under this section an additional partner or new stockholder must be approved by the city clerk. This subsection only applies to corporations when the new stockholder obtains ten (10) percent or more of the common stock or financial interest in the business entity. 
(e)  Should a transfer of the license be approved, there shall be no prorated return of any license fee and the new licensee shall meet all requirements for a new license to be issued hereunder, except payment of license fees. 
(f)  Except as provided above, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed establishment shall be cause for immediate suspension of any license issued hereunder pending a revocation hearing as provided for under this article. 
(Ord. of 5-14-12) 
Sec. 7-261. - Revocation, suspensions, violations, and penalties. 
    Upon notice the city clerk may for good cause, revoke or suspend or place on probation the license of any massage therapy business: 
(1)  That commits or allows any violations of the provisions of this division of the City Code; 
(2)  That allows any massage therapist, working on the massage therapy business's premises, to commit or offer to commit a sexual crime under O.C.G.A. title 16, chapter 6; 
(3)  That allows any person to perform or offer massage on the premises who is not a licensed massage therapist; 
(4)  Where the applicant for the massage therapy business's city license gave false information on the application, in his or her affidavit, or in the massage therapy business's registry as required in this division, or fails to update information related to the license to the city clerk as required by this division; or 
(5)  Where the licensee fails at any time to meet the requirements for licensure under this division. 
(6)  Penalties: In addition to revocation or suspension of the massage therapy license, any person who violates any provision of this article may, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-6 of the City of Duluth Code. Each day during which said offenses occur shall constitute a separate offense, as shall each separate act constitute a violation. 
(Ord. of 5-14-12) 
Sec. 7-262. - Notice of intent to deny, revoke or suspend license. 
(a)  Whenever, in the opinion of the clerk there is cause to deny an initial application or renewal, or to revoke or suspend the license of a massage therapy business, a written notice of intention to revoke or suspend shall be furnished to the holder thereof. Such written notice shall list the grounds upon which revocation or suspension is sought and shall set forth the licensee's appeal rights. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served or when served by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, within three (3) days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
(Ord. of 5-14-12) 
Sec. 7-263. - Appeal hearings. 
(a)  No license shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The city clerk or the clerk's designee shall provide written notice of the decision to deny, revoke or suspend a massage therapy business license. Any applicant or licensee adversely affected by the decision of the city clerk may have a review thereof by appeal to the mayor and council or their designated hearing officer. 
(c)  Appeals shall be made by written petition filed in the office of the city clerk within fifteen (15) days of the final decision or action of the city clerk. 
(d)  In order to defray administrative costs all appeals under this section must be accompanied by a filing fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00). The mayor and council or their designated hearing officer may at the request of the appellant refund the filing fee by a majority vote. 
(e)  A hearing shall be conducted before mayor and council or their designated hearing officer on each properly filed appeal within thirty (30) days of the filing of the appeal with the city clerk's office unless a continuance is agreed upon by the appellant and the city clerk. 
(1)  The appellant at such a hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross examine witnesses. All testimony shall be sworn. 
(f)  The city clerk shall bear the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence standard. The determination and findings by the city clerk shall not be set aside unless mayor and council or their designated hearing officer finds them to be: 
(1)  Contrary to law or ordinance; 
(2)  Unsupported by substantial evidence on the record as a whole; or 
(3)  Unreasonable. 
(g)  The written findings of mayor and council or their designated hearing officer shall be forwarded to the city clerk after conclusion of the hearing and it shall be the duty of the city clerk to notify the appellant of the decision. 
(h)  The findings and decision of the mayor and council or their designated hearing officer shall be final unless appealed within thirty (30) days of the date of said findings by certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. of 5-14-12) 
Sec. 7-264. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The requirements of this division shall have no application to or effect upon the following persons acting within the scope of their professions: 
(1)  Medical doctors and osteopaths, chiropractors, physical and occupational therapists, podiatrists, acupuncturists, registered or licensed practical nurses. 
(2)  Cosmetologists duly licensed to practice in this state pursuant to state law except that this exemption shall apply solely to massaging the head, neck, face, scalp and hair of the patron. 
(3)  Employees of duly licensed nursing and convalescent homes and hospitals. 
(4)  Athletic directors or trainers who are affiliated with an accredited educational institution or a bona fide sports team and whose work is limited to athletic team members. 
(b)  Massage therapists licensed by the state may perform massage therapy services in the home of a client, provided that the massage therapy business the therapist is associated with is properly licensed under this article and complies with section 7-248 (application) and section 7-250 (renewal). 
(1)  Massage therapy businesses providing client home services shall not be subject to the provisions of this article regulating the physical locations where massage therapy shall be performed, but shall comply with section 7-259(e) (prohibiting massage of sexual or genital area, or to act in a manner intended to arouse, appeal to or gratify the lust or passions or sexual desires); section 256(a) (regulating hours of operation) and section 7-254 (prohibiting escort services and adult entertainment). 
(c)  Requirements for licensure under the act, shall not apply to persons excluded from state licensure pursuant to O.C.G.A.  43-24A-19, acting within the scope of their professions. 
(Ord. of 5-14-12) 
Secs. 7-265-7-320. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PAWNSHOPS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to regulate pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A.  44-12-136. 

Sec. 7-321. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Employee means: 
(1)  Any owner or pawnbroker who, in the performance of his duties or the management of the business affairs of a pawnshop, comes into contact with the members of the public; 
(2)  Any person working for an owner or pawnbroker; or 
(3)  Any person who is employed on a part-time or full-time basis, either with or without remuneration, by a pawnshop. 
    Pawn or pledge means a bailment of personal property as security for any debt or engagement, redeemable upon certain terms and with the power of sale on default. 
    Pawnbroker means any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this definition. 
    Pawnshop means any business wherein a substantial part thereof is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn or exchange any goods, wares, merchandise or any kind of personal property whatever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
(Ord. of 12-8-86,  I) 
Sec. 7-322. - Annual regulatory permit required. 
    All persons, before beginning the business of operating a pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects, or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn, shall first file an application with the city police department for a non-refundable annual regulatory permit to conduct such business. The fee for such permit is one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200.00). 
(Ord. of 12-8-86,  II; Ord. of 2-12-96,  1) 
Sec. 7-323. - Application for permit. 
    The application for the annual permit required by this article shall state the street number and address at which the business is proposed to be operated. The application shall contain the full name, address, phone number, date of birth, photograph and social security number of all persons, including pawnbrokers and employees, having any interest in the proposed business, plus any additional information, including fingerprints, deemed necessary by the city clerk and the city police department. It will be the responsibility of the owner or pawnbroker to provide an annual updated permit application on all employees, though no administrative or investigative costs will be charged for any application other than the initial application. 
(Ord. of 12-8-86,  III) 
Sec. 7-324. - Permit prerequisite to issuance of business license. 
    No business license shall be issued to any person until the annual permit required by this article shall have been approved by the city police department and issued by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 12-8-86,  IV) 
Sec. 7-325. - Regulation as to employees. 
    No person shall be employed by a pawnshop in any capacity until such person has been fingerprinted by the city police department and has been issued an annual personal identification card authorizing such person to be a pawnshop employee. It shall be the duty of the pawnbroker to insure compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. of 12-8-86,  V) 
Sec. 7-326. - Restrictions as to character. 
    No owner, employee, pawnbroker or any other person connected with the business for which a license or permit is sought shall have been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, nor shall he have been convicted of a crime involving theft or a crime against property. 
(Ord. of 12-8-86,  VI) 
Sec. 7-327. - Records and information to be maintained; display of pawnshop transaction number; identification; digital photographs; fingerprints; records storage. 
    Engaging in the business of pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling used or previously owned merchandise, furniture, machinery, appliances, utensils, firearms, gold, silver, coins, precious metals, jewelry, and precious stones within the unincorporated areas of the county is hereby declared to be affected with the public interest due to the opportunity it affords for the disposal of stolen property. 
    In the public interest and as set forth herein, all pawnbrokers shall maintain records documenting all pawnshop transactions. 
(1)  All pawnbrokers shall maintain records documenting accurate descriptions of all property pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged, or sold to the pawnbroker. Such description shall include, to the extent possible, the manufacturer, model, serial number, style, material, kind, color, design, number of stones if jewelry, and all other identifying names, marks, and numbers. The pawnbroker shall assign a pawnshop transaction number documenting each transaction, and ensure each item received is tagged with the pawnshop transaction number. 
(2)  The tag bearing the pawnshop transaction number must remain attached to the item until the property is disposed of by sale, trade, or other lawful means. This paragraph does not apply to the purchase of property from licensed wholesale or distributor businesses for the purpose of retail sales; however the pawnbroker shall be required to maintain all purchasing records for property exempted from this paragraph. 
(3)  The pawnbroker shall require all persons pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property to show proper identification prior to conducting a pawnshop transaction. Proper identification is defined as a government issued photo identification card such as a driver's license, military identification card, state identification card, or passport. 
(4)  The pawnbroker shall also document the name, address, telephone number, race, sex, height, weight, driver's license number, date of birth, and social security number of the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the property, along with the date and time of transaction. This documentation shall be made at the time of the transaction. 
(5)  The pawnbroker shall photograph, with a digital camera or web camera, the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the property. The photograph shall clearly show a frontal view of the subject's face along with the pawnbroker's ticket transaction number and a photograph of the item being pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged, or sold. Digital images shall be labeled and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption, readily identifiable and readily available for review. 
(6)  The pawnbroker shall obtain from each person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling any property, the fingerprint of the right hand index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. The fingerprint shall be imprinted onto the pawn transaction form in the designated area along with the signature of the person pawning, trading, pledging, exchanging, or selling the property. The fingerprint must be clear and legible. In the event that more than one (1) pawn transaction form is required, a fingerprint and signature should be obtained for each form. Fingerprints and the information required herein shall be obtained each time such person pledges, trades, pawns, exchanges, or sells any property. 
(7)  Items of property that appear to be new, unused, and in their original packaging cannot be accepted by the pawnbroker unless the customer can supply a copy of the original sales receipt, or other proof of purchase from the place of purchase, to the pawnbroker who shall retain the receipt or proof of purchase on file. 
(8)  The pawnbroker shall store the above records, digital images, and fingerprints for a period of four (4) years and make them available to law enforcement personnel upon request. 
(9)  Every pawnshop shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic automated reporting system via the internet to the administrator of the electronic automated reporting system. The administrator of the electronic automated reporting system will electronically transmit all transactions to the city police department. 
(Ord. of 12-8-86,  VII; Ord. of 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 7-328. - Daily report to police; required format. 
    Every pawnbroker shall make a daily report, in such form as may be prescribed by the chief of police, of all pawnshop transactions that occurred during 24 hours ending at 9:00 p.m. on the date of the report. 
(1)  Daily reports shall list all property pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged, or sold, the pawn transaction number for each transaction, and a description of the property including, to the extent possible, the manufacturer, model, serial number, style, material, kind, color, design, number of stones if jewelry, and any other identifying names, marks, and numbers. The daily report shall also list the name, address, race, sex, height, weight, driver's license number, date of birth, and social security number of the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the property along with the date and time of the transaction. 
(2)  Every pawnshop shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic automated reporting system via the internet to the administrator of the electronic automated reporting system. The administrator of the electronic automated reporting system will electronically transmit all transactions to the police department. 
(3)  In the event that the electronic automated reporting system becomes temporarily or permanently disabled, pawnshops and pawnbrokers will be notified as soon as possible by the police department. In this event, the pawnbrokers will be required to make records of transactions in paper form as prescribed by the police department. Such paper forms must include all information as enumerated in 7-327. Pawnbrokers shall be responsible for maintaining an adequate inventory of these forms. 
(4)  The chief of police or his designee shall select and designate the required automated reporting system and required equipment needed. There will be a fee assessed to the pawnshop for each reported transaction. Said fee may be assessed against the persons pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property. The accessed fee shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the actual cost charged by the police department or the third party administrator. This fee will be invoiced to the pawnbroker and collected by the chief of police or his designee, which may be a third party administrator of the automated reporting system. 
(Ord. of 12-8-86,  VIII; Ord. of 9-27-93; Ord. of 2-28-94,  1, 2; Ord. of 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 7-329. - Hours of operation. 
    The hours during which pawnbrokers may conduct business shall be from no earlier than 7:00 a.m. to no later than 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(Ord. of 12-8-86,  IX; Ord. of 9-27-93) 
Sec. 7-330. - Retention period. 
    Any pawnbroker or person operating under a pawnbroker's license who takes goods on pawn or buys goods, taking full title thereto, the word "goods" being here used in the broadest sense and including all kinds of personal property, shall hold such goods taken in pawn or purchased for at least thirty (30) days before disposing of same by sale, transfer, shipment, or otherwise. 
(Ord. of 12-8-86,  X) 
Sec. 7-331. - Dealing with minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, his agents or employees, to receive in pawn, from minors, goods of any character or description. A minor, for the purpose of this section, is an individual seventeen (17) years of age or under. 
(Ord. of 12-8-86,  XI) 
Sec. 7-332. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article may, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-6. 
(Ord. of 12-8-86,  XII) 
Sec. 7-333. - Suspension, revocation of license. 
    Any person failing to comply with any provision of this article or other law, ordinance and regulation as may be passed by the council for the conduct of the business of a pawnbroker, shall have his business license revoked. Such revocation shall result from conviction in any court for a violation of any provision of this article or any other ordinance or regulation covering the conduct of the business for which a permit and license shall have been issued. 
(Ord. of 12-8-86,  XII) 
Secs. 7-334-7-355. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - SALES AND SOLICITATION[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of February 9, 2004, amended the Code by repealing former art. X,  7-356-7-369, and adding a new art. X. Former art. X pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from ordinances of December 11, 1989; August 14, 1995; and February 12, 1996. 

Sec. 7-356. - Definitions. 
    Charitable organization or nonprofit organization shall be defined as an organization registered in accordance with O.C.G.A.  43-17-5 or an organization exempt from such registration in accordance with O.C.G.A.  43-17-9 or any organization recognized as such by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States Department of Treasury. 
    Peddler shall mean an individual carrying his or her own merchandise, article or other good and who offers to sell such merchandise, article or other good or service to consumers at retail, and who upon such a sale delivers the merchandise then and there on the spot at any fixed location within the incorporated areas of the city. 
    Solicitor shall mean any person, group, firm, or organization who shall solicit orders, sales, funds, contributions or donations on behalf of a business, occupation, organization, vocation, or individual for commercial, charitable, nonprofit, or other noncommercial purpose, door to door or house to house in the residential areas or in any fixed location on any streets, highways, or the rights of way thereof within the incorporated areas of the city. 
(Ord. of 2-9-04) 
Sec. 7-357. - Permit required-Solicitor. 
(a)  Any solicitor desiring to engage in any type of selling, soliciting, survey making or any other activity in any residential areas for a commercial purpose, shall first register with the city clerk by completing a personal information questionnaire as set forth in section 7-359 of this article and then by obtaining a personal identification card from the police department which shall serve as the permit to engage in the proscribed activities, and shall register its occupation with city clerk and pay any necessary fees required by this article. 
(b)  Any solicitor desiring to solicit orders, sales, funds, contributions or donations for only a charitable, nonprofit, or other noncommercial purpose in any residential areas shall first register and supply proof of such recognized status with the city clerk. The chief of police shall then issue written confirmation of the organization's exempt charitable, nonprofit or noncommercial status and the date and location of the solicitation to be conducted. The organization shall then furnish a copy of such confirmation to each of its agents or representatives who shall keep a copy of such confirmation on their person at all times while engaged in their charitable, nonprofit, noncommercial solicitation. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  The following are exempt from the requirements set forth in subsection (a): 
(1)  Persons, businesses, and organizations exempted from local regulation by operation of state or federal law, or by the Constitution of the United States or the state, are exempt from the requirements of this article. This exemption is deemed to include, but may not be limited to, persons or organizations canvassing door to door or house to house in the residential areas or on any streets, highways, or the rights of way thereof within the incorporated areas of the city for a religious or political purpose. 
(2)  Representatives or agents of charitable or nonprofit or other noncommercial organizations as defined in section 7-356(c) of this article. 
(3)  Any exemption granted herein shall remain in effect only until December 31 following the date of the confirmation. Only one (1) such letter shall be issued to each organization during any calendar year. 
(4)  Any sales representative who calls upon prospective customers at the private invitation of the homeowner or occupant shall be treated as exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-9-04; Ord. of 11-13-06) 
Sec. 7-358. - Permits-Peddlers. 
(a)  Any peddler desiring to sell any merchandise, article or other good or service or transact any other business shall first register with the city clerk by completing a personal information questionnaire as set forth in section 7-359 of this article and obtaining a personal identification card which shall serve as the permit to engage in the proscribed activities, and shall pay any necessary fees required by this article. 
(b)  All peddlers must specify the location and duration of said activity so as to determine that the preferred location is not in violation of the city's Code of Ordinances or zoning ordinance or deemed to be unsafe the city police department. 
(c)  No peddler shall attempt to sell any merchandise, article or other good or service or transact any other legal business on any street, sidewalk, park, parkway or any other public place unless the peddler's license specifies that peddling in such public places is permitted. 
(Ord. of 2-9-04) 
Sec. 7-359. - Contents of information questionnaire. 
(a)  The city clerk's office shall prepare a questionnaire to be completed by each applicant for a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) payable to the City of Duluth seeking the issuance of a personal identification card and permit requiring pertinent information regarding the physical description, identity, and background of each application including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Name and social security number of individual applicant; 
(2)  Date of birth; 
(3)  Driver's license number, if applicable. 
(4)  Race; 
(5)  Gender; 
(6)  Residential address and primary telephone number; 
(7)  Business address and telephone number; 
(8)  Height and weight; 
(9)  Hair and eye color; 
(10)  Name and address of organization represented and whether that organization is either: 
a.  Commercial; 
b.  Noncommercial; 
(11)  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant's immediate supervisor in the organization represented; 
(12)  A list of any pleas of guilty, convictions, or sentences of probation entered against the application in regard to any offences other than minor traffic violations. 
(b)  The questionnaire form shall also bear the following statement: 
"Georgia law provides it is a felony to knowingly and willfully make a false, fictitious or fraudulent statement or representation in any matter within the jurisdiction of any department or agency of the government of any municipality of this state." 
(c)  The city clerk shall review the questionnaire for the purpose of ascertaining whether the applicant has plead to, or been convicted of a felony, or a misdemeanor involving a violation of moral turpitude. After ascertaining that the questionnaire has been properly completed and that the applicant has not been disqualified by virtue of prior pleas or convictions of any felonies or misdemeanors involving violence or moral turpitude, the city clerk shall approve the application subject to the payment of any applicable license fee. 
(d)  No individual shall be permitted to solicit sales, funds, contributions or donations within the city on behalf of any organization if the organization has had its confirmation letter or permit, as issued by the city clerk, revoked under this article. 
(Ord. of 2-9-04; Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 7-360. - Occupation tax or regulatory registration required for commercial solicitations. 
(a)  Following approval of the application questionnaire made in accordance with this article, and prior to the issuance of any permit granted hereunder, any applicant seeking to solicit within the city for a commercial purpose shall obtain an occupational tax registration and pay an occupational tax registration fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) or produce a valid occupational tax registration or certificate from another county or municipality of this state. 
(b)  Following approval of the application questionnaire made in accordance with this article, and prior to the issuance of any permit granted hereunder, the applicant seeking to peddle merchandise, article or good or other service shall obtain a regulatory registration and pay a regulatory registration fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. of 2-9-04; Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 7-361. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Upon qualification and payment by the applicant of a nonrefundable occupational tax or regulatory registration fee for commercial solicitation or peddling, the city clerk's staff shall photograph the applicant and provide the applicant with a permit bearing the applicant's photograph, name and the name of the organization represented, and identifying the applicant as a commercial solicitor or peddler. 
(b)  All solicitors and peddlers permitted by the city shall carry the permit on their person at all times and said license shall be presented for inspection to any appropriate officer or official of the city upon demand. The permit is valid only for location and duration as approved. 
(Ord. of 2-9-04; Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 7-362. - Validity; renewal of permits. 
    Each permit issued under this article shall be valid only for the person or organization indicated thereon, and until the expiration of the current occupation tax certificate of such organization. Such permit may be renewed upon payment of a fee set forth in section 7-360 of this article as from time to time established by the city council and verification by the city that the organization represented has renewed its occupation tax certificate for the current year. 
(Ord. of 2-9-04; Ord. of 3-22-04) 
Sec. 7-363. - Display of permit. 
    The city clerk shall furnish to each permit holder a devise suitable for attaching the permit card to the outer clothing of the permit holder. No person shall engage in any of the conduct coming under this article without wearing and displaying the permit in a conspicuous manner. 
(Ord. of 2-9-04; Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 7-364. - Disclosure of purpose of call. 
    At each dwelling, whether it be an apartment unit or detached single family residence, the solicitor shall inform the occupant in unambiguous terms of the purpose of the call and shall not represent that the solicitor is participating in any contest, game or other competitive endeavor, or that he or she is offering the occupant an opportunity to participate in any such contest, game or endeavor. 
(Ord. of 2-9-04) 
Sec. 7-365. - Posted property. 
    No solicitor shall enter a dwelling except at the express invitation of the occupant. No solicitation shall be made at any single or multi-family dwelling where a conspicuous "No Soliciting" "No Peddlers" or other similar sign is displayed at or near the main entrance or driveway to the premises. 
(Ord. of 2-9-04) 
Sec. 7-366. - Decorum required. 
(a)  No person shall use vulgar, insulting or threatening language in the course of any solicitation or attempt to peddle 
(b)  No solicitor shall remain upon the premises after the occupant of the premises has verbally indicated that he does not wish to make a purchase or donation or to otherwise listen or participate in the purpose of the call. For the purpose of this article, a call shall be deemed to continue until the solicitor has left the premises. 
(Ord. of 2-9-04) 
Sec. 7-367. - Prohibited acts. 
    It shall be a violation of this article: 
(1)  For any person to engage in any of the activities described in this article without first obtaining a permit or confirmation letter. 
(2)  For any person to violate any of the provisions of this article or to violate any other city ordinance or any state or federal law while engaging in any of the activities coming under this article. 
(3)  For any person to lend, rent, or sell his permit card to another. 
(4)  For any person to engage in any activity coming under section 7-357(a) of this article from the hours of 8:00 p.m. until 10:00 a.m. according to the standard time in effect at the time the activity is alleged to have occurred. 
(5)  For any person to engage in any activity coming under this article during a period in which his permit is in suspension or after his permit has been revoked. 
(6)  For any person, firm or corporation to engage in the act or business of a peddler of any merchandise, article or other good or service within the corporate limits without having first secured an occupation tax registration as set forth in section 7-360 of this article. 
(7)  For any person to engage in fraud, cheating or misrepresentation, be it through himself or through an employee. 
(8)  For more than two (2) individuals to engage in solicitation upon any premises at the same time for the same goods or service. Each individual member of a group engaged in solicitation in violation of this provision shall be deemed to have violated such provision. 
(9)  For any person to make more than one (1) solicitation call at the same premises for identical goods or services within any two-week period, without receiving prior invitation therefore from the occupant of any such premises. This provision shall be construed to include solicitation upon the same premises by employees, agents or representatives of any person more than once during the aforesaid period with out prior invitation as herein provided. 
(10)  For any person with a criminal record as described in section 7-369 of this article, whether or not otherwise eligible for an exemption under section 7-357(d) of this article, to engage in any of the activities described in this article. 
(11)  For any person, at the time of initial contact with the occupant or prospective customer, to fail to verbally identify himself for the purpose of the call or solicitation and the company and product line he represents or charitable, nonprofit, or noncommercial group he represents. 
(12)  For any person engaged in solicitation to misrepresent the purpose of the call or solicitation or use any falsehood, deception or misrepresentation to induce a sale or contribution, or use any plans, scheme or ruse which misrepresents the status of the purpose of the person engaging in the call or solicitation. 
(13)  For any person to solicit or attempt to solicit at a building or residence at any entrance or part of the building or residence other than the main entrance to the residence. 
(14)  For any person to solicit, sell, collect contributions, donations or funds or attempt to solicit, sell collect contributions, donations or funds on the streets, highways or right of way within the incorporated areas of the city. 
(Ord. of 2-9-04; Ord. of 11-13-06; Ord. of 8-13-18 ) 
Sec. 7-368. - Penalties. 
    Any person charged with a violation of this article shall be apprehended by the police department or summoned to appear in the municipal court of this city, and if found to be guilty of said violation, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the city jail for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 2-9-04) 
Sec. 7-369. - Permit suspension; revocation. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued to any person who has been found guilty of a misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude any time within five (5) years prior to the date of application, nor shall a permit be issued to any person convicted a felony, except that a permit may be issued to a convicted felon if it appears that he has been pardoned, or that he has been free from any legal restrictions for a period of five (5) years prior to the date of his application. For the purpose of this article, the terms "conviction" and "found guilty" shall be deemed to include verdicts or pleas of guilty, or pleas of nolo contendre, entered by a court of this state, a court of a sister state, or any federal district court. Any permit issued as the result of a willful false statement or omission in the solicitor's application for permit shall be deemed null and void from the time of its issue. 
(b)  The permit of any person charged with a felony, or a misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude, shall be deemed suspended from the time of lawful arrest, formal, accusation, or indictment whichever shall first occur; such suspension shall remain in effect until the solicitor is convicted or acquitted, or until the charged is dismissed, "dead-docketed" or "no-billed." 
(c)  The permit of any person arrested or served with summons in regard to a violation of any provision of this article, which is alleged to have occurred the date the permit was issued, shall be deemed suspended from the time he was arrested or served with summons; such suspension shall remain in effect until the solicitor is acquitted or the case is dismissed. 
(d)  The permit of any person who is convicted of a felony, or a misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude, shall be deemed revoked from the time of such conviction. The permit of any person convicted of having violated any provision of this article after issuance of the permit shall be deemed revoked from the time of conviction. 
(e)  Any suspension or revocation occurring pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be effective by operation of law, whether or not any formal notification to the solicitor is given or received. 
(Ord. of 2-9-04) 
Sec. 7-370. - Surrender of permit. 
    Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article for the use by any person is, and shall remain, the property of the city. Each permit holder shall surrender his permit cared to the police department no later than three (3) of the department's business days following the expiration, suspension, or revocation of the permit, or upon the demand of any officer of the department or upon the demand of the chief of police, whichever shall occur first. 
(Ord. of 2-9-04) 
Secs. 7-371-7-390. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - RESERVED[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of January 11, 2016 ,  1, repealed article XI,  7-391-7-396, 7-406-7-414 and 7-426-7-430, which pertained to taxicabs and derived from an ordinance of April 13, 1987; an ordinance of February 25, 1991; an ordinance of April 27, 1992 and an ordinance of February 12, 1996. 

Secs. 7-391-7-450. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - RESERVED[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of June 8, 2015,  C(5) , repealed article XII,  7-451-7-460, which pertained to yard sales and derived from Ord. No. 83-11-2, adopted November 14, 1983 and ordinance of February 25, 2002. 

Secs. 7-451-7-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - RESERVED[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of February 9, 2004, amended the Code by repealing former art. XIII,  7-501-7-505, in its entirety. Former art. XIII pertained to peddlers, and derived from an ordinance of June 12, 1989. 

Secs. 7-501-7-600. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of October 13, 1997,  1-18, and 20-34, has been treated at the editor's discretion as superseding the provisions of former art. XIV,  7-601, 7-621, 7-622, 7-631-7-634, 7-641-7-647, 7-651, 7-661, 7-671, 7-672, and 7-681-7-684. Former art. XIV pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from ordinances of April 26, 1993; August 14, 1995; and October 9, 1995. 
Cross reference- Types of entertainment, attire and conduct prohibited in an establishment dispensing alcoholic beverages,  3-123; public indecency,  10-10. 

Sec. 7-601. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult entertainment establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  1) 
Sec. 7-602. - Definitions. 
    The following terms used in this article defining adult entertainment establishments shall have the meanings indicated below: 
    Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five (5) percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five (5) percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult business means either (1) each of those enterprises defined in this article; (2) any business other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or (3) any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services, merchandise, or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult minimotion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than fifty (50) persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five (5) percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five (5) percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Escort bureau; introduction services means any business, agency or persons who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnishes or offer to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
    Good moral character. A person is of good moral character according to this article if that person has not been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States, or of a violation of any municipal ordinance with the exception of a simple traffic violation (which shall not include driving under the influence) within the past ten (10) years. Conviction shall include a plea of nolo contendere or bond forfeitures. 
    Minor means, for the purposes of this article, any person who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years. 
    Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means and shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct; analingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, public region, buttocks or female breast; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  2; Ord. of 7-30-01) 
Sec. 7-603. - Erotic dance establishment regulations. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall operate, advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  No later than March first of each year, an erotic dance establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the city clerk showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  An erotic dance establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of three (3) years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(d)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of eighteen (18) years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(e)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. It shall be the continuing obligation of the licensee and the employees and agents of the licensee at all times to take such steps as may be necessary to ensure that all persons in or on the premises shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age and shall be capable of proving their age at any time by the presentation of a valid driver's license or other proof deemed appropriate by the chief of police of the city or his or her designee that such person is, in fact, eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
(f)  An erotic dance establishment shall be closed within the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and shall be closed from 12:00 midnight Saturday night through 4:00 p.m. on Monday. 
(g)  No erotic dance establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverage, intoxicating liquor or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(h)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. 
(i)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. Only one (1) dancer shall dance or perform on such raised surface or stage at any time. 
(j)  No dancing shall occur closer than ten (10) feet to any patron. 
(k)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(l)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(m)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(n)  All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to three and five tenths (3.5) foot candles per square foot. 
(o)  If any portion or subparagraph of this section of this article or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  3) 
Sec. 7-604. - Certain activities prohibited. 
    No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  4) 
Sec. 7-605. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on in or upon any premises within the city any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this article without a license so to do. No license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  5) 
Sec. 7-606. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult minimotion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau or adult business or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  6) 
Sec. 7-607. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  7) 
Sec. 7-608. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  8) 
Sec. 7-609. - Location. 
(a)  Premises for which an application is made for the licensing of adult entertainment at the time of the application and at the time the license is granted, if granted, shall be located only in a zoning district as the same is now or hereafter delineated and defined by the zoning ordinances of the city. No adult business or use restricted hereunder shall be located: 
(1)  Within six hundred (600) feet of any parcel of land which is either zoned or used for residential uses or purposes (RA-200, R-100, R-75, RM, HRD, CBD or residential portion of PUD); 
(2)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located; 
(3)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; 
(4)  Within one hundred (100) feet of any parcel of land upon which any other establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located; 
(5)  On less than one (1) acre of land containing at least one hundred (100) feet of road frontage. 
(6)  On a parcel of land other than one zoned to allow adult businesses pursuant to the Unified Development Code of the city. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(c)  The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with the ordinances of the city; regulation of the state revenue commissioner; the laws of the state; and all other pertinent laws. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval when finished by the building inspector. Each building in which the business is to be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all time from the street on which the building is located so as to reveal all of the outside premises of such building. All premises for which a license shall be issued shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways, and open areas may be clearly seen by the customers therein. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  9; Ord. of 9-14-15 ) 
Sec. 7-610. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Qualification. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than eighteen (18) years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five (5) years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)  [Restrictions. ] A dancer employed as such by a licensee hereunder shall not at any time be employed by the licensee as a waiter, waitress, bartender or busperson or in any capacity for a period of thirty (30) days after having performed as a dancer in the licensed premises or in any premises in the state in which adult entertainment is offered or allowed. It is the intent of this provision that dancers shall perform no function other than that of dancing or providing the entertainment licensed hereby and shall not at any time provide services as waiters, waitresses, bartenders, buspersons or otherwise in or about the licensed premises. 
(c)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the city clerk of his intended employment on forms supplied by the city clerk and shall receive approval of such employment from the city clerk in the form of an employment permit. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the city clerk requires, including a set of fingerprints, on regular city or United States Department of Justice forms. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may within ten (10) days of said denial, apply to the city clerk for a hearing. The decision of the city clerk after a hearing may be appealed to the city council which may issue such order as is proper in the premises. An investigation fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the city clerk evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice if filed. The applicant for a permit shall file with the chief of police or his designee an application which shall state, truthfully and correctly, the age and current address of the applicant; all prior addresses of the applicant within the immediately preceding three-year period and the marital status of the applicant during such period; any convictions for violation of federal, state, or local laws excluding traffic violations other than violations involving alcohol or controlled substances within the immediately preceding three (3) years; and any other information reasonably requested by the police chief or his or her designee in conjunction with such application. Following receipt of the application for such permit and the fee to cover administrative costs associated with processing the application, the chief of police or his or her designee shall issue a permit to eligible applicants within twenty (20) days from the date of application and following verification of the information contained in the application. The licensee shall have the continuing obligation and responsibility of ensuring that each dancer performing shall at all times have a valid permit as required by this subsection. 
(d)  Suspension, revocation of employment permits. Violation of the provisions of the ordinances of the city, laws and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of the employment permit. 
(e)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be permitted as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensees of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  10) 
Sec. 7-611. - Application for license. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city clerk or her designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable application fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be paid to the city clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt or a copy thereof shall be supplied to the city clerk at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The application for a license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  All applications for a license permitting adult entertainment shall be investigated by the city police department and a report of said investigation presented to the clerk for consideration with the application. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  11; Ord. of 5-28-02) 
Sec. 7-612. - Application contents. 
    Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant; 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two (2) photographs of the applicant at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches taken within the last six (6) months; 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application. Such information shall be supplied regarding partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five (5) percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding; 
(8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions; 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five (5) percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the clerk of court. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged; 
(11)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the county police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application; 
(13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five (5) percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation; 
(14)  If the applicant, any partners of any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five (5) percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past ten (10) years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed; 
(15)  The city shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant; 
(16)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any; 
(17)  At least three (3) character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a Municipal Code violation involving moral turpitude in the past ten (10) years. The city clerk shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(18)  Address of the premises to be licensed; 
(19)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated; 
(20)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  12) 
Sec. 7-613. - Applicant to appear. 
    The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the city and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  13) 
Sec. 7-614. - Application; investigation. 
(a)  The city shall have thirty (30) days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the city clerk shall grant the license if the city clerk finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of the application; 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct or convicted of an attempt to commit, or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as a crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude and is of good moral character. 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(8)  The applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
(9)  That the applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not within five (5) years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur; 
(10)  That on the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(11)  That the proposed premises is not to be located too close to any church, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted hereunder; 
(12)  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, state or the United States; 
(13)  That the applicant has not had any license issued by the city or by any other city in the state, or by any other licensing authority in the state relating to the manufacture, distribution or sale of alcoholic or malt beverages or wine previously suspended or revoked within the past ten (10) years; 
(14)  That the applicant is not related to any distributor or wholesaler of alcoholic beverages or employees thereof within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as computed according to the laws of the state; 
(15)  That the applicant has adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and mange its affairs and that the applicant is not a mere surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever; 
(16)  That the applicant is not the city clerk or a member of the city council or a spouse or minor child of one of the aforesaid persons; 
(17)  That the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age and is a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully permitted for permanent residence. 
(b)  The clerk may decline to issue a license when any person having any interest in the operation of such place of business or control over such place of business does not meet the same character requirements as herein set forth for the licensee. 
(c)  The city clerk shall complete the investigation of the application and the background of the applicant within thirty (30) days of the submission of the complete application, and shall either grant or deny said application within the thirty-day period. Written notice of the grant or denial of the license shall be provided to the applicant within five (5) business days of the end of the thirty-day period, and failure to provide such written notice within the thirty-five-day time period shall constitute a granting of the license. 
Should the license be granted either by express written approval of the clerk or by failure to provide written approval or denial within the thirty-five-day period provided, said applicant shall tender the license fee to the city by certified check within ten days of the approval. Failure to tender the required license fee within the time period provided shall constitute grounds for revocation of said license. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  14; Ord. of 7-30-01) 
Sec. 7-615. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
    No license provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes; 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five (5) percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five (5) percent interest therein are not of good moral character; 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in apart by any person who is not of good moral character; 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the city. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  15; Ord. of 7-30-01) 
Sec. 7-616. - License-Refusal; appeal. 
    Should the city clerk, following investigation of the applicant, deny the application within the thirty-five-day period set forth in section 7-614, said applicant shall have the right to file an appeal of the denial. The appeal shall be filed with the city clerk in writing within ten (10) days of the date of the written denial. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  16; Ord. of 7-30-01) 
Sec. 7-617. - Same-Requirement and renewal. 
    Licenses for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the licensees continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. The nonrefundable license fee shall be five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per year or any portion thereof. The renewal fees for the adult entertainment establishment licenses shall be five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per year. Any such license, after issuance, must be renewed annually not later than February 1 of each year and such license will be considered for renewal only in the event the current license holder is in full and complete compliance with all of the provisions of this article and all other ordinances of the city and the laws of the state which may apply to the licensing and operation of the premises licensed hereunder. Any license not renewed by February 1 of each year shall lapse. Operation of unlicensed premises is unlawful. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  17) 
Sec. 7-618. - Same-Nontransferable. 
    No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one (1) or more of the partners should die, one (1) or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case the license, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  18) 
Sec. 7-619. - Appeal-Procedure. 
    The licensee shall, within ten (10) days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a written notice of appeal to the city clerk. 
    The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the mayor and council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or request, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the mayor and council and the name and address of the applicant. 
    The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than five (5) nor more than thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice of appeal for council action. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  20) 
Sec. 7-620. - Same-Council determines procedure. 
    When an appeal is placed on the council agenda, the council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law; 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(3)  The hearing provided for in this section shall be scheduled for a date which is not more than forty-five (45) days after the city's receipt of the written notice of appeal. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  21; Ord. of 7-30-01) 
Sec. 7-621. - City council. 
    Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the city council, at the time and date set therefor, the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the licensee, from interested parties, and from city staff. The city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  22) 
Sec. 7-622. - Powers of hearing officer. 
    The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  23) 
Sec. 7-623. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
    The council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  24) 
Sec. 7-624. - Hearing officer-Report and final decision. 
    Should a hearing officer have been appointed by the mayor and council to conduct an appeal hearing, the hearing officer shall submit a written report and recommendation to the council within five (5) business days of the conclusion of said hearing. Regardless of whether or not a hearing officer has been used at said hearing, the council shall schedule a meeting for the purpose of making a final determination in the matter which meeting shall be not more than ten (10) business days from the conclusion of the appeals hearing. At this meeting, the council shall receive the report of the hearing officer, if any, and shall make a final determination on the appeal. The applicant shall be notified of the date and time of the meeting at which final action will be taken. Said notice shall be provided in writing, at least five (5) business days prior to the date of the meeting. The council's decision shall be reduced to writing at the time of the meeting and provided to the applicant appealing the decision within five (5) business days of the date the decision is rendered by the city council. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  25; Ord. of 7-30-01) 
Sec. 7-625. - Appeal of council decision. 
    Any person whose appeal is denied by the city council shall have the right to appeal the decision of the city council to the superior court of the county. The appeal shall be by writ of certiorari filed in accordance with all state provisions related to such an action, and the review of the superior court shall be based on the record of the appeal hearing before the city council. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  26; Ord. of 7-30-01) 
Sec. 7-626. - Violations; penalty. 
    Any person violating the provision of this article shall be guilty of an ordinance violation punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or imprisonment in the city jail for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days or both. In addition to such fine, and/or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  27) 
Sec. 7-627. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
    Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  28) 
Sec. 7-628. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
    If the licensee or if any employee of the licensee or if any stockholder, officer or agent of the licensee, if a corporation, or if any partner, co-owner or joint-venturer shall violate any of the provisions hereof or shall be convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude related to the premises licensed hereunder, whether a felony or misdemeanor and other than traffic violations, or shall otherwise fail to comply with the provision hereof, the license granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked, terminated, suspended, otherwise limited by the mayor and council of the city after a public hearing is held for that purpose in accordance with the appropriate requirements of the due process clause of the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Georgia. In the event any such violation by the licensee shall, in the opinion of the mayor and council of the city, constitute such a violation and shall immediately place in jeopardy or pose an immediate threat to persons or to property, sufficient to justify immediate action, the mayor and council may, by informally providing limited due process, temporarily suspend such license provided they shall within a period of thirty (30) days thereafter, proceed to afford to the licensee a full due process hearing. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  29) 
Sec. 7-629. - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
    Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  30) 
Sec. 7-630. - Self-inspection of licensed premises. 
    The licensee of a licensed premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the license premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the city clerk. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  31) 
Sec. 7-631. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
    A licensed premises or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the city clerk on her finding of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the city clerk shall serve on the licensee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within twenty-four (24) hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the city clerk may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the city clerk. The city clerk shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "Unsafe" as the case may be. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  32) 
Sec. 7-632. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
    A licensed premises or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  33) 
Sec. 7-633. - Applicability 
    Nothing in this article adopted by the mayor and council of the city shall be construed to apply to the presentation, showing, or performance of any play, drama, ballet, or motion picture in any theater, concert hall, museum of fine arts, school, institution of higher education, or other similar establishment as a form of an expression of opinion or communication of ideas or information, as differentiated from the promotion or exploitation of nudity for the purpose of advancing the economic welfare of a commercial or business enterprise. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  34) 
Sec. 7-634. - Prohibition of enclosed viewing rooms. 
    Any adult business as defined in this article having available for customers, patrons or members any booth, room, or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the establishment, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock, or other control type or view obstructing devices or materials. 
(2)  Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
b.  Have at least one (1) side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying same. 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six (6) feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable. 
d.  The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned. 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle when not in use shall be a minimum of ten (10) candles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(3)  Occupants. Only one (1) individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth, room or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room or cubicle. 
(Ord. of 7-30-01) 
Sec. 7-635. - Severability. 
    In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, including but not limited to, a declaration or adjudication that such section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of the article violates a constitutional provision of free speech under the Georgia Constitution or the United States Constitution, such adjudication shall in no manner effect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this article, all of which shall remain in full force and effect as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. The city council hereby declares it would have adopted the remaining parts of the ordinance if it had known that such part or parts thereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. The provisions of this article are declared severable to the maximum extent allowed by law. 
(Ord. of 7-30-01) 
Secs. 7-636-7-684. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - RESERVED[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of February 9, 2004, amended the Code by repealing former art. XV,  7-685-7-694 in its entirety. Former art. XV pertained to solicitation for charitable contributions on streets and highways, and derived from an ordinance of June 24, 1996. 

Secs. 7-685-7-710. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - BONDING COMPANIES 

Sec. 7-711. - Authority to operate bonding company. 
(a)  Any and all entities wishing to engage in the bonding business in the city for those cases within the jurisdiction of the municipal court of the city shall obtain a certificate of authority ("certificate"). All employees of those entities holding certificates who are professional bondspersons and who write bonds shall obtain a professional bondsperson permit ("permit"). 
(b)  An entity wishing to engage in the bonding business in the city ("bonding company") can be an individual, trust, a group of individuals, whether or not formed as a partnership or other legal entity, a corporation or a combination of individuals, trusts and corporations. A bonding company can consist solely of a professional bondsperson; however, when a professional bondsperson comprises the entire personnel and payroll of the bonding company, said professional bondsperson must secure both a certificate and a permit. 
(c)  A certificate is renewable annually unless the bonding company or an employee has defaulted under this article; ceases to be in good standing; has violated other general federal, or state laws applicable to either the bonding company or to any individual involved with the bonding company or the bonding business itself; or has violated any ordinance of the city. 
(d)  Within the context of these requirements and as defined by state law, a "professional bondsperson" is one who holds him or herself out as a signer of surety of bonds for compensation and meets the requirements of O.C.G.A.  17-6-50. No professional bondsperson or agent thereof may visit prisoners or sign bonds for any person imprisoned unless the bonding company has procured a certificate of authority and the professional bondsperson or agent thereof has obtained a professional bondsperson permit ("permit"). This permit shall be in the form of an identification card. The requirements contained in this article shall in no way lessen the requirements placed upon professional bondspersons under state law. A professional bondsperson shall not be authorized to directly write bonds in the municipal court of the city at any time while the bonding company which employs him or her is not certified due to the suspension or revocation of the certificate, or while the professional bondsperson's permit is suspended or revoked. 
(e)  All certificates must be prominently displayed in the business location of the bonding company. All professional bondspersons transacting bonding business in the city must wear in a location visible to the public a professional bondsperson identification card (permit). 
(f)  All certificate applications must be accompanied by a non refundable filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to cover costs of investigation. All professional bondsperson permit applications must be accompanied by a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each person required to submit a professional bondsperson permit application. Each renewal application and all additional professional bondsperson applications must be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) each. Each bonding company shall pay a regulatory fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) in addition to occupation taxes and other taxes and fees, where applicable. 
(g)  The term "professional bondsperson" shall be deemed to include the term "bondsman." 
(h)  Certificates of authority and professional bondsperson permits/identification cards are nontransferable. 
(Ord. of 2-23-98,  1) 
Sec. 7-712 - Applications. 
(a)  In order to be considered for a certificate of authority, an bonding company must submit all appropriate applications to the city police department. All employees, agents, applicable creditors and other individuals described in these regulations are required to complete, swear to, and file a professional bondsperson permit application with the city police department. 
(b)  All bonding companies wishing to transact business in the municipal court of the city, whether in the form of association, trust, individual, partnership or corporation, must file an application for certificate of authority with the city police department in order to be considered for a certificate of authority. The following are required to submit said application: 
(1)  Shareholders of a corporate bonding company; 
(2)  Directors of a corporate bonding company, not otherwise shareholders; 
(3)  Employees, officers and agents of a corporate bonding company; 
(4)  Individuals who loan money or provide collateral for or to a corporate bonding company or to any employee, officer, director or shareholder of a corporate bonding company, or to partners of a partnership; and 
(5)  Members of an association or partnership. 
(c)  The following documents shall be provided by a bonding company: 
(1)  In the case of corporations, certified copies of the articles of incorporation and bylaws as amended through the date of the filing of an application; 
(2)  Certificate of good standing from the secretary of state; 
(3)  In the case of partnerships, trusts, sole proprietorships, and joint ventures, a list of all partners, including all parties that have an equitable interest in the business; 
(4)  If a partnership or joint venture, agreement with all amendments, as of the date of the application, if a trust, a certified copy of the trust instrument; 
(5)  In the case of trusts or partnerships, those individuals who will be signing on behalf of the trust or partnership; 
(6)  A list of all shareholders of record as of the date of filing of the application and of all individuals or other entities which have liens, options or warrants on existing shares outstanding or future shares to be issued; 
(7)  A list of all the duly elected members of the board of directors; 
(8)  A list of all duly elected officers; 
(9)  A list of all employees; 
(10)  The employment history and residences for the past ten (10) years of each person associated with the bonding company; 
(11)  In the case of corporations, a corporate resolution, duly signed by the appropriate officers, affixed with the corporate seal (optional), stating that the corporation, by and through its duly authorized agents, is permitted to transact surety business in the state and in the city and that such authority includes the power to execute and guarantee bond obligations or contracts to which the state, county or city is or may be a party; 
(12)  A list of all surety or bonding companies with which the corporation or any individual, listed in subsection (b)(1) through (5) above, has been affiliated with during the past ten (10) years as of the date of filing the application; 
(13)  A list of all individuals or entities which will be authorized to sign or act on behalf of the bonding company; 
(14)  A list of any individual or entity that is or may be a creditor of the bonding operation or of an individual running or owning a bonding operation who will benefit from or receive compensation, whether in money or special benefits, from the operation of the bonding company; 
(15)  The name and address of the individual who shall be authorized to accept service or process on behalf of bonding company. This person must be a resident of the state. In the case of corporations, a certified copy of a corporate resolution, duly adopted, appointing such person as agent, must accompany the application; 
(16)  A schedule showing separately the date and penal sum of all of the bonds upon which the bonding company then appears as surety and a subschedule of all bonds upon which the bonding company appears as surety which have been forfeited and not paid; 
(17)  Current compiled financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant; and 
(18)  Such other relevant information as may be required on the application pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 2-23-98,  2) 
Sec. 7-713. - Qualifications-General. 
(a)  All employees, owners, shareholders or agents of the bonding company must agree to be fingerprinted and photographed by the designated authorities of the city, and agree to execute such releases as would be necessary in order to facilitate an investigation to be conducted by the police department as to ascertain whether or not the qualifications contained herein have been met. 
(b)  No professional bondsperson or agent or subagent of a professional bondsperson shall be permitted to sign bonds for any person imprisoned unless the professional bondsperson, agent or subagent shall have previously procured the following: 
(1)  A limited surety agent's license issued by the insurance commissioner of the state. 
(2)  A certified power-of-attorney agreement from an underwriter, whether the underwriter is a company, corporation, firm, partnership, association or individual, which agreement makes, constitutes and appoints the professional bondsperson, agent or subagent as the underwriter's true and lawful agent and attorney in fact with express authority to make, execute, seal and deliver, as surety, bail bonds and recognizance, such that the execution of the bail bonds and recognizance by the professional bondsperson, agent or subagent is binding upon the underwriter for the full amount of each and every bail bond or recognizance written in favor of the city. 
(c)  The police chief shall require every bonding company to show a complete record for all persons associated with the bonding company reflecting any conviction in any court for the violation of any offense or any crime and to present to the police chief such other information as will enable the police chief to determine the character of the professional bondsperson or agent. 
(d)  No person shall be permitted to act as an agent for a bonding company, be a professional bondsperson, or own any interest in or be an officer, agent, partner or member of the board of directors of a bonding company, who has been convicted of a felony offense of any kind or any offense involving acts of moral turpitude or violence or entered a plea of nolo contendere to such offenses. 
(e)  No bonding company or agent or employee of an bonding company shall have received other than an honorable discharge from the armed services or have been court marshaled while in the armed services. 
(f)  No person shall be permitted to sign as agent for a bonding company or as a professional bondsperson who has failed to meet his or her bonding requirements of either the city or any other city or county within the state. 
(g)  No certificate of authority shall be issued to any bonding company whose officers, members of the board of directors, or shareholders (or respective spouses, children, siblings or parents, as the case may be) have failed to meet the bonding requirements of either the city or any other city or county in the state. 
(h)  No person shall be permitted to write bonds who is otherwise prohibited by law. 
(i)  No professional bondsperson or bonding company will be permitted to write bonds when, at any time, their surety bond shall be less than the amount required under these regulations. 
(j)  No person who has a past record of failure to meet payments on defaulted bonds as a professional bondsperson or the agent or subagent thereof in any jurisdiction, nor any bonding company who employs such person, shall be permitted to write bonds. 
(k)  No bonding company which is not financially solvent, or in the case of a sole shareholder or proprietor, no person who is not financially solvent shall be permitted to write bonds. 
(l)  All bonding companies who submit applications in order to start doing business in the city on or after January 1, 1999, in addition to all of the other requirements found in these regulations for doing business in the city, must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the chief of police that there exists a need in the city for additional bonding businesses and that the operation of an additional bonding company will not be an administrative burden to the city or to the police department. 
(Ord. of 2-23-98,  3) 
Sec. 7-714. - Qualifications-Financial. 
(a)  No certificate or permit shall be issued to any person to carry on or engage in the business of professional bondsperson until the bonding company has posted with the chief of police a surety bond in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). This surety bond is to be written by a company with an "A" rating, and is to be held by the city and subject to disbursement by the surety to the city to the extent of any individual bond forfeitures not paid to the city. However, this sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) shall not limit the amount of liability of a professional bondsperson to the city and the professional bondsperson shall remain liable to the city for the total amount for which the professional bondsperson is responsible. 
(b)  If any payment is made by the surety, the professional bondsperson shall post an additional surety bond in order to maintain the total surety bond amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(c)  All bonding companies will be required to remain in good standing with respect to all applicable city, state, and federal laws governing doing business. A violation of such applicable laws, such as tax laws, will result in suspension or revocation of an bonding company's certificate. 
(Ord. of 2-23-98,  5) 
Sec. 7-715. - Fees. 
    No bonding company or agent acting on behalf of a bonding company shall be permitted to accept any funds in addition to those fees authorized by law for the performance of their services. Nor shall anyone accept from the principal on the bond or from anyone on his behalf, any sums with respect to the issuance or continuance of a bail bond on his behalf. Violation will cause the certificate of authority of the bonding company and the offending individual's Permit to be immediately suspended pending revocation hearing. 
(Ord. of 2-23-98,  5) 
Sec. 7-716. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
(a)  The police chief shall suspend the permit of any professional bondsperson or agent or subagent thereof for any one (1) or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Misconduct in the business of professional bondsperson by the professional bondsperson or the professional bondsperson's agent or employee; 
(2)  Failure to respond to judgments by the professional bondsperson or the professional bondsperson's surety; 
(3)  Violation of any law specifically affecting professional bondspersons or criminal bonds or violation of this article; 
(4)  The refusal for cause by Gwinnett County to permit the professional bondsperson to operate in that jurisdiction; 
(5)  Having bonds outstanding in an amount totaling more than two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00); 
(6)  Having outstanding forfeited bonds in an amount totaling more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00); or 
(7)  Having outstanding forfeited bonds in an amount more than 25 percent of the total value of outstanding bonds. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to accept a bond signed by a professional bondsperson whose permit has been suspended or revoked. 
(c)  The person or agent thereof whose permit is suspended shall be notified by the police chief of the reason for the suspension and shall be given the right within 30 days from the effective date of the suspension to appear and to show cause why the suspension should not be made permanent by the mayor and council. Failure to appear within the specified time or any extension thereof shall require revocation by the chief of police. 
(d)  If a permit is revoked, the holder of the permit shall not be permitted to again receive a permit for five (5) years from the date of the revocation. 
(Ord. of 2-23-98,  6) 
Sec. 7-717. - Reissuance of certificates of authority. 
    Violations of the regulations contained herein or as later amended and promulgated will cause the certificate of authority to be suspended or revoked. No bond shall be written without a current certificate of authority or during a suspension of such certificate. A bonding company wishing to obtain a certificate subsequent to a revocation or suspension of a certificate must make a new application, as contained herein, indicating the current status of bonds in force at the time of new application and current status of bonds subject to forfeiture at the time of the new application. Furthermore, any information with respect to violations of this article or violation of other state or federal law will be investigated by the chief of police and such information will be directed to either the city solicitor's office or the district attorney's office, as the case may be, for further investigation and criminal prosecution whenever it appears that there has been a violation of state law or this article. 
(Ord. of 2-23-98,  7) 
Sec. 7-718. - Reports. 
(a)  Individuals or legal entities applying for or holding a certificate of authority shall submit copies of annual compiled financial statements (or income tax returns, if an individual) as of December 31 for the last two (2) years preceding the date of the application and shall also submit annual financial statements on or before April 15 for the prior year just completed. Periodic reports may be requested on a quarterly basis and, if so requested, will be due by the fifteenth day of the month following the applicable quarter, i.e., April 15 for the January through March quarter, etc. These statements shall be sworn to by a corporate officer or the individual submitting them, or may be signed by a certified public accountant. (Facsimile signatures are not acceptable on any application or reports required for a certificate of authority or to renew a certificate of authority.) 
(b)  These reports shall include a list of all bonds in force as of the application date and as of each reporting date, if not an original application, and the known current status of each obligation. Said reports shall be submitted as heretofore required or more frequently as may be determined by the chief of police and will be due 15 days subsequent to written notice of such request other than those already required herein. The nature and amount of bonds will be considered in conjunction with these financial reports of an bonding company as well as the current surety bond balance in order to ascertain bonding limitations of the respective businesses. Generally, a bonding business shall be limited to writing no more than the face value of their surety bonds. However, in no event shall a business holding a certificate of authority be prohibited from writing less than the face value of the surety bonds. 
(c)  The permit of a professional bondsperson whose records are found to be falsified shall be suspended for sixty (60) days. For a second violation of this section within five (5) years, the permit shall be suspended for twelve (12) months. For a third violation of this section within five (5) years, the permit shall be suspended for twelve (12) months, and the professional bondsperson shall be ineligible for a permit for an additional year. For a fourth violation of this section within five (5) years, the professional bondsperson shall be ineligible for a permit for five (5) years from the date of discovery of the falsification. These penalties shall be in addition to any sentences imposed by any court as a result of the falsification of records. 
(d)  There shall be a continuing duty on all bonding companies to update their records with the city police department upon the happening of any of the following events: 
(1)  Change in ownership; prior approval required (except in cases of liquidations); 
(2)  The acquisition of new shareholders if a corporation, new partners if a partnership, new beneficiaries if a trust; prior approval required; 
(3)  The hiring of new employees, which will necessitate the filing of a professional bondsperson permit application on each new employee, officer or director, shareholder or other individual who commences working for a bonding company subsequent to the filing of its application; 
(4)  If, at any time, a bonding company becomes indebted to any creditor in an amount in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or where the bonding company gives collateral to a creditor, which collateral would, or encumbers, the bonding company so that upon foreclosure the bonding company would become insolvent; 
(5)  If a bonding company receives a loan from any individual or other entity in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00); provided, however, that where such loan is made by a duly chartered bank or other lending institution regulated by state or federal laws, that such report need not be made to the police department, if otherwise disclosed in the annual financial report; or 
(6)  Changes in the articles of incorporation, bylaws, articles of partnership, trust document or other governing instruments. 
(Ord. of 2-23-98,  8) 
Sec. 7-719. - Rules of conduct for professional bondspersons. 
(a)  No professional bondsperson shall be allowed to loiter in the police station or grounds or to enter those places except when attending court or on business in connection with a case wherein the professional bondsperson is surety on a bond. A professional bondsperson shall not be allowed to speak to any prisoner at the police station unless authorized to do so by the patrol supervisor on duty. The patrol supervisor shall not grant this authority until the patrol supervisor has received from the prisoner a written request, naming the professional bondsperson the prisoner wishes to see. If no professional bondsperson is named by the prisoner, the patrol supervisor shall call certified bonding companies in rotation until a professional bondsperson is secured. 
(b)  Every professional bondsperson and the professional bondsperson's agents and subagents shall wear the permit/identification badge whenever the professional bondsperson is acting as such in any city building or other city property. 
(c)  Professional bondspersons will obey all criminal and civil statutes of this state in addition to applicable federal statutes and city ordinances. 
(d)  Professional bondspersons will not write bonds while under the influence of intoxicants or drugs. 
(e)  Professional bondspersons will refrain from attempting to pirate clients away from other bonding companies either openly or covertly. 
(f)  Professional bondspersons will refrain from harassing any competitive professional bondsperson, members of the public, clients, members of a client's family or employees of the police department. 
(g)  Professional bondspersons will at no time represent themselves to the public as police officers, court officers, deputy sheriffs, or having any affiliation with such law enforcement agencies. 
(h)  Professional bondspersons shall refrain from contacting judges or magistrates to have bond set or to propose a particular bond amount for a client. 
(i)  Professional bondspersons will comply with O.C.G.A.  17-6-51, 17-6-52 and 17-6-53 as now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
(j)  Only one (1) representative of a bonding company will be allowed in the jail area at a time except two (2) representatives may be in the jail area if one (1) of them is being trained. 
(k)  Only one (1) bond will be completed at a time. As soon as the bond has been completed, professional bondspersons shall leave the jail area in order that the next bonding company can complete its business. The jail area will not be used as a business office. 
(l)  Absolutely no soliciting of business at the police department or jail shall be tolerated at any time. 
(m)  Professional bondspersons will refrain from using loud, boisterous, obscene, or harassing language or behavior while at the police department or jail. 
(n)  Professional bondspersons surrendering a person off-bond shall have all required paperwork completed and turned over to police department personnel at the jail door. 
(o)  No professional bondspersons are allowed in the police department office areas at any time, unless authorized by the patrol supervisor or while conducting official business. 
(p)  Bonds will not be completed by professional bondspersons until the client has completed all book-in procedures at the police department. 
(q)  No professional bondsperson shall give legal advice or recommend a plea to any inmate or recommend any attorney to any inmate. 
(r)  No professional bondsperson shall charge fees beyond those fees allowable by law. 
(Ord. of 2-23-98,  9) 
Sec. 7-720. - Bond forfeiture procedure. 
(a)  Upon completion of a bonding agreement between the bonding company and the principal, the bonding company shall be provided with notification of the date and time the principal is scheduled for appearance in court. The date and time for appearance in court shall be a part of the bonding agreement. In the event that the date and time for appearance in court is revised for any reason such as a continuance, the bonding company and the principal shall be notified within seventy-two (72) hours of the revised court date. The court clerk of the municipal court of the city shall notify the bonding company in writing of any such revisions within the seventy-two-hour limit, Saturdays, Sundays and legally observed holidays excluded. 
(b)  Any accused individual who fails to appear in municipal court on their appearance date and time as required, including any continuances granted, shall forfeit his or her bond by court order, as provided for by law. 
(c)  Upon an order of bond forfeiture, the municipal court judge shall order an execution hearing not sooner than one hundred twenty (120) days but not later than one hundred fifty (150) days after such failure to appear. Notice of the execution hearing shall be served within ten (10) days of such failure to appear by certified mail to the bonding company at the address listed on the bond document, or by personal service with the bonding company's registered agent. 
(d)  Upon determination at the execution hearing that judgment should be entered, the judge shall so order and a writ of fieri facias shall be filed with the clerk of court. 
(Ord. of 2-23-98,  10) 
Sec. 7-721. - Authority of the chief of police. 
    This article in no way prohibits the chief of police or his authorized agents, from time to time, from establishing additional criteria and policies approving and regulating bonding companies, nor limits the right of the chief of police to approve applications for the privilege of writing bail bonds. 
(Ord. of 2-23-98,  11) 
Sec. 7-722. - Exemptions. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as affecting the right of a citizen to sign a bond not for compensation or the right of surety companies that have complied with the laws of the state regulating those companies to carry on their regular business. 
(Ord. of 2-23-98,  12) 
Secs. 7-723-7-729. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - FOOD SALES ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 7-730. - Definitions. 
    Food sales establishment for the purpose of this section means retail and wholesale grocery stores; retail seafood stores and places of business; food processing plants, seafood processing plants, except those processing plants which are currently required to obtain a license from the commissioner of agriculture under any other provision of law; bakeries; confectionaries; fruit, nut, and vegetables stores or roadside stands; wholesale sandwich and salad manufacturers; including vending machines and operations connected therewith; and places of business and similar establishments, mobile or permanent, engaged in the sale of food primarily for consumption off premises. 
(Ord. of 1-27-03) 
Sec. 7-731. - Posted license required. 
    Each food sales establishment as defined herein licensed pursuant to this Code shall post such license on the premises in an open or conspicuous manner so as to be visible to the public. 
(Ord. of 1-27-03) 
Sec. 7-732. - Compliance required for issuance or renewal. 
    Pursuant to O.C.G.A.  26-2-25, the city clerk shall not issue or renew any occupation tax for any food sales establishment as defined herein until such establishment complies with the requirements of the Codes of Georgia and of the city. 
(Ord. of 1-27-03) 
Secs. 7-733-7-749. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of February 26, 2007 amended the Code by repealing former art. XVIII,  7-750-7-769, and adding a new art. XVIII. Former art. XVIII pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from an ordinance of November 10, 2003. 

Sec. 7-750. - Authority. 
    The legal authority for these rules is O.C.G.A.  16-5-71,  16-5-71.1,  16-12-5,  31-3-4, and chs. 5 and 40 of title 31. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-751. - Purpose. 
    The body art studios and body artists rules are adopted for the purpose of establishing reasonable standards for individuals performing body art procedures and the facilities from which the procedures are provided. Such standards are designed to promote the health and safety of all individuals performing and receiving body art services. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-752. - Exemptions. 
    These rules shall not apply to a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 34, or a technician acting under the direct on-site supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-753. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to these rules. Any word or phrase not defined below but otherwise defined in these rules shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
    Antibacterial solution means any solution used to retard the growth of bacteria which is approved for application to human skin and includes all products labeled accordingly as approved by FDA. 
    Biohazard means any infectious agents or parts thereof presenting a real or potential risk to the wellbeing of human or other species, directly through infection or indirectly through disruption of the environment. 
    Body art means the practice of physical body adornment by the following techniques: Body piercing, tattooing, and cosmetic tattooing. This definition does not include for the purposes of these rules, piercing of the outer perimeter or lube of the ear with pre-sterilized single-use stud and clasp ear piercing systems. 
    Body artist permit means the authorization granted by the board of health to the body artist to perform body art. Such permit is the property of the county board of health. 
    Body art studio means any permanent building, structure, or suite located in a planned commercial center on a permanent foundation, holding a valid city or county business permit or license, wherein a body artist performs body art. 
    Body artist means any person who performs body art. 
    Body piercing means puncturing or penetration the skin or mucosa of a person with any sharp instrument and/or the insertion of jewelry or other adornment thereto in the opening. 
    Cosmetic tattooing means to mark or color the skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting indelible pigments or dyes under the skin or mucosa. Cosmetic tattooing shall include permanent cosmetics, micro-pigmentation, permanent color technology, and micro-pigment implantation. 
    Board of health means the county board of health or its duly authorized representatives. 
    Currently licensed health care professional includes but is not limited to licensed physicians, registered nurses (RN), licensed practical nurses (LPN), and licensed emergency medical technicians. 
    Department means the state department of human resources. 
    Owner means a partnership, corporation, association, business entity, or person or group of persons which/who own, maintain, and control the body art studio and who are legally responsible for the operation of the body art studio. 
    Parlor means the actual room of the body art studio where the body artist performs procedures. 
    Body art studio permit means the authorization granted by the board of health to the owner to operate a body art studio. Such permit is the property of the county board of health. 
    Sanitary means clean and free of agents of infection or disease. 
    Sanitized means effective antibacterial treatment by a process that provides a sufficient concentration of chemicals for enough time to reduce the bacteria count including pathogens to a safe level on equipment. 
    Sharps means any discarded article that may cause punctures or cuts to the skin. 
    Standard precautions means a set of guidelines and controls, published by the Center for Disease Control (CDC) as "Guidelines for Prevention of Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Health-Care and Public-Safety Workers" in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), June 23, 1989, Vol. 38, NO. S-6; "Recommendation for Preventing Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Patients During Exposure-Prone Invasive Procedures," in MMWR, July 12, 1991, Vol. 40, No. RR-8; and "Recommendations for Prevention and Control of HCV Infection and HCV Related Chronic Disease" in MMWR, October 16, 1998, Vol. 47, No. RR-19. These methods of infection control require the employer and the employee to assume that all human blood and specified human body fluids are infectious for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and other blood borne pathogens. Precautions included, but are not limited to, hand washing, gloving, personal protective equipment, injury prevention, and proper handling and disposal of needles, other sharp instruments, and blood and body fluid contaminated products. Standard precautions include universal precautions. In the event that the CDC or other primary reference or regulatory authority publishes materials or amends regulations applicable to this definition shall be deemed amended to include the latest versions of these documents, regulations and recommendations. 
    Sterilization means holding an instrument in an autoclave for fifteen (15) minutes at fifteen (15) pounds pressure at a temperature of 273 degree Fahrenheit or 121 degrees Celsius. 
    Sterilizer means an autoclave certified to meet medical standards. 
    Sterilizer indicator means a tape, strip, or other device designed to change color to indicate that sterilization temperature has been achieved during the sterilization procedure. 
    Tattoo means to mark or color the skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting indelible pigments or dyes under the skin or mucosa and includes the definition of tattoo as defined in O.C.G.A.  31-40-1(1) and as many there after be amended. The term "tattoo" also includes all forms of cosmetic tattooing. 
    Wash means the cleansing the skin with warm water and antibacterial soap and drying with single-use towels. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-754. - Scope of rules. 
(a)  All permits issued under this article shall constitute a mere privilege to conduct the business so authorized during the term of the permit only and subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the city, the board of health, the department, and state law. 
(b)  The requirements of these rules shall be in addition to all other licensing, taxing, regulatory provisions of local, state, or federal law and shall not authorize violations of said other applicable laws. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-755. - Body art studio owner. 
(a)  The owner shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements in O.C.G.A. tit. 31, ch. 40, with any applicable administrative rules and regulations of the Department, and with the applicable rules of the county board of health, including, but not limited to, all applicable statutes and rules and regulations regarding disclosure of ownership. 
(b)  Prior to being granted a body art studio permit, the body art studio owner shall adopt and submit to the board of health a written statement of policies and procedures of the body art studio showing compliance with the following: 
(1)  No person under eighteen (18) shall perform body art procedures on individuals unless under the direct on-site supervision of a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 34. 
(2)  Body artists shall not be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs while performing body art procedures. 
(3)  No person shall perform body art procedures on an individual who is or reasonably appears to be under the influence of alcohol, drugs or other stimulants or depressants or is of unsound mind or body. 
(4)  No animals of any kind shall be allowed in a body art studio except service animals used by persons with legally recognized disabilities. 
(5)  No tattoo procedure shall be performed on a person under the age of eighteen (18) except by a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 34, or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such physician or osteopath with the written consent of a parent or guardian. 
(6)  No body piercing procedure shall be preformed on a person under the age of eighteen (18) without the written consent of a parent or guardian. The parent or guardian must be present when the piercing procedure is performed. 
(7)  No tattoo procedure shall be performed on any person within one (1) inch of any part of the eye socket of such person. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-756. - Body art studio permit. 
(a)  The owner of each body art studio shall obtain a valid body art studio permit from the county board of health environmental health section prior to beginning operation. Body art studios shall renew their permit annually in accordance with section 7-757 herein. 
(b)  The permit is the property of the county board of health. 
(c)  To be eligible for a new body art studio permit or a renewal permit, a body art studio must be in compliance with all of the requirements of these rules. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to practice body art procedures unless such procedures are performed in a body art studio operating under a valid body art studio permit issued by the county board of health environmental health section. 
(e)  The body art studio permit shall be displayed on the premises in a conspicuous place in public view at all times. Permits shall not be defaced or altered in any manner. A body art studio shall not post a reproduction of a permit unless the board of health has marked it "Duplicate." 
(f)  All body art studio permits issued pursuant to these rules are nontransferable. 
(g)  A body art studio permit shall be returned to the county board of health environmental health section if it is suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-757. - Application for body art studio permit. 
(a)  The application for a body art studio or for the renewal of a body art studio permit shall be made on forms provided by the county board of health environmental health section. 
(b)  Any application for a new body art studio permit or for the renewal of a body art studio permit shall be sworn to by the applicant as true, correct, and complete before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(c)  Applications for a new permit. 
(1)  At lease thirty (30) days prior to the anticipated date of opening, the owner of a new body art studio shall submit an application to the county board of health environmental health section for a body art studio permit to operate under these rules. 
(2)  The application for a new body art studio permit shall include: 
a.  A quarter inch per foot scale drawing of the floor plan of the body art studio and a drawing of associated details shown at one and a half (11/2) inches per foot scale, signed by a registered engineer or architect. Such drawing shall show the accurate placement of each of the following: 
1.  Hand-sinks; 
2.  Bathroom(s); 
3.  First-aid kits; 
4.  Waiting area(s); 
5.  Windows; 
6.  Doors; 
7.  Tables; 
8.  Chairs; 
9.  Room measurements; 
10.  Equipment; 
b.  A zoning certification obtained from the appropriate jurisdiction. The applicant shall comply with all applicable zoning, building, safety, fire, and other local codes and requirements; 
c.  A copy of the certificate of occupancy for the studio; 
d.  A complete description of all body art services which will be provided in the body art studio; 
e.  The full or legal name under which the body art studio is conducted; 
f.  The address of the body art studio; 
g.  If the owner leases the location, the name and current address of the landlord; 
h.  The name and home address of the owner; if the owner of body art studio is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners; if the owner is a cooperation, the date and place of incorporation and the name and address of its registered agent in the state; of if the owner is any type of association, the names of the principals of the association; 
i.  A list containing the full names and home addresses of all employees and staff who will be working in a body art studio; 
j.  A copy of the written statement of policies and procedures of the body art studio in accordance with section 7-755 of these rules; 
k.  An acknowledgement signed by the owner acknowledging that the owner has read and understands these rules; and 
l.  Such other information as may be deemed necessary by the board of health. 
(3)  The applicant shall submit a non-refundable plan review fee as set by the county board of health and approved by the county board of commissioners. 
(d)  Applications for renewal. 
(1)  At least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of a body art studio permit, the owner shall submit an application to the county board of health environmental health section for renewal of the body art studio permit. 
(2)  The application for the renewal of a body art studio permit shall include: 
a.  A complete description of all body art services that will be provided at the studio; 
b.  The full or legal name under which the body art studio is operated; 
c.  The address of the body art studio; 
d.  If the owner leases the location, the name and current address of the landlord; 
e.  The name and current home address of the owner of the body art studio is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners; if the owner is a corporation, the date and place of incorporation and the name and address of its registered agent in the state; or if the owner is any other type of association, the names of the principals of the association; 
f.  An updated list containing the full names and home addresses of all current employees and staff who will be working in the body art studio; 
g.  A copy of the written statement of policies and procedures of the body art studio in accordance with section 7-755 of these rules; 
h.  An acknowledgement signed by the owner acknowledging that the owner has read and understands these rules; and 
i.  Such other information as may be deemed necessary by the board of health. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-758. - Issuance of body art studio permits and fees. 
(a)  The county board of health environmental health section may issue a body art studio permit to an owner after determining that the studio is in compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. tit. 31, ch. 40, with any applicable administrative rules and regulations of the department of human resources, and with these rules. 
(b)  A body art studio shall submit an application for a new body art studio permit when any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The studio is remodeled, renovated, or expanded; 
(2)  There is a change in the legal ownership of the body art studio; or 
(3)  An existing facility is moved or relocated. 
(c)  Body art studios permits shall automatically expire on June 30 of each year. 
(d)  Prior to the issuance of a body art studio permit, the owner must pay the applicable permit fee. Body art studio permit fees shall not be prorated except that an owner who submits an application for a body art studio permit on January 1 or later shall only be required to pay half of the body art studio permit fee. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-759. - Application to existing businesses. 
    The provisions of these rules shall be applicable to all body art studios whether the studios were established before or after the effective date of these rules. Any body art studio in business on the effective date of these rules shall comply with all requirements of these rules within six (6) months of the effective date. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-760. - Body art studio minimum floor plan requirements. 
(a)  The body art studio shall be constructed, arranged, and maintained so as to provide adequately for the health and safety of its customers and staff. 
(b)  The body art studio shall be constructed in a manner to allow the customer receiving the procedure adequate privacy from observers. The parlor shall be separate from the waiting area. 
(c)  Each parlor shall have a minimum of forty-five (45) square feet of floor space. 
(d)  Insects, vermin, and/or rodents shall not be present in any part of the body art studio. Effective measures shall be taken by the body art studio owner to prevent the breeding or presence on the premises of insects, vermin, and/or rodents. 
(e)  The body art studio shall have adequate mechanical ventilation in compliance with current state and local building codes. 
(f)  Walls and ceilings shall be painted or covered in a manner which allows for easy and effective cleaning. All paint and coverings shall be light in color. 
(g)  Parlor floors shall be constructed of nonabsorbent material which will allow for effective cleaning. Floors in the parlor areas shall not be covered with carpet or wood. 
(h)  A clean and sanitary toilet and hand washing facility shall be made accessible to customers; however, it shall be separate from the parlor. 
(i)  Each parlor shall be equipped with at least one sink providing hot and cold water under pressure trough mixing valve with not aerator, and with foot or wrist actuated controls, for the use of the body artists for washing their hands and preparing customers for the body art procedures. This area shall be provided with dispenses soap, an antibacterial solution, dispenses single-use towels, and an individual hand brushes for each body artist. 
(j)  An equipment washing sink shall be provided in the studio, distinct from the hand sinks and shall be located in the equipment handling and assembly area. This sink shall meet National Safety Foundation (NSF) standards. 
(k)  Each parlor shall be equipped with an artificial light source equivalent to at least twenty (20) foot candles three (3) feet off the floor. Body art procedure areas and equipment handling and assembly areas shall be provided with one hundred (100) foot candles at the level where the procedure is performed. 
(l)  Parlors shall not be used as corridors for access to other rooms. 
(m)  A water heater capable of heating water to 100 F shall be provided. The size and capacity of such water heater shall be subject to the approval of the board of health. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-761. - Body art studio furnishings and fixtures. 
(a)  Furnishings of the body art studio shall be maintained in sanitary condition and shall be intact and functional. The studio shall be kept clean, neat, and free of litter and rubbish. 
(b)  Cabinets for the storage instruments, dyes, pigments, single-use articles, carbon, stencils, jewelry, studs, and other supplies shall be provided for each body artist and shall be designed, manufactured, and maintained in a sanitary manner so as to protect contents from contamination. 
(c)  Worktables and chairs shall be provided for each body artist. 
(1)  Surfaces of all worktables and chairs shall be constructed of material which is smooth, light colored, nonporous, nonabsorbent, corrosion resistant, and easily sanitized. 
(2)  Worktables and chairs shall be sanitized with a bactericidal solution after each procedure. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-762. - Body art studio supplies. 
(a)  Single-use supplies shall be commercially packaged and handled to protect them from contamination. These supplies shall be stored in an area separate from chemical supplies and toilet facilities. 
(b)  All materials applied to human skin including, but not limited to, ink, stencils, and single-use piercing needles shall be from single-use containers and shall be disposed of after each use. 
(c)  Jewelry supplies used in a body art studio shall be made of implant grade high quality stainless steel, gold, platinum, titanium, niobium, or dense low porosity plastic. The jewelry shall also be smooth surfaced and scratch free. 
(d)  Only single-use sterile gauze and single use antibacterial ointment dispensers shall be used. 
(e)  Single-use items shall not be used on more than one client for any reason. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-763. - Sterilization. 
(a)  Instrument cleaning. 
(1)  All non single-use, non-disposable instruments shall be properly cleaned and sterilized after each use by following the manufacture's recommendations prior to packaging and sterilization. 
(2)  Employees shall wear heavy-duty, multi-use, waterproof gloves while cleaning instruments. 
(3)  Used instruments shall be soaked in an EPA approved disinfectant until cleaning can be performed. The solution shall be changed as recommended by the solution manufacturer. 
(4)  Instruments shall be disassembled for cleaning. 
(5)  All instrument components shall be cleaned, either manually or in an ultrasonic cleaner, using the appropriate cleaning agent specified to the type of cleaning performed. 
(b)  Instrument packaging. 
(1)  Employees shall wear clean gloves while packaging or wrapping instruments. 
(2)  Instruments shall be wrapped or packaged with a sterilizer indicator on the package. 
(3)  All packages shall be labeled with the time and date of sterilization. Packages will no longer be considered sterile six (6) months after the date or sterilization. 
(c)  Instrument sterilization. 
(1)  The sterilizer shall be designed and labeled as a medical instrument sterilizer. 
(2)  The operator's manual for the sterilizer shall be available on the premises, and the sterilizer shall be operated according to the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(3)  The sterilizer shall be cleaned and maintained according to the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(4)  A sterilizer load log shall be maintained for the studio and made available for inspection by properly identified representatives of the board of health during normal operation hours. The log shall be kept for a minimum of one (1) year. The log shall contain the following documentation for each load. 
a.  Descriptions of instruments contained in the load; 
b.  Date of sterilization, and time if more than one load is processed in a single day; 
c.  Sterilizer cycle time and temperature; 
d.  Indication of proper sterilization of instruments, as indicated by the appropriate color change of the sterilizer indicator on each package. The indicator used shall be compatible with the sterilization process being used; and 
e.  Action taken when appropriate color indicator change did not occur. 
(d)  Sterilization monitoring. 
(1)  Sterilizer monitoring shall be performed at least once every two (2) months (unless more frequent monitoring is specified by the manufacturer) by using a commercial biological monitoring (spore) system. 
(2)  All biological indicators shall be analyzed by a laboratory that operates under FDA guidelines and is independent of the studio with reports sent to the studio and the county board of health environmental health section. 
(3)  Biological indicator test results shall be maintained in the premises for a minimum of one (1) year and must be available for inspection by properly identified representatives for the board of health during normal operation hours. 
(4)  Upon notification of a positive microbiological monitoring report, the sterilizer shall be immediately checked for proper use and function. The studio will cease operations immediately upon receipt of a positive microbiological report. Three (3) consecutive biological tests shall be performed before the studio is reopened. All three (3) tests must be a negative. The studio shall have the option to purchase and install a new sterilizer in order to reopen prior to the receipt of the test result on the previous sterilizer. 
(e)  Instrument storage. 
(1)  Hands shall be washed and gloved prior to handling sterilized objects 
(2)  After sterilization, the instruments shall be stored in a dry, clean area reserved for storage of sterilized instruments. 
(f)  Single-use items. If the body art studio operates using only pre-sterilized instruments and supplies, a sterilizer is not required. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-764. - Disinfection of workplace. 
(a)  Each body art studio shall be kept clean and sanitary. 
(b)  The owner shall develop the implement a cleaning schedule that includes appropriate methods of decontamination, plus any tasks or procedures to be performed daily. This written schedule shall be based on the types of surfaces to be cleaned, the types of possible contamination present, the tasks or procedures to be performed, and their location within the body art studio. The owner shall maintain a log of all scheduled cleaning. This log shall be available for review by properly identified representatives of the board of health during normal operation hours. Violation of proper maintenance and documentation thereof will be grounds for immediate closure and suspension of the owner's body art permit. 
(c)  All work surfaces shall be disinfected with an EPA approved disinfectant at the beginning of each work day, after completion of body art procedures on each individual, and at the end of each work day. 
(d)  All protective coverings such as plastic wrap and aluminum foil shall be removed after each body art procedure and replaced with unused protective coverings. 
(e)  Reusable receptacles such as bins, pails, and cans that have the likelihood of becoming contaminated shall be decontaminated on a daily basis with a current EPA approval disinfectant. When contamination is visible, receptacles shall be cleaned and decontaminates immediately. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-765. - Disposal of waste. 
(a)  All disposable instruments are considered biohazardous and must be disposed of as biohazardous material. All biohazardous waste must be disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws, rules, and ordinances regarding biohazardous waste. Needles, razors, and other sharp instruments shall be placed in puncture restraint, closed containers immediately after use and shall be stored in closed cabinets or drawers at the end of each workday. 
(b)  Needles shall not be purposely bent, broken, or otherwise manipulated. 
(c)  Sharps waste shall be safely discarded in a rigid and puncture restraint waste container that is leak proof on the sides and bottom with a self-closing lid. These containers shall be labeled with the international biohazard symbol and the word "BIOHAZARD." Sharps waste shall be removed and disposed of by a company that will dispose of it in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws, rules and ordinances regarding biohazardous waste. 
(d)  Biohazardous non-sharps waste shall be discarded in a biohazard bag. Waste shall be removed and disposed of by a company that will dispose of it in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws, rules and ordinances regarding biohazardous waste. 
(e)  Non-biohazardous disposable wastes shall be placed in lined, easily cleanable containers with tight fitting lids to prevent leakage or spillage. 
(f)  Non-biohazardous disposable waste shall be handled, stored, and disposed of so as to minimize direct exposure of personnel to waste materials. 
(g)  Self-closing waste containers lined with plastic bags manufactured specifically for waste containers shall be located within each parlor and restroom and shall be emptied at least once per day into a commercially approved dumpster. This dumpster must be picked up and emptied by a commercial contractor to least once per week. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-766. - Client files. 
(a)  The owner shall maintain a detailed client file of the body art procedures administered to each client. 
(b)  The client file shall be created prior to any body art procedure being performed and shall reflect the clients name and signature, address, proof of age, body art procedure performed, date, design, its precise location upon the body, and the name of the body artist or body artists performing or assisting in the procedure. The client files shall also describe whether any complications or incidents arose during the procedure and detail what action was taken to resolve the incident. A copy of a valid state issued photo ID must be obtained from the client and maintained with the client's file. 
(c)  Each client shall be provided with an informed consent statement that fully explains the procedure and each client shall be required to sign the informed consent statement prior to receiving any body art procedure. The informed consent statement signed by the client shall be maintained by the owner in the client file, with a copy given to the client. 
(d)  A "disclaimer of liability" from promulgated by the board shall also be signed by the client prior to receiving any body art procedure. A copy of the "disclaimer of liability" signed by the client shall be maintained by the owner in the client file, with a copy given to the client. 
(e)  The client file shall contain a signed and dated statement by the client attesting that he or she is not under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs at the time of the body art procedure is performed. 
(f)  The client file shall contain a signed and dated statement by the client attesting that he or she has received, read, and understood a copy of the after care procedures advising the client on proper subsequent care of the body art. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-767. - Body art studio inspections. 
(a)  The premises of any body art studio and all records required to be maintained under these regulations shall be available for review and examination by properly identified representatives of the board of health during normal operation hours for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with these rules. 
(b)  The owner shall be responsible for having an employee with knowledge of the studio's records on duty at the body art studio during all hours of operation. 
(c)  Studio inspections shall be performed at least two (2) times annually. additional studio inspections shall be performed as often as necessary for the enforcement of these rules. Any violation of these rules will require a re-inspection of the body art studio to determine whether that violation has been corrected. Each re-inspection will carry a re-inspection fee. 
(d)  A copy of the most current inspection report shall be posted in public view, in an unobscured manner, at eye level (five (5) feet +/- six (6) inches) within fifteen (15) feet of the main door. The inspection report shall be approachable to within one (1) foot. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-768. - Body art studio personnel. 
(a)  Body artists shall obtain and maintain current certification in emergency first-aid, CPR, sterilization, blood borne pathogen, and sanitary procedures from currently licensed health care professional. All certification must be renewed at a minimum of every two (2) years unless a more frequent time period is specifies by the licensing agencies. 
(b)  The above certifications must be obtained before each body artist's employment. 
(c)  Each body artist must obtain an examination by a current licensed physician within twelve (12) months prior to the initial application for a body art permit. Each body artist must obtain from the physician a certificate certifying that the body artist is free of any communicable disease in a communicable state, including but not limited to, syphilis, hepatitis B and C, and HIV. 
(d)  The owner must maintain a file on all employees who perform body art procedures. Such files shall be available for inspection by properly identified representatives if the board of health during normal operation hours. The file shall include the following: 
(1)  Report of physical examination; 
(2)  Evidence of current emergency first-aid, CPR, sterilization, blood borne pathogen, and sanitation certification; and 
(3)  The home address and home telephone number of each employee. 
(e)  The owner of a body art studio shall only hire, employ, or use individuals who have complied with these rules. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-769. - Body artist permit. 
(a)  No person may perform body art without first obtaining a body artist permit. Body artists shall renew their permit annually. 
(b)  A body artist permit shall not be eligible for renewal unless all requirements of these rules are met. 
(c)  The body artist permit shall be displayed in the body artist parlor. 
(d)  All body artist permits issued pursuant to these rules are nontransferable. 
(e)  All body artist permits shall be returned to the board of health if it is suspended or revoked. 
(f)  Proof of current certification in first-aid, CPR, blood borne pathogen training, sanitation, and sterilizer training shall be required prior to be issuance of a body artist permit and shall be maintained in good standing. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-770. - Application for a body artist permit. 
(a)  Each body artist shall submit to the board of health an application for a body artist permit. 
(b)  The application for a body artist permit shall be made on forms provided by the board of health. 
(c)  Application for a body artist permit shall include the following information concerning the body artist: 
(1)  Full legal name; 
(2)  All aliases; 
(3)  Home address; 
(4)  Gender; 
(5)  Mailing address; 
(6)  Home phone number; 
(7)  Training and/or experience; 
(8)  Evidence of current certification in CPR, first-aid, and blood borne pathogens training, sanitation, and sterilization training completion; 
(9)  Physician report of physical examination. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-771. - Issuance of body artist permit and fees. 
(a)  The county board of health, environmental health section may issue a body artist permit to an individual after determining that the individual is in compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. tit. 31, ch. 40, with any applicable rules and regulations of the department, and with these rules. 
(b)  A body artist permit shall automatically expire on June 30 of each year. 
(c)  At least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the body artist permit, the body artist shall submit an application for renewal to the county board of health, environmental health section and pay the applicable permit fee. 
(d)  Prior to the issuance of a body artist permit, the body artist shall pay the applicable permit fee. 
(e)  A body artist fee shall not be prorated except that an individual who submits an application for a body artist permit on January 1 or later shall only be required to pay half the body artist permit fee. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-772. - Application to existing body artist. 
    The provisions of these rules shall be applicable to all body artist, whether the body artist began performing body art before or after the effective date of these rules. Any body artist established on the effective date of these rules shall comply with all requirements of these rules within six (6) months of the effective date. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-773. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No person shall tattoo the body of an individual who is under eighteen (18) years of age, unless the person performing the tattoo procedure is a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 34, or a technician acting under the direct supervision if such licensed physician or osteopath in compliance with O.C.G.A. tit. 31, ch. 9. 
(b)  No person shall pierce the body, with the exception of ear lobes, of any person under the age of eighteen (18) for the purpose of allowing the insertion of earrings, jewelry, or similar objects to the body, unless the minor's legal parent, custodian, or guardian with the proper identification is present and signs a written consent form provided by the body art studio. The consent form must indicate the methods and part(s) of the minor's body upon which the body art procedure is performed. 
(c)  No person shall tattoo the body of any person within any area within one (1) inch of the nearest part of the eye socket of such person. 
(d)  No person shall obtain the services provided in a body art studio by misrepresentation of age in any place where body art procedures are performed. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-774. - Sanitation. 
(a)  Body artists shall follow standard precautions. 
(b)  All hand and/or arm jewelry worn by body artist shall be removed prior to the start of the body art procedure. 
(c)  Prior to performing body art on each client, the fingernails and hands of body artist shall be thoroughly washed and scrubbed with warm water and antibacterial soap, using an individual, single-use scrub. Surgical scrubs are not to be reused. The hands shall then be dried using single-use towels. 
(d)  Prior to the start of the body art procedure the body artist should inspect his/her hands for hangnails, small cuts, sores, and abrasions. If a cut, sore, or abrasion is detected, a bandage should be applied for added protection before gloving. Fingernails shall be trimmed to insure that the gloves are not punctured. 
(e)  Single-use medical-surgical disposable examination gloves shall be worn during that body art procedure. Gloves shall be changed and properly disposed of each time there is an interruption in the procedure, the gloves become torn or punctured, or whatever their integrity has been compromised. 
(f)  Each body artist shall wear a clean outer garment, apron, or smock. These items shall be changed after each client. 
(g)  Body artists who are experiencing symptoms of illness including, but not limited to, diarrhea, vomiting, fever, rash, or skin infections shall refrain from performing body art. 
(h)  Adequate numbers of sterilized needles and tubes must be on hand for each body artist for the entire day and/or night operation. 
(i)  Only single-use disposable razors shall be used to shave the ear where the body art procedure will be performed. 
(j)  All items that come in contact with the client's skin shall be single-use and disposed of after the procedure. 
(k)  All fixtures and equipment contaminated with blood shall be cleaned with an approved sanitizer or with a ten (10) percent bleach solution made fresh daily. 
(l)  Smoking, eating, or drinking by anyone is prohibited in a parlor where body art procedures are performed. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-775. - Dyes and pigments. 
(a)  Only single-use containers of dyes and pigments that are currently FDA approved for tattooing of human skin shall be used. 
(b)  All dyes and pigments shall be used according to the manufacturer's instructions. 
(c)  After tattooing each individual, the remaining unused dye or pigment in the single-use container shall be discarded along with the container into a biohazard container. 
(d)  In preparing dyes and pigments to be used by a body artist, only nontoxic sterile single-use materials shall be used. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-776. - Tattoo preparation. 
(a)  Prior to placing a tattoo design on the client's skin, any jewelry worn by the client that might impede that body art procedure shall be removed. 
(b)  The body artist shall apply an antibacterial solution to the skin in the involved areas. 
(c)  If a paper stencil is used by a body artist for transferring the design to the skin, the stencil shall be single-use and disposable. 
(d)  If the design is drawn directly onto the skin it shall be applied with a single-use article only. 
(e)  The completed tattoo shall be washed with a single-use towel saturated with an antibacterial solution. 
(f)  After the area had dried, a thick layer of antibacterial ointment from a collapsible or plastic tube shall be applied. 
(g)  After the application if the antibacterial ointment, a bandage shall be applied to the tattoo using sealed non-sticking pads. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-777. - Procedures specific to body piercing. 
(a)  Before piercing the skin of a client, any jewelry worn by the client that might impede the procedure shall be removed. 
(b)  The body artist shall apply an antibacterial solution to the skin in the involved area prior to the procedure being performed. 
(c)  The body artist shall apply an antibacterial ointment to the skin in the involved area after the procedure is performed. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-778. - Compliance. 
(a)  A body art studio shall operate in compliance with these rules and with a valid body art studio permit issued by the county board of health. 
(b)  A body artist shall perform body art procedures in compliance with these rules and with a valid body artist permit issued by the county board of health. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-779. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The board of health shall have the power and authority to deny, suspend, or revoke any permit issued under these rues for failure to comply with the provisions there of. When an application for a permit is denied or the permit previously granted is suspended or revoked, the applicant or holder thereof shall be afforded notice and hearing in accordance with O.C.G.A. tit. 31, ch. 5, art. 1, and the county board of health enforcement rules. In lieu of a hearing and upon correction of all violations, the permit holder may request an inspection to reinstate the permit. 
(b)  These rules, upon adoption by the mayor and council of the city, shall be enforced by the county board of health as a duly adopted ordinance of the city in the municipal court of the city. Any person violating any provision of these rules shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the city, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed on thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and/or by confinement in the county jail for a total term not to exceed sixty (60) days, or both. 
(c)  The court shall have the power and authority to place any person found guilty of a violation of these rules on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. As a condition of such suspension, the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by the law. 
(d)  The board of health is also empowered to institute appropriate proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of enjoining a violation of any applicable provision of O.C.G.A. tit. 31, ch. 40, of the rules and regulations of the department, or the rule of the county board of health. 
(e)  Any person, firm, or corporation operating a body art studio without a valid permit or performing body art outside of a permitted body art studio shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-780. - Grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation. 
(a)  The permit of body art studio may be denied, suspended, or revoked upon one (1) or more of the followings grounds: 
(1)  Failure of the permit holder to maintain initial requirements for obtaining the permit; 
(2)  The owner allows or permits any person who does not have a valid body artist permit to perform a body art procedure in the body art studio; 
(3)  The original application, or renewal thereof, contains materially false information; or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
(4)  Failure of the owner to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, customers and others on the premises in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public and the customers; or 
(5)  The owner or the owner's employees associated with the body art studio have allowed to occur or have engaged in a violation of any part of these rules. 
(b)  The permit of a body artist may be denied, suspended, or revoked upon one (1) or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure of the body artist to maintain initial requirements for obtaining the body artist permit; 
(2)  The body artist has violated any of the provisions of these rules; or 
(3)  The original application, or renewal thereof, contains materially false information; or the body artist has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 7-781. - Conflict with other laws. 
    Should any section or provision of these rules be in conflict with any other applicable ordinance, rule, regulation, provision, requirement, or law, then the more restrictive ordinance, rule, regulation, provision, requirement, or law shall control. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Secs. 7-782-7-799. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - HOTEL AND MOTEL EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 7-800. - Title. 
    This article shall be referred to and commonly known as the "Duluth Hotel and Motel Excise Tax Ordinance." The authority to levy this tax is granted through O.C.G.A.  48-13-50 et seq. 
(Ord. of 4-24-06) 
Sec. 7-801. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City. The City of Duluth, Georgia. 
    Clerk. The Clerk of the City of Duluth, Georgia. 
    Due date. The twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
    Guest room. A room occupied, or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants. 
    Hotel or motel. Any building or structure, or any portion thereof, kept, used or maintained as or advertised or held out to furnish for value to the public any room or rooms, lodgings, accommodations furnished by any person or legal entity licensed by, or required to pay business or occupation taxes to the city for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, campground or any other place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are regularly furnished for value. 
    Monthly period. A calendar month of any year. 
    Occupancy. The use or possession of, or the right to use or possess, any guest room or apartment in a hotel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
    Occupant or guest. Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use, or other agreement, or otherwise. 
    Operator. Any person operating a hotel in the city, including but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, the lessee, sub lessee, lender in possession, licensee, or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
    Permanent resident. Any occupant who has or shall have occupied, or has or shall have the right to occupancy of, any guest room for a period of more than ten (10) consecutive days. 
    Person. An individual or natural person, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, non-profit corporation, limited liability company, estate, administrator, executor, conservator, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
    Rent. The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
    Return. Any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
    Tax. The tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. of 4-24-06) 
Sec. 7-802. - Imposition and rate of tax. 
    There is hereby levied, assessed and imposed, and there shall be paid a tax of five (5) percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city. Excluded are the taxes owed after the tenth day on rooms furnished for more than ten (10) consecutive days. The tax shall be paid upon any occupancy occurring on or after May 1, 2006, although such occupancy is pursuant to a contract, lease or other arrangement made prior to said date. Where rent is paid or charged, billed or falls due on either a weekly, monthly or other term basis, the rent so paid, charged, billed, or falling due shall be subject to the tax herein imposed to the extent that it covers any portion of the month of May, 2006 and any portion of any monthly lease period thereafter. 
(Ord. of 4-24-06) 
Sec. 7-803. - Persons liable; extinguishment of liability. 
    Every person occupying a guest room in a hotel in this city is liable for the tax. This liability is not extinguished until the tax has been paid to the city except that a receipt from an operator maintaining a place of business in this city or from an operator who is authorized by the clerk, under such rules and regulations as she may prescribe, to collect the tax and who is, for the purposes of this article, regarded as an operator maintaining a place of business in this city, which receipt is given to the occupant pursuant to section 7-804 hereof, is sufficient to relieve the occupant from further liability for the tax to which the receipt refers. 
(Ord. of 4-24-06) 
Sec. 7-804. - Collection of tax by operator; receipt to occupant; rules for collection schedule. 
(a)  Every operator maintaining a place of business in this city as provided in section 7-803 and renting guest rooms in this city not exempted under section 7-806 shall collect the tax described in section 7-802 from the occupant. 
(b)  Such operator shall, at the time of collecting the rent from the occupant, provide a receipt to the occupant to whom the tax is charged showing the amount of rent and the amount of all taxes by category. 
(c)  All taxes due shall be collected at the same time as rent is collected. In all cases of transactions upon credit or deferred payment, the payment of tax to the operator may be deferred in accordance therewith, and the operator shall be liable for such tax at the time and to the extent that these credits are incurred in accordance with the rate of tax owing on the amount thereof. 
(d)  The clerk shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations prescribing methods and schedules for the collection and payment of the tax. 
(Ord. of 4-24-06) 
Sec. 7-805. - Unlawful advertising regarding tax. 
    It is unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any guest, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof, will be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that it will not be added to the rental of the guest room, or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded. 
(Ord. of 4-24-06) 
Sec. 7-806. - Exemptions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no tax shall be levied as provided in this article under the following circumstances: 
(1)  No tax shall be levied or imposed under this article or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business. 
(2)  No tax shall be levied or imposed for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations provided to any persons who certify that they are staying in such room, lodging or accommodation as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty. 
(3)  The tax shall be levied or imposed on the fees or charges for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations during the first ten (10) days of continuous occupancy but shall not be levied and imposed on charges imposed for any continuous occupancy thereafter. 
(4)  No tax shall be levied or imposed upon the fees or charges for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished for use as meeting rooms or to any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided without charge. 
(Ord. of 4-24-06) 
Sec. 7-807. - Registration of operator; form contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
    Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall immediately register with the clerk on a form provided by the clerk. Persons engaged in this business must register no later than fifteen (15) days after the date the tax becomes effective and is imposed as set forth in section 7-802, but the privilege of registration imposed after the imposition of the tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof, regardless of registration. The registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of its place or places of business and such other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the clerk may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in the case of ownership by a corporation or other entity, by an officer of said entity. The clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and come readily to the notice of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. This certificate is nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be returned immediately to the clerk upon the cessation of business at that location named or upon the sale or transfer of the business at that location. 
(Ord. of 4-24-06) 
Sec. 7-808. - Due date for taxes. 
    All taxes levied and imposed by this article shall be due and payable to the city monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month following each respective monthly period in which such taxes are collected. 
(Ord. of 4-24-06) 
Sec. 7-809. - Returns and time for filing returns; remittance of tax; extension of time for filing. 
    On or before the twentieth day of the month following each monthly period, each operator of each hotel shall file a return with the clerk showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, rent from government officials or employees while traveling on official business, rent from persons certifying the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty, taxable rent, amount of taxes due for the related period and such other information as may be required by the clerk. Accompanied with each return when filed shall be the remittance of the net amount of tax due. For a good cause the clerk may extend for a period not to exceed one (1) month, the time for making any return or payment to the tax. No further extension of time may be granted. Any person to whom an extension of time has been granted, who makes a return and pays the tax within the period of extension shall pay in addition to the tax, interest on the amount thereof at the rate of one (1) percent per month, or fraction thereof, for a period of this extension to the time of return and payment. 
(Ord. of 4-24-06) 
Sec. 7-810. - Collection fee allowed operators. 
    Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed for same by way of a deduction upon submission, reporting, and payment of the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three (3) percent of the amount due as provided for under O.C.G.A. Title 48, Chapter 13, Article 3 ( 48-13-52) as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. of 4-24-06) 
Sec. 7-811. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority; basis of recomputation. If the clerk is not satisfied with the return of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, she may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within her possession or that may come into her possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty. The amount of the deficiency shall bear a penalty of five (5) percent or five dollars ($5.00), which ever is greater on the past due amount, from the original due date of the tax. 
(c)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of twelve (12) percent per annum from the due date of taxes. 
(d)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination, the clerk may offset overpayments for a period, or periods, against unpaid tax found to be due for another period or periods, against penalties, and against the interest on such unpaid tax. 
(e)  Notice of determination; service of. The clerk, or her designated representative, shall give to the operator written notice of her determination of deficiency. The notice may be served personally or by certified mail. If by certified mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his/her address as it appears in the records of the clerk. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(f)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three (3) years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three (3) years after the return is filed, whichever period shall last expire. 
(Ord. of 4-24-06) 
Sec. 7-812. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any operator fails to make a return, the clerk of the city shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the operator or, as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the clerk. Upon the basis of this estimate the clerk shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid the city, adding to the sum thus determined a penalty equal to fifteen (15) percent thereof. One (1) or more determinations may be made of the amount due for one (1) or more than one (1) monthly period. 
(b)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination the clerk may offset overpayments for a period, or periods, against unpaid tax found to be due for another period or periods, against penalties, and against interest on unpaid tax found to be due. The interest on such unpaid tax shall be computed in the manner set forth in section 7-811(c). 
(c)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the unpaid tax found to be due by the clerk shall bear interest at the rate as set forth in section 7-811(c) above. 
(d)  Notice of determination; service of. Promptly after making this determination, the clerk shall give to the operator written notice of the determination as set forth in section 7-811(e) above. 
(Ord. of 4-24-06) 
Sec. 7-813. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Action for tax; time for. When it is determined by a return filed, or by the clerk having made a determination under the provisions of section 7-811 or section 7-812 of this article that tax is due and payable to the city under the provisions of this article, the clerk may at any time within three (3) years after determination that such tax is due and payable bring an action in the courts of this state, of any other state, or of the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount of tax payable to the city together with interest thereon and penalties, court costs, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
The bringing of such an action shall not be a prerequisite for the issuance of a Fi. Fa. under the provisions of subparagraph (d) this section. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount of tax under this article sells or transfers his/her business, his/her successors or assigns shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price of the business to cover such amount of tax, interest thereon, and penalties, and pay such sum over to the city unless the operator liable for such tax delivers to such purchaser or transferee, as the case may be, at the time of such sale or transfer, a certificate from the clerk showing that all tax returns required of such operator have been filed and all taxes shown as being payable on said returns have been paid in full. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold; time to enforce successors' liability. If the purchaser or transferee of a business fails to withhold the required amount of the purchase price, he/she shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him/her to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells or transfers his/her business, or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs the later. 
(d)  Issuance of Fi. Fa. The clerk is hereby authorized to issue a Fi. Fa. for execution and levy to satisfy the amount of any tax, penalty or interest due but not paid under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-24-06) 
Sec. 7-814. - Administration of article. 
(a)  Authority of the clerk. The clerk of the city, under supervision of the city manager, shall administer and enforce provisions of this article for the levy and collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The clerk shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other ordinances of the city, or the laws of the state, or the constitution of this state or the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the taxes hereunder. 
(c)  Records required from operators; form. Every operator shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the clerk may require. 
(d)  Examination of records; audits. The clerk, or any person authorized in writing by her, may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount of tax required to be paid. 
(e)  Authority to require reports; contents. In the administration of the provisions of this article, the clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in such person's or persons' possession or custody information relating to rentals of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the clerk when required by the clerk and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the clerk may require. 
(f)  The clerk or any person having an administrative duty under this article shall not in any manner [permit] the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment or other facilities of any operator or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses or expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, [to be seen or examined by any persons not having that administrative duty under this article;] or permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having that administrative duty under this article. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax or amounts of tax, interest and penalties required to be collected. 
(Ord. of 4-24-06) 
Editor's note- City administrator changed to city manager at the direction of the city. 
Sec. 7-815. - Agents for receiving notices. 
    When registering pursuant to section 7-807 herein each operator shall appoint in writing an agent to receive for the operator any notice required to be given to the operator under the provisions of this article, stating the full name, street address, mailing address and telephone number of such agent. Such agent shall be either an individual resident of the city or an employee of the operator who regularly works at the operator's place of business on a daily basis, and the appointment of the agent must be accompanied by the written consent of such agent to serve as agent for the operator. Such agent may be changed from time to time by written appointment of, and consent of a successor agent. The operator is required to have such an agent at all times and should an agent cease to be a resident of the city or an employee regularly working at the operator's place of business in the city, as the case may be, the operator shall immediately file a written appointment of a new agent and such agent's consent to serve as such with the clerk. Any agent so appointed by an operator shall be authorized to receive for and on behalf of the operator any notice required to be given to the operator by the provisions of this article. Delivery of any such notice to such agent, in person or by certified mail, shall be sufficient to meet the requirements of this article and such notice shall be binding on the operator. This method of giving notice to operators is supplementary and cumulative of the other methods of giving notice set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 4-24-06) 
Sec. 7-816. - Appropriation of sums collected. 
    All sums colleted under this article shall be expended for any purposed authorized by law as stated in O.C.G.A.  48-13-50 et seq. 
(Ord. of 4-24-06) 
Sec. 7-817. - Violations; fines and punishment. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-6 of the City Code. Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. 
(b)  Any operator or other person who fails to register as required herein or to furnish any return required to be made or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the clerk or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(c)  If after hearing held before the municipal court, the court shall find that any person has willfully avoided payment of the tax imposed by this article, he may suspend or revoke all city licenses held by said tax evader. The owner, manager or operator of the hotel accommodations shall have an opportunity to be heard and such hearing to be held not less than five (5) days after notice of the time and place of the hearing addressed to the owner, manager or operator at his/her last known place of business. The suspension or revocation of any license shall not release or discharge the owner, manager or operator of hotel accommodations from his civil liability for the payment of the tax nor for prosecution of such offense. 
(Ord. of 4-24-06) 
Secs. 7-818-7-899. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XX. - STATE ISSUED CABLE OR VIDEO FRANCHISE 

Sec. 7-900. - Franchise fee for state issued cable or video franchise. 
    The city hereby requires a franchise fee of five (5) percent of gross revenues generated within the city for any cable or video state franchise issued in its corporate boundaries by the state. 
(Ord. of 12-3-07,  1) 
Sec. 7-901. - Authorized designee. 
    The city hereby authorizes the mayor, city manager and/or city clerk, upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the secretary of state and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the five (5) percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. 
(Ord. of 12-3-07,  1) 
Editor's note- City administrator changed to city manager at the direction of the city. 
Secs. 7-902-7-919. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXI. - RENTAL MOTOR VEHICLE EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 7-920. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings respectively ascribed to them. 
    Month or monthly period shall mean the calendar months of any year. 
    Rental charge means the total value received by a rental motor vehicle concern for the rental or leave for 31 or fewer consecutive days of a rental motor vehicle, including the total cash and nonmonetary consideration for the rental or lease including, but not limited to, charges based on time or mileage and charges for insurance coverage or collision damage waiver, but excluding all charges for motor fuel taxes or sales taxes. 
    Rental motor vehicle means a motor vehicle designed to carry ten or fewer passengers and used primarily for the transportation of persons that is rented or leased without a driver regardless of whether such vehicle is licensed in the state. 
    Rental motor vehicle concern means a person or legal entity which owns or leases five or more rental motor vehicles and which regularly rents or leases such vehicles to the public for value. 
    Tax, excise tax or taxes shall mean the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. of 6-30-08) 
Sec. 7-921. - Authority; rules and regulations; records. 
(a)  Authority. The city clerk shall administer and enforce this article for the levy and collection of the tax by and on behalf of the governing authority of the city. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The city clerk shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state or the constitution of the state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of this article and the collection of the tax under this article. 
(c)  Records required. Every rental motor vehicle concern subject to this article shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the city clerk may require. 
(Ord. of 6-30-08) 
Sec. 7-922. - Excise tax levied; collection. 
(a)  There is hereby assessed and levied an excise tax upon each rental charge collected by any rental motor vehicle concern when such charge constitutes a taxable event for the purposes of the sales and use tax as provided for under O.C.G.A. Title 48, chapter 8, article I, as amended. The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be in the amount of three (3) percent of the rental charge as defined herein. The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be imposed only at the time when and the place where a customer pays sales tax with respect to the rental charge. The customer who pays a rental charge that is subject to the tax levy as provided in this article shall be liable for the tax. The tax shall be paid by the customer to the rental motor vehicle concern. The tax shall be a debt of the customer to the rental motor vehicle concern until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery for other debts. 
(b)  The rental motor vehicle concern collecting the tax shall remit the tax to the governing authority of the city by and through the city clerk and the tax thus remitted shall be a credit against the tax imposed by this article on the rental motor vehicle concern. Every rental motor vehicle concern subject to the tax levied by this article shall be liable for the tax at the rate of three percent upon the rental charges actually collected or the amount of taxes collected from the customers, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. of 6-30-08) 
Sec. 7-923. - Purposes for proceeds from tax. 
    The following projects and purposes for which the proceeds of the tax levied by this article are to be expended are specified as follows: 
(1)  Promoting industry, trade, commerce, and tourism; 
(2)  Capital outlay projects consisting of the construction of convention, trade, sports, and recreational facilities, or public safety facilities, including the acquiring, constructing, renovating, improving, and equipping of parking facilities, pedestrian walkways, plazas, connections, and other public improvements associated with such convention, trade, sports, and recreational facilities or public safety facilities or the retirement of debt issued with respect to such capital outlay projects; and/or 
(3)  Maintenance and operation expenses or security and public safety expenses associated with capital outlay projects funded pursuant to subparagraph (B) of this paragraph. 
(Ord. of 6-30-08) 
Sec. 7-924. - Exceptions. 
    No tax shall be imposed pursuant to this article on the rental charge associated with the rental or lease of a rental motor vehicle if either: 
(1)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle outside the state and returns it within the state; or 
(2)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle in the state and returns it outside the state. 
(Ord. of 6-30-08) 
Sec. 7-925. - Amount of tax allowed to be retained for expenses. 
    Each rental motor vehicle concern collecting the tax imposed by this article shall be allowed to retain three (3) percent of the tax due and collected and may retain that amount in the form of a deduction for expenses incurred in submitting, reporting and paying the amount of taxes due, if the amounts due are not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. of 6-30-08) 
Sec. 7-926. - Statement required showing gross rental charges and taxes. 
(a)  On or before the last day of each month following the month of July 2008, the rental motor vehicle concern liable for the tax provided for herein shall transmit to the city clerk, a statement showing the gross rental charges and gross taxes collected by authority of this article for the preceding calendar month. Along with said statement, the rental motor vehicle concern shall submit to the city clerk the net taxes due for that particular month. 
(b)  Failure to remit taxes by the due date shall subject the rental motor vehicle concern to a penalty of five (5) percent of the tax then due, and in addition to such penalty, interest thereon on the unpaid principal amount due, computed at the rate of one (1) percent per month. 
(Ord. of 6-30-08) 
Sec. 7-927. - Records. 
    In order to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and to collect all the tax imposed, all rental motor vehicle concerns are hereby required to keep a record of all rental charges for rental motor vehicles and taxes collected which are related thereto. Said records shall be open for inspection and copying by any duly authorized agent of the city during regular business hours. 
(Ord. of 6-30-08) 
Sec. 7-928. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the excise tax provided for herein, or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any rental motor vehicle concern the clerk may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within her possession or that may come into her possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for the one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  The amount of the determination made by the city clerk shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month from the due date of the taxes found to be due. 
(c)  The city clerk or the clerk's designated representative shall give to the rental motor vehicle concern a written notice of any such determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail and if by mail the service shall be addressed to the operator or the owner of the rental motor vehicle concern at the address as the same appears in the records of the city clerk as provided by each rental motor vehicle concern. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by an addressee or agent of the addressee. 
(d)  Except in cases of failure to make a return, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the last day of the calendar month following the monthly period in which the amount proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period shall expire last. 
(Ord. of 6-30-08) 
Sec. 7-929. - Failure to make a return. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the excise tax due. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the rental motor vehicle concern has failed to make the return and shall be based upon such information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner as prescribed above in section 7-928. 
(b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month or fraction thereof from the last day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount of any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(Ord. of 6-30-08) 
Sec. 7-930. - Audit authority. 
    Duly authorized employees of the city upon exhibition of identification and during regular business hours may examine and copy the books, papers, records, financial reports equipment and other facilities if necessary of any rental motor vehicle concern in order to verify the accuracy of any return made pursuant to this article, or if no return is made by the rental motor vehicle concern, to ascertain or determine the amount of tax required to be paid. 
(Ord. of 6-30-08) 
Sec. 7-931. - Withholding tax on sale of business. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern liable for any amount under this article transfers or sells its business or quits the business, its successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient amounts from the purchase price to cover the amount required to be paid pursuant to this article until the former owner or operator of the rental motor vehicle concern produces a receipt from the city clerk or an authorized designee showing that the indebtedness has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(b)  If the purchaser of a business or rental motor vehicle concern fails to withhold from the purchase price as required herein such purchaser shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount of the outstanding tax required to be withheld by him to the extent of such purchase price. 
(Ord. of 6-30-08) 
Sec. 7-932. - Prosecution of violators. 
    The city clerk, designated code enforcement personnel or the city police department shall be authorized to issue citations for violation of this article and the municipal court of the city is empowered to prosecute persons violating the provisions of this article on such citations. 
(Ord. of 6-30-08) 
Sec. 7-933. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  In addition to the interest charges and delinquent penalties specified in this article, any person who violates any provision of this article may, upon conviction, be punished as provided in such ordinance or in the absence of such provision, by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense and/or imprisonment for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days. 
(b)  The tax levied by this article shall be effective on the first day of July 2008, and shall continue until its permissible existence shall expire as provided by law, or until otherwise terminated by the Georgia General Assembly or the city council. 
(Ord. of 6-30-08) 
Sec. 7-934. - Lien taken for delinquent excise tax. 
    In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the excise tax herein levied, the city clerk, upon any tax or installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, may issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the persons, partnership or corporation liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property (in the city) of the person, partnership or corporation liable for said tax, all as provided by the ordinances and charter of said city and the laws of the state. The lien of said excise tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution may be levied by the city police department upon the property of defendant located in said city, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by ordinances and charter of said city and the laws of the state, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the charter of said city and the laws of the state in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the city clerk against any person defaulting on the excise tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him or her as though he or she had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. of 6-30-08) 
Secs. 7-935-7-949. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE. XXII. - TELEPHONE COMPANIES 

Sec. 7-950. - Due compensation for telephone companies with end user retail customers within the city. 
(a)  The city hereby requires due compensation of three (3) percent of actual recurring local service revenues, as defined in paragraphs (8) and (9) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A.  46-5-1; provided, however, that any company which pays in excess of three (3) percent of actual recurring local service revenues pursuant to an existing franchise agreement shall continue to pay in accordance with the agreement until the expiration of the franchise agreement or December 31, 2012, whichever occurs first, and any company which pays in excess of three (3) percent of actual recurring local service revenues in accordance with an occupational license tax arrangement shall continue to pay in accordance with such payment schedule until December 31, 2012. 
(b)  Regarding any telephone company that does not have retail, end user customers located within the city's municipal boundaries, the payment by such company to a municipal authority in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the department of transportation for the use of its rights of way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. 
(Ord. of 10-27-08,  1) 
Sec. 7-951. - Authorized designee. 
    The city clerk, shall, on behalf of the city, exercise day-to-day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the regulatory authority of the city under O.C.G.A. 46-5-1 et seq. and shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Review application information submitted by a telephone company to the city and, if an application is incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within fifteen (15) business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies. 
(2)  Report the receipt of a completed application to the council within sixty (60) calendar days of the receipt of such completed application. 
(3)  Review payments of due compensation submitted by the company to ensure compliance with the provisions of the amended law and this article. 
(4)  Provide a coordination function between a telephone company and all city departments on any matter relating to the amended law and this article. 
(5)  Arrange and evaluate, no more than once a year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company which is reasonably related to the calculation and payment of due compensation. 
(6)  Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its rights of way written notice of annexations and changes in municipal corporate boundaries. 
(Ord. of 10-27-08,  2) 
ARTICLE XXIII. - PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS 

Sec. 7-952. - Applicability of certain sections. 
(a)  Section 7-957 shall not apply to any precious metals or goods containing precious metals obtained from industrial producers, manufacturers, licensed dealers, or distributors. 
(b)  Sections 7-954 and 7-955 shall not apply to registered pawnbrokers, scrap metal processors, or secondhand dealers. Pawnbrokers, scrap metal processors, and secondhand dealers are not, however, relieved from compliance with section 7-957 when the purchase of precious metals or goods containing precious metals are from persons or sources other than industrial. 
( Ord. of 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 7-953. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the term: 
    Precious metals means any metals including, but not limited to, in whole or in part, silver, gold, and platinum. 
    Precious metals dealer means any person, partnership, sole proprietorship, corporation, association, or other entity engaged in the business of purchasing, selling, bartering, or acquiring in trade any precious metals from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers for resale in its original form or as changed by melting, reforming, remolding, or for resale as scrap, or in bulk. 
    Permanent location means a business domiciled within a properly constructed building which must be located within a properly zoned area according to the planning and zoning ordinance. 
    Nonpermanent location means any location designated to be used to conduct the aforementioned business, in any movable vehicle, and temporary or movable structure, including but not limited to, vans, mobile homes, trailers, hotels and motels, lodges, or any similar nonpermanent structure designed by applicant to be used to conduct such business for a limited or specific time. 
( Ord. of 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 7-954. - Occupation tax certificate required, application. 
(a)  All persons, firms or corporations desiring to engage in the business, trade or profession of a precious metals dealer shall, before engaging in such business, trade or profession, make application for an occupation tax certificate in the form and manner prescribed by the licensing and revenue manager. 
(b)  The application shall include but shall not be limited to the information required on all occupation tax returns, along with the following additional information: 
(1)  Full name, date of birth, address, and Social Security number of applicant. 
(2)  Full name(s), date(s) of birth, and Social Security number(s) of any other person(s) having an ownership interest in the proposed business. In the case of a corporation, this list shall include owners of ten (10) or more percent of the common or preferred stock. 
(3)  Full names, dates of birth, and Social Security numbers, and titles of corporate officers where appropriate. 
(4)  Full name, address, telephone number, date of birth, title, and Social Security number of individuals to be employed. 
( Ord. of 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 7-955. - Work permits required. 
    Prior to the issuance of an occupation tax certificate, a work permit shall be required for the owner(s), manager(s), and employee(s). 
( Ord. of 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 7-956. - Applicant disqualifications. 
    No occupation tax certificate shall be granted to any person under the age of eighteen (18) or who has been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere under any federal, state or local law of any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sexual related crime, theft or violence against person or property, any crime of possession, sale, or distribution of illegal drugs, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses, or attempts to commit any of these listed offenses. 
( Ord. of 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 7-957. - Records and information to be maintained; display of transaction number; identification; digital photographs; fingerprints; records storage. 
    Engaging in the business of buying used or previously owned precious metals in the unincorporated areas of the county is hereby declared to affect the public interest due to the opportunity it affords for the disposal of stolen property. 
    In the public interest and as set forth herein, all precious metals dealers shall maintain records documenting all precious metals transactions. 
(1)  All precious metals dealers shall maintain records documenting accurate descriptions of all property purchased. Such description shall include, to the extent possible, the manufacturer, model, serial number, style, material, kind, color, design, number of stones if jewelry, and all other identifying names, marks, and numbers. The precious metals dealers shall assign a transaction number documenting each transaction, and ensure each item received is tagged with the transaction number. 
(2)  The tag bearing the transaction number must remain attached to the item until the property is disposed of by sale, trade, or other lawful means. This paragraph does not apply to the purchase of property from licensed wholesale or distributor businesses for the purpose of retail sales; however the precious metals dealer shall be required to maintain all purchasing records for property exempted from this paragraph. 
(3)  The precious metals dealer shall require all persons selling property to show proper identification prior to conducting a transaction. Proper identification is defined as a government issued photo identification card such as a driver's license, military identification card, state identification card, or passport. 
(4)  The precious metals dealer shall also document the name, address, telephone number, race, sex, height, weight, driver's license number, date of birth, and Social Security number of the person selling the property, along with the date and time of transaction. This documentation shall be made at the time of the transaction. 
(5)  The precious metals dealer shall photograph, with a digital camera or web camera, the person selling the property. The photograph shall clearly show a frontal view of the subject's face along with the transaction number and a photograph of the item being sold. Digital images shall be labeled and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption, readily identifiable, and readily available for review. 
(6)  The precious metals dealer shall obtain from each person selling any property, the fingerprint of the right hand index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. The fingerprint shall be imprinted onto the transaction form in the designated area along with the signature of the person selling the property. The fingerprint must be clear and legible. In the event that more than one (1) transaction form is required, a fingerprint and signature will be obtained for each form. Fingerprints and the information required herein shall be obtained each time such person pledges, trades, pawns, exchanges, or sells any property. 
(7)  Items of property that appear to be new, unused, and in their original packaging cannot be accepted by the precious metals dealer unless the customer can supply a copy of the original sales receipt, or other proof of purchase from the place of purchase, to the precious metals dealers who shall retain the receipt or proof of purchase on file. 
(8)  The precious metals dealer shall store the above records, digital images, and fingerprints for a period of four (4) years and make them available to law enforcement personnel upon request. 
(9)  Every precious metals dealer shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic automated reporting system via the internet to the administrator of the electronic automated reporting system. The administrator of the electronic automated reporting system will electronically transmit all transactions to the city police department. 
( Ord. of 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 7-958. - Daily report to police; required format. 
    Every precious metals dealer shall make a daily report, in such form as may be prescribed by the chief of police, of all pawnshop transactions that occurred during twenty-four (24) hours ending at 9:00 p.m. on the date of the report. 
(1)  Daily reports shall list all property sold, the transaction number for each transaction, and a description of the property including, to the extent possible, the manufacturer, model, serial number, style, material, kind, color, design, number of stones if jewelry, and any other identifying names, marks, and numbers. The daily report shall also list the name, address, race, sex, height, weight, driver's license number, date of birth, and Social Security number on the automated reporting system along with the date and time of the transaction. 
(2)  Every precious metals dealer shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic automated reporting system via the internet to the administrator of the electronic automated reporting system. The administrator of the electronic automated reporting system will electronically transmit all transactions to the police department. 
(3)  In the event that the electronic automated reporting system becomes temporarily or permanently disabled, precious metals dealers will be notified as soon as possible by the police department. In this event, the precious metals dealer will be required to make records of transactions in paper form as prescribed by the police department. Such paper forms must include all information as enumerated in section 7-957. Precious metals dealers shall be responsible for maintaining an adequate inventory of these forms. 
(4)  The chief of police or his designee shall select and designate the required automated reporting system and required equipment needed. There will be a fee assessed to the precious metals dealer for each reported transaction. Said fee may be assessed against the persons selling property. The accessed fee shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the actual cost charged by the police department or the third party administrator. This fee will be invoiced to the precious metals dealers and collected by the chief of police or his designee, which may be a third party administrator of the automated reporting system. 
( Ord. of 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 7-959. - Property not to be disposed of for thirty (30) days after acquisition; location of property; police holds. 
(a)  All property received through any precious metals dealer transaction shall be held for at least thirty (30) days before disposing of same by sale, transfer, shipment, or otherwise. 
(b)  All property purchased shall be held and maintained by the precious metals dealer on the premises of the precious metals dealer or, if impracticable, at such other location as may have been previously approved in writing by the chief of police or his designee. The chief of police shall not approve any off-premises storage facilities located outside Gwinnett County. 
(c)  The Duluth Police Department has the authority to place property that is the subject of police investigation on police hold. In that event, the Duluth police department shall notify the precious metals dealer of the need for a police hold and identify all property subject to the police hold. Upon notification, it shall be the responsibility of the precious metals dealer to maintain the subject property until such time as the property is released from police hold status or the property is confiscated as evidence. 
(d)  No occupation tax certificate shall be granted to any applicant for a nonpermanent location as defined in section 7-953. 
( Ord. of 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 7-960. - Dealing with minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any precious metals dealers, his or her agents or employees, to receive through any precious metals dealer any property from minors. A minor, for the purpose of this section, is an individual seventeen (17) years of age or under. 
( Ord. of 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 7-961. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
    The City of Duluth police department shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this chapter. Sworn officers of the city police department and civilian employees designated by the chief of police shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this chapter during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other county officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of the county code. 
( Ord. of 3-14-16 ) 
Sec. 7-962. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person, firm, company, corporation or other entity who violates any provision of this chapter may be subject to arrest or summoned to appear in the Duluth municipal court and upon conviction or other finding of guilt, punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than one hundred eighty (180) days or by compulsory labor on the streets or public works not to exceed thirty (30) days or by both fine and imprisonment or labor, or the fine may be imposed with an alternative of such imprisonment or compulsory labor, for each separate violation. 
( Ord. of 3-14-16 ) 
Chapter 8 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate the operation of motor vehicles,  1.13(15). 
Cross reference- Limousine services,  7-186 et seq.; taxicabs,  7-391 et seq. 
State Law reference- Motor vehicles and traffic generally, O.C.G.A. Title 40; municipal authority to regulate traffic on streets and highways under its jurisdiction, O.C.G.A.  40-6-371. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1-8-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-26. - Adoption of Uniform Rules of the Road by reference. 
    Pursuant to O.C.G.A.  40-6-372 through 40-6-376, O.C.G.A.  40-6-1 through 40-6-395, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A.  40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city, with like effect as if recited in this article. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to adoptO.C.G.A. Title 40, Ch. 6 by reference O.C.G.A.  40-6-372. 
Sec. 8-27. - Weight restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate a vehicle whose maximum gross weight exceeds ten thousand (10,000) pounds within the city upon the following named streets between the points hereinafter described: 
(1)  On West Lawrenceville Street from Hill Street to the beginning of McClure Bridge Road and along McClure Bridge Road to its intersection with Pleasant Hill Road. 
(2)  North Peachtree (also known as Water Works Road) from its intersection with Rogers Bridge Road to its intersection with Brock Road. 
(3)  River Mill Drive from its intersection with Highway 120 to its intersection with Peachtree Industrial Boulevard. 
(b)  The prohibitions contained in this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Vehicles owned and operated by the city, public utilities or contractors and materialmen while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements or street utilities within the city. 
(2)  Police, fire and ambulance vehicles responding to emergencies that threaten the health, safety and welfare of persons or property. 
(3)  Vehicles making deliveries to destinations located along one (1) of the routes described in subsection (a) above. 
(c)  Any person who violates any provision of this section may, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-6. 
(Ord. of 10-13-86; Ord. of 9-12-88; Ord. of 2-22-99) 
Sec. 8-28. - Authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The driver of any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call, or when in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, or when responding to, but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated. 
(b)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may: 
(1)  Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this Code. 
(2)  Proceed past a traffic light or stop sign, but only slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation. 
(3)  Exceed the speed limits specified so long as he does not endanger life or property. 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions so long as he does not endanger life or property. 
(c)  The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of such vehicle, while in motion, sounds audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one (1) lighted lamp displaying a red and/or blue light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red and/or blue light from in front of the vehicle. 
(d)  The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of any authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Ord. of 6-10-74,  27) 
Secs. 8-29-8-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPEED LIMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to alter or establish speed limits, O.C.G.A.  40-6-183, 40-6-371(a)(10). 

Sec. 8-41. - Basic rules. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle on a street or highway within the city at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. Consistent with the foregoing, every person shall drive at a reasonable and prudent speed when approaching and crossing an intersection or railroad grade crossing, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching and traversing a hill crest, when travelling upon any narrow or winding roadway and when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions. 
(b)  In no event shall any speed limit within the city exceed fifty-five (55) miles per hour. 
(c)  No speed limit within the city shall be less than twenty-five (25) miles per hour in any urban or residence district, or less than thirty (30) miles per hour outside an urban or residence district unless the mayor and council determine on the basis of an engineering or traffic investigation that a special hazard or condition exists which requires a lower speed limit for compliance with the basic rule set forth in subsection (a) above. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided herein for particular posted streets and areas, the speed limit within the city shall be thirty (30) miles per hour in all urban or residence areas, and fifty-five (55) miles per hour outside such urban or residence areas. 
(e)  No traffic violation for speeding under a speed limit which is altered from the general rule of subsection (d) above shall be enforceable unless adequate signs posting the lawful speed limits are erected upon or at the entrance to a road or street, or part thereof affected, such as to give notice of the speed limit to motorists. 
(Ord. No. D-154,  1, 8-11-75) 
Sec. 8-42. - Speed detection devices authorized. 
(a)  The city is hereby authorized, upon approval of the department of public safety, and receipt of a state permit, to use such speed detection devices as may be authorized by the city council. It is hereby declared to be the policy and legislative intent of the mayor and council that speed detection devices are to be utilized for purposes of promoting public safety within the city, and not for purposes of collecting revenue from fines imposed. The use of speed detection devices shall be subject to the restrictions of this section, and other restrictions which may be imposed by state law or regulation. 
(b)  No officer shall make a case based upon the use of any speed detection device unless the alleged speed of the vehicle exceeds the posted speed limit by over ten (10) miles per hour, or unless the alleged offense occurs in a properly marked school zone. 
(c)  No violation based upon the use of any speed detection device may be enforced unless and until signs are posted upon the highways which comprise a part of the state highway system, at the points on the respective highways which intersect the city, such signs warning motorists of the use of such devices. 
(d)  Evidence obtained by officers from the use of speed detection devices within three hundred (300) feet of a reduction in speed limit inside the city limits, or within one-half mile of a reduction of a speed limit outside the city limits, shall be inadmissible in the prosecution of a traffic violation. 
(e)  Evidence obtained by officers by use of a speed detection device shall not be admissible in the prosecution of a traffic violation when such alleged violation occurs within a period of thirty (30) days following a reduction of the speed limit in the area where the violation is alleged to have occurred. 
(f)  No speed detection device shall be employed where it is not visible to approaching motorists for a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet, and evidence obtained not in compliance herewith shall not be admissible in the prosecution of a traffic violation. 
(Ord. No. D-154,  2, 8-11-75) 
Sec. 8-43. - Peachtree Industrial Boulevard. 
    The established speed limit for that portion of the roadway presently known as Peachtree Industrial Boulevard which is located between North Berkley Lake Road and State Highway 120 shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
(Ord. of 4-9-90(2)) 
Secs. 8-44-8-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PHOTOGRAPHIC TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 8-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    In operation means operating in good working condition. 
    Operator shall mean any individual driving and/or in possession of a vehicle. 
    Owner means the registrant of a motor vehicle, except that such term shall not include a motor vehicle rental company when a motor vehicle registered by such company is being operated by another person under a rental agreement with such company. 
    Recorded images means images recorded by a traffic-control signal monitoring device 
(1)  On: 
a.  Not less than two photographs; 
b.  Not less than two microphotographs; 
c.  Not less than two electronic images; or, 
d.  Videotape; and, 
(2)  Showing a traffic-control signal displaying a circular red or red arrow signal along with the rear of a motor vehicle apparently operated in disregard or disobedience of such signal and, on at least one image or portion of tape, clearly revealing the number or other identifying designation of the license plate displayed on the motor vehicle. 
    Signature means any manual or facsimile of a person signature. 
    System location is the approach to an intersection toward which a photographic, video, digital or electronic camera is directed and is in operation. 
    Traffic-control signal monitoring device means a device with one or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a traffic-control signal to produce recorded images of motor vehicles being operated in disregard or disobedience of a circular red or red arrow signal. 
(Ord. of 7-14-03; Ord. of 10-8-07) 
Sec. 8-52. - Compliance with traffic-control signals. 
(a)  Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or, if the there is no crosswalk, before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown by a steady circular green signal. 
(b)  Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal indication shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or, if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed to shown by a steady green arrow signal indication. 
(c)  The driver of a motor vehicle shall be liable for a civil monetary penalty imposed pursuant to this ordinance if such motor vehicle is found, as evidenced by information obtained from a traffic-control signal monitoring device, to have failed to comply with a traffic light signal as designated in subsections (a) and (b) of this section within the city limits. 
(Ord. of 7-14-03) 
Sec. 8-53. - Proof; certificate. 
(a)  Proof that a particular vehicle entered an intersection in violation of section 8-26 of the City Code, as detected by a traffic-control signal monitoring device, together with proof that the particular vehicle is registered with the state department of public safety (or any other state or local vehicle registration office) in the charged person's name, shall raise the evidentiary presumption and constitute prima facie evidence in any prosecution of a violation of that section that the charged person was the person driving the vehicle depicted in the recorded image. 
(b)  A certificate, sworn to or affirmed by a trained law enforcement officer or a technician employed by the city public safety department, or a copy thereof, based on inspection of recorded images produced by a traffic-control signal monitoring device shall be considered prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. 
(c)  Consistent with O.C.G.A.  40-6-20(f)(7) recorded images made for the purpose of this subsection shall not be a public record. 
(d)  The provisions of this division shall not limit law enforcement agencies to the use of traffic-control signal monitoring devices in enforcing O.C.G.A.  40-6-20(a); and, when there is evidence obtained from another source or sources which constitutes a prima-facie case of a violation of O.C.G.A.  40-6-20(a), such violation may be prosecuted as otherwise provide by law in lieu of, but not in addition to enforcement under this division. 
(e)  Such presumption may be rebutted if the owner or lessee of the vehicle files a sworn notarized statement with the clerk of municipal court prior to the return date established on the citation identifying the name and address of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. Upon review of the notarized statement by the prosecuting attorney for the city, a hearing may be set for prosecution of the alleged violation. 
(f)  Such presumption may be rebutted if the charged person can prove that they were not the operator of the vehicle through photographic evidence produced and maintained by the city when the vehicle owned by the charged person was in violation of section 8-52 of the City Code of Ordinances. 
(g)  Such presumption may be rebutted if the owner or lessee of the vehicle testifies under oath in open court that he or she was not the operator of the vehicle at the time of alleged violation. 
(h)  Such presumption may be rebutted if a certified copy of a police report, showing that the vehicle had been reported to the police as stolen prior to the time of the alleged violation, is presented, prior to the return date established on the citation issued pursuant to this section, to the court adjudicating the alleged violation. Upon review of the notarized statement by the prosecuting attorney for the city, a hearing may be set for prosecution for the alleged violation. 
(i)  Such presumption may be rebutted if the recorded image depicts the vehicle passed through the intersection in violation of section 8-52 of the City Code of Ordinances as part of a funeral procession. 
(j)  Such presumption may be rebutted if the recorded image depicts the vehicle passed through the intersection in violation of section 8-52 of the City Code of Ordinances in order to avoid impeding the efforts of an emergency vehicle to pass through the intersection. 
(k)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the prosecution and conviction for a violation of this section shall not require a picture of the driver described in section 8-54. 
(Ord. of 7-14-03; Ord. of 5-22-06) 
Sec. 8-54. - Penalty. 
    Imposition of a penalty pursuant to this section shall not be deemed a criminal conviction as an operator and shall not be made a part of the operating record of the person upon whom such liability is imposed nor shall it be used for insurance purposes in the provision of motor vehicle insurance coverage. The civil monetary penalty imposed by this section for each violation shall be no more than seventy dollars ($70.00). 
(Ord. of 7-14-03; Ord. of 7-11-05) 
Sec. 8-55. - Summons. 
(a)  A summons for a violation of this section may be executed by the city by sending by first-class mail a copy thereof to the address of the owner, or lessee of the vehicle as shown, in the case of vehicle owners, in the records of the state department of public safety (or any other state vehicle registration office) or, in the case of vehicle lessees or renters, in the records of the lessor. Said summons shall be postmarked not later than ten days after the date of the alleged violation. 
(b)  No proceedings for contempt or arrest shall be instituted for failure to appear on the return date of the summons. 
(Ord. of 7-14-03) 
Sec. 8-56. - Administration. 
(a)  A private entity may enter into an agreement with the city to be compensated for providing the traffic light signal violation monitoring system or equipment, and all related support services, to include consulting, operations and administration. However, only a trained law enforcement officer or a technician employed by the city public safety department may swear to or affirm the certificate required by section 8-53. 
(b)  No portion of any fine collected through the use of a traffic-control signal monitoring devices may be paid to the manufacturer or vendor. Compensation to the manufacturer or vendor shall be based on the value of such equipment and shall not be based on the number of traffic citations issued or the revenue generated by traffic-control signal monitoring devices. 
(Ord. of 7-14-03) 
Sec. 8-57. - Signage. 
(a)  The city shall erect signs on every highway, which comprises a part of the state highway system at that point on the highway, which intersects the jurisdictional limits of the city. A sign shall be erected also by the city on each public road on the approach to the next traffic-control signal for such road when a traffic-control device is monitoring such next signal for such road. 
(b)  Such signs shall be at least thirty (30) inches by thirty (30) inches in measurement and shall warn motorists that traffic-control signal monitoring devices are being employed. 
(Ord. of 7-14-03) 
Sec. 8-58. - Warning period. 
    Only warning notices and not citations shall be sent during the thirty-day period commencing with each installation of a traffic-control signal monitoring device. 
(Ord. of 7-14-03) 
Secs. 8-59-8-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to regulate stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A.  40-6-371(a)(1). 

Sec. 8-66. - General regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to permit any motor vehicle to stop, stand, or park in any of the following places and locations, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a policeman or traffic control device: 
(1)  In any intersection; 
(2)  In any crosswalk; 
(3)  Upon any bridge or viaduct or approach thereto; 
(4)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of a point of the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone; 
(5)  Within thirty (30) feet of a traffic signal, beacon, or sign on the approaching side; 
(6)  Within twenty (20) feet of any intersection or crosswalk; 
(7)  At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the usable width of the roadway from moving traffic to less than eighteen (18) feet; 
(8)  Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant; 
(9)  At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway; 
(10)  Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest railroad grade crossing; 
(11)  Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire department station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any such station within seventy-five (75) feet of such entrance when a sign is properly posted; 
(12)  On any sidewalk or parkway; 
(13)  At any place where official signs prohibit parking. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful, at any time, to permit any vehicle to park or stand along any of the following streets located within the city: 
(1)  Ashley Lane; 
(2)  Meeting Street; 
(3)  East Bay Street; 
(4)  Brock Road; 
(5)  Cul -de -sac on (south) Regency Park Drive; 
(6)  Shortleaf Way, north end, stub street sections. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to park or stand along any of the following streets located within the city during the time period from 6:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday: 
(1)  Oak Street; 
(2)  South Street; 
(3)  First Street; 
(4)  Reserved; 
(5)  Mason Drive; 
(6)  Mattison Street; 
(7)  Pinecrest Circle; 
(8)  Cul-de-sac on (north) Regency Park Drive. 
(d)  The chief of police of the city or any other person authorized by the mayor and council or the chief of police shall cause signs to be posted in all areas where parking is limited or prohibited by provisions of this section, indicating such limitations or prohibitions. 
(e)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. of 5-29-90; Ord. of 3-9-92; Mo. of 4-20-92; Ord. of 6-8-92; Ord. of 3-25-96; Ord. of 8-9-10; Ord. of 5-9-11) 
Sec. 8-67. - Unauthorized parking. 
(a)  Unauthorized parking on private property prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on any private property in an attempt to sell said vehicle unless the owner of the vehicle procures the express written consent of the owner or person in lawful possession thereof and the display of the vehicle is otherwise in compliance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city and all other applicable city ordinances and state laws. In the event the identity of the driver of such vehicle is unknown, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be prima facie deemed to be in violation hereof. 
(b)  Unauthorized parking on public right-of-ways. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on a public right-of-way in an attempt to sell said vehicle. In the event the identity of the driver of such vehicle is unknown, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be prima facie deemed to be in violation hereof. Any officer locating a vehicle in violation of this section shall place a notice on the vehicle warning that the vehicle will be towed if not removed within twenty-four (24) hours. Any vehicle not removed within twenty-four (24) hours may be towed in accordance with state law. 
(c)  Penalty. This section may be enforced by the police department or the planning and development department. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. of 12-13-99) 
Sec. 8-68. - Two-hour parking. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any parking space located along the right of way of Main Street from the point where Main Street intersects Highway 120 and continuing along Main Street in a westerly direction to its point of intersection with West Lawrenceville Street and continuing along in a westerly direction to the intersection of Main Street and Knox Street for a period in excess of two (2) hours. 
    The chief of police of the city or his designee may cause signs to be posted in the areas designated in this section stating that parking is limited and indicating the limitations or prohibitions. 
    This section may be enforced by the police department and any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. of 8-14-00) 
Sec. 8-69. - Parking on Apartment Drive. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on or parallel to the roadway located along the southwesterly section of Apartment Drive, from the point where Apartment Drive intersects Donnaville Street and continuing along Apartment Drive in a southwesterly direction to the dead end. 
    The chief of police of the city or his designee may cause signs to be posted in the areas designated in this ordinance stating that parking is limited and indicating the limitations or prohibitions. 
    This section may be enforced by the police department and any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. of 4-22-02) 
Secs. 8-70-8-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ABANDONED VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of November 8, 2010, amended the code by repealing former Art. IV,  8-86-8-94, and adding a new Art. IV. Former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from an ordinance of September 24, 1970. 
Cross reference- Nuisances, Ch. 9; solid waste management, Ch. 13. 
State Law reference- Authority to provide by ordinance for removal and disposal of junked vehicles, O.C.G.A.  36-60-4; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A.  40-11-1 et seq.; when police officers may remove vehicles, O.C.G.A.  40-6-206; removal of improperly parked cars or trespassing personal property, O.C.G.A.  44-1-13. 

Sec. 8-86. - General prohibition; removal required. 
    It shall be unlawful to abandon a vehicle on any street or public property in the city for more than five (5) days. Any vehicle found so abandoned may be impounded or otherwise removed and all expense incurred shall be paid by the owner thereof or any other party claiming the same. 
(Ord. of 11-8-10) 
Sec. 8-87. - Notice to remove; penalty for noncompliance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to retain in the city inoperative, wrecked or junked automobiles or other motor vehicles for more than seventy-two (72) hours after being advised to remove such motor vehicles by the city through its city clerk or police department representative. Such notice to remove may be attached to such vehicle, in the event authorities are unable to ascertain ownership. Each twenty-four-hour period which occurs after such seventy-two-hour notice has expired shall be deemed a separate violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-8-10) 
Sec. 8-88. - Presumption of ownership. 
    It shall be presumed that the owner of an abandoned vehicle is the registered owner of the vehicle according to state records, but any person causing or allowing any such vehicle to be left on the public streets shall likewise be guilty and subject to punishment for the violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-8-10) 
Sec. 8-89. - Impoundment. 
    A police officer may impound a vehicle from the public streets or highways of the city under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Threat of public safety. When the vehicle poses a threat to the public health and safety or inconvenience to other vehicular traffic. 
(2)  Unattended vehicle. A vehicle which has been left unattended for a period of at least five (5) days, provided it appears the individual who left the vehicle does not intend to return and remove the vehicle. 
(3)  Unlawful operation of vehicle. Any motor vehicle that is required to be towed pursuant to lawful mandate or when operation of such vehicle would constitute a violation of law. 
(4)  Arrest situations. When the driver of a motor vehicle has been arrested, the motor vehicle may be impounded under the following circumstances and after a reasonable attempt to contact the owner of such vehicle to find an alternate disposition to impoundment: 
a.  If there is no one present who is authorized and/or capable of removing the vehicle; 
b.  If the driver can not provide a name or number of a person or towing company to pick up the vehicle within twenty (20) minutes; and 
c.  If the vehicle is not at a location where it can be safely left at the request of the owner/driver; however, vehicles may not be left on the side of the roadway. 
(Ord. of 11-8-10) 
Sec. 8-90. - Leaving vehicles on scene. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be left on the side of any street, road or highway by any police officer. If the vehicle is in a parking lot or on private property and the driver requests such vehicle to be left on the scene, the police officer shall, when practical to do so, obtain consent from the owner of the property, or an agent thereof, before leaving the vehicle. 
(b)  In cases where a vehicle is left on private property, the driver shall be advised that the police department in no way accepts liability for any theft or damage to such vehicle. 
(Ord. of 11-8-10) 
Sec. 8-91. - Agreement for wrecker service and regulatory fees. 
    The city council is authorized to enter into agreements for the services of a wrecker to be used for the purposes of this article. Such agreement shall include the following: 
(1)  A term stating that a fixed charge is to be paid for each vehicle towed under the provisions of this article consistent with state law and maximum rates established by the public service commission. 
(2)  A term stating that a fifteen dollar ($15.00) fee shall be paid to the city by the contractor for each vehicle towed pursuant to this article to offset costs incurred by the city in regulating the contract and supervising the towing of vehicles as provided in this article. 
(3)  A requirement that the contractor comply with all state laws including but not limited to O.C.G.A.  40-11-1 et seq., rules and regulations of the public service commission and the Georgia Security and Immigration Act. 
(4)  A requirement that the contractor be licensed by the public service commission. 
(5)  A requirement that the contractor successfully undergo a background check to be performed and evaluated by the city police department. 
(Ord. of 11-8-10) 
Sec. 8-92. - Storage charge. 
    All cars, trucks or vehicles impounded by the police department for any reason shall be assessed with a daily storage fee, in addition to towing fee. The car, truck or vehicle shall stand as security to satisfy the storage fee upon failure of the owner to pay same. 
(Ord. of 11-8-10) 
Sec. 8-93. - State emergency vehicle certification decal. 
    All wrecker service vehicles being operated in the city shall have a current valid state emergency vehicle certification decal placed in a position on the windshield of each wrecker service vehicle as specified by the state department of public safety. 
(Ord. of 11-8-10) 
Sec. 8-94. - Redemption of vehicle. 
    When vehicles are towed under this article, the vehicles shall not be released until the person calling for the vehicle has afforded satisfactory evidence of ownership and paid all costs incidental thereto. 
(Ord. of 11-8-10) 
Sec. 8-95. - Release of vehicles. 
    Every wrecker service operating in the city must be available to release vehicles Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., and Saturday, 8:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m., at no additional charge. 
(Ord. of 11-8-10) 
Sec. 8-96. - Records. 
    Every wrecker service operating in the city shall maintain a daily list of vehicles towed and/or stored for nonowner initiated towing and storage services. The daily list shall contain details as to the make, year, model, color, vehicle identification number, license plate number, name of the owner and the purpose for removing and/or storing such vehicle. Such records shall be retained for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days and shall be made available to the police department at any reasonable hour. 
(Ord. of 11-8-10) 
Secs. 8-97-8-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARADES AND PROCESSIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Preventing or disrupting lawful meetings, gatherings or processions, O.C.G.A.  16-11-34; operation of motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A.  40-6-7. 

Sec. 8-116. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Parade means any parade, march, ceremony, demonstration, show, exhibition, pageant, or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or other public place in the city. 
    Parade permit means a permit as required by this article. 
(Ord. of 11-12-90,  1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 8-117. - Permit required. 
    No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the chief of police. 
(Ord. of 11-12-90,  2) 
Sec. 8-118. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions; 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; or 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Ord. of 11-12-90,  3) 
Sec. 8-119. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Generally. A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by the city. 
(b)  Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than five (5) days nor more than thirty (30) days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(c)  Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct the parade; 
(2)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of that organization; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade leader and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
(4)  The date when the parade is to be conducted; 
(5)  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point; 
(6)  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute the parade; the type of animals, and description of the vehicles; 
(7)  The hours when the parade will start and terminate; 
(8)  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
(9)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for the parade; 
(10)  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any assembly area or areas; 
(11)  The interval of space to be maintained between units of the parade; 
(12)  If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his or her behalf; 
(13)  Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to determine whether a permit should be issued. 
(d)  Late applications. The chief of police, where good cause is shown thereof, shall have the authority in his sole discretion to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than two (2) days before the date the parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(Ord. of 11-12-90,  4) 
Sec. 8-120. - Standards for issuance of permit. 
    The chief of police shall issue a permit conditioned upon the applicant's written agreement to comply with the terms of such permit as provided for herein when, from a consideration of the application and from any other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds in his sole discretion that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to the proposed route; 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city; 
(3)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto; 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the assembly areas; 
(5)  The conduct of the parade will not unreasonably interfere with the movement of fire fighting equipment en route to a fire; 
(6)  Such parade will not interfere with another parade for which a permit has been issued; 
(7)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; 
(8)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route; and 
(9)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt construction or improvements of the department of public works or the department of sewer of the county along the parade route during the time of the parade. 
(Ord. of 11-12-90,  5) 
Sec. 8-121. - Notice of rejection of permit. 
    The chief of police shall act upon the application for a parade permit within five (5) days after the filing thereof. If the chief of police disapproves the application, he or she shall mail to the applicant within five (5) days after the date upon which the application was filed a notice of denial of the permit. A notice of the action stating the reasons for the denial of the permit may be communicated to the applicant in less than five (5) days if necessary. 
(Ord. of 11-12-90,  6) 
Sec. 8-122. - Appeal procedure. 
    Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the city council. The appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days after notice is sent. The city council shall act upon appeal within sixty (60) days after its receipt. 
(Ord. of 11-12-90,  7) 
Sec. 8-123. - Alternative permit. 
    The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within two (2) days after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this article. 
(Ord. of 11-12-90,  8) 
Sec. 8-124. - Notice to city and other officials. 
    Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  The mayor; 
(2)  The city manager; 
(3)  The city attorney; 
(4)  The fire chief; 
(5)  The director of the department of public works; and 
(6)  The general manager or responsible head of each public transportation utility, the regular routes of which vehicles may be affected by the route of the proposed parade. 
(Ord. of 11-12-90,  9) 
Sec. 8-125. - Contents of permit. 
Editor's note- City administrator changed to city manager at the direction of the city. 
    Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  The assembly area and time; 
(2)  Starting time; 
(3)  Minimum speed; 
(4)  Maximum speed; 
(5)  The route of the parade; 
(6)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade; 
(7)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade; 
(8)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; 
(9)  The disbanding area and disbanding time; and 
(10)  Any other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article and for the protection of persons or property. 
(Ord. of 11-12-90,  10) 
Sec. 8-126. - Indemnity bond. 
    The police chief may, in his discretion, require the applicant for a parade permit to furnish to the city a bond in an amount not to exceed two hundred and fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) secured by a surety company licensed to do business in the State of Georgia, payable to the city or to any person in the city and county who may suffer any injury or damage from any vehicle, float, device, or person participating in the parade. 
(Ord. of 11-12-90,  11) 
Sec. 8-127. - Duties of permittee. 
(a)  A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(b)  The parade leader or other person heading of leading the activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Ord. of 11-12-90,  12) 
Sec. 8-128. - Public conduct during parades. 
(a)  Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(b)  Driving through parades. No rider of an animal, driver of a vehicle, streetcar or trackless trolley shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when the vehicles, persons or animals are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(c)  Parking on parade route. The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to the effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-12-90,  13) 
Sec. 8-129. - Revocation of permit. 
    The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued under the provisions of this article upon application of the standards for issuance as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 11-12-90,  14) 
Chapter 9 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to define and abate nuisances,  1.13(21). 
Cross reference- Public nuisance animals,  4-20; abandoned vehicles,  8-86 et seq.; closure of abandoned wells required,  13-4; nuisance created in improper handling of garbage; penalty for failure to abate,  13-25. 
State Law reference- Nuisances, O.C.G.A. Title 41. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - General prohibition. 
    It shall be an offense, punishable by a fine, for a person to allow within the city any condition which creates a nuisance. 
(Ord. of 9-24-70(4),  21(a)) 
Sec. 9-2. - Proceeding to abate. 
    All nuisances in and about the streets and public alleys shall be removed by the chief of police or the city superintendent. Any nuisance may be removed upon the written complaint of any inhabitant of the city, which complaint must set forth particularly the nature and location of the same and the person complained against. On such complaint being filed with the clerk, the clerk shall issue a summons to the person charged with maintaining such nuisance, requiring him to show cause before the city council at the time therein specified, not more than ten (10) days after such notice, why the nuisance complained of should not be abated. Such notice shall be served by any city police officer on the person complained against at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, by handing him a copy or leaving the same at his residence or place of business. At the trial, the council shall hear evidence as to the facts, and pass such order as may be just. If the thing complained of shall be found a nuisance, the order shall specify within what time it is to be abated by the defendant. If it is not abated by the time specified in the order, then the clerk shall issue a writ directed to the chief of police of the city, directing abatement of the nuisance. 
(Ord. of 9-24-70(4),  21(b)) 
Sec. 9-3. - Expense of abatement. 
    Whenever the city shall abate a nuisance under this chapter, it shall be authorized to employ a force sufficient to abate such nuisance, and the total cost thereof shall be assessed against the person adjudged guilty of creating or maintaining the same and constitute a lien on the property of such person and shall be collected in the same manner as city taxes are collected on default of payment. 
(Ord. of 9-24-70(4),  21(c)) 
Secs. 9-4-9-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WEEDS 

Sec. 9-31. - Growth limitations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the city to permit weeds, Johnson grass, brush or any objectionable or unsightly matter to grow to a greater height than twelve (12) inches upon such real property within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any property line which abuts street rights-of-way, alleys, utility easements, subdivided additions, developed property or any buildings or other structures. 
(Ord. of 9-12-88(2),  1.1) 
Sec. 9-32. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the planning and zoning department, or any other agency or individual designated by the mayor and council, to enforce this article. 
(Ord. of 9-12-88(2),  1.7) 
Sec. 9-33. - Issuance of citations. 
    Citations under this article shall be issued by the appropriate enforcement personnel ordering those cited to appear before the municipal court of the city at a designated date and time. The form of the citations shall be approved by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 9-12-88(2),  1.7) 
Sec. 9-34. - Violations of article. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, and each and every day that the premises shall remain in a condition in violation of the terms of this article shall constitute a separate offense. This section shall be in addition to and cumulative of the provisions of the abatement of the nuisance and the charge of the cost of the same against the owner of the premises by the city. 
(b)  The penalty imposed under this article shall be in accordance with section 1-6. 
(Ord. of 9-12-88(2),  1.6) 
Sec. 9-35. - Certain areas to be kept free and clear. 
    It shall be the duty of any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the city, to keep the area adjacent to his property line, including the front or side parkway between the property line or sidewalk and the curb and the rear or side parkway between the property line and the alley pavement or travelled way, or if there is no curb, then within ten (10) feet outside such property line, free and clear of the matter referred to in section 9-31. Where the alleyway is not open to traffic, the parkway in such cases shall be deemed to be between the property line and the centerline of the alley. All vegetation not regularly cultivated and which exceeds twelve (12) inches in height shall be presumed to be objectionable and unsightly, except that regularly cultivated crops shall not be allowed to grow within the right-of-way of any public street or easement, but shall be kept mowed. It shall be unlawful for any person described herein to fail to cut and remove the matter referred to in section 9-31 from the areas described herein, and such failure shall constitute a violation hereof upon the terms and conditions of this section. 
(Ord. of 9-12-88(2),  1.2) 
Sec. 9-36. - Duty to cut and remove. 
    It shall be the duty of any person owning, claiming, occupying, or having supervision or control of any real property, to cut and remove all such weeds, brush and other objectionable or unsightly matter as often as may be necessary, provided that the removing and cutting of same at least once in every thirty (30) days shall be deemed a compliance with this article and to use every precaution to prevent the same growing on such premises as to become a nuisance. 
(Ord. of 9-12-88(2),  1.3) 
Sec. 9-37. - Notice to cut and remove. 
    In the event that any person owning, claiming, occupying, or having supervision or control of any real property occupied or unoccupied within the city fails to comply with the provisions of this article, it shall be the duty of the entity charged with enforcement of this article to give ten (10) days' notice in writing to such person violating the terms of this article, by letter addressed to such person, by certified mail. 
(Ord. of 9-12-88(2),  1.4) 
Sec. 9-38. - Cutting and removal by city. 
(a)  If any person fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this article within ten (10) days after receipt of notice from the city that such property is in violation, the city, through its agents and employees, may go upon such property and do or cause to be done the work necessary to obtain compliance with this article. 
(b)  The expense incurred in correcting the condition of such property, and any administrative costs involved, shall be paid by the city and charged to the owner of such property. A bill for such services shall be promptly sent to the owner of the property on which such services were performed. Should such amount go unpaid for a period of thirty (30) days following the mailing of such bill, the city may institute a law suit and seek recovery of the amounts expended by the city including applicable interest and attorneys' fees. This provision is not exclusive of any other rights and remedies available to the city under its Charter and laws of the state. 
(Ord. of 9-12-88(2),  1.5) 
Secs. 9-39-9-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE 

Sec. 9-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    A-weighted sound pressure level means the sound pressure level as measured with a sound level meter using the A-weighted network. The standard notation is DB(A) or dBA. 
    Alarm means any fire, burglary, motor vehicle or civil defence alarm, whistle or similar stationary emergency signaling device. 
    Commercial area means an area as defined by the city zoning ordinance. 
    Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, demolition or similar action, for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. 
    Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage demanding immediate attention. 
    Emergency vehicle means a motor vehicle belonging to a fire department or an ambulance, or a motor vehicle belonging to a federal, state, county or municipal law enforcement agency, provided such vehicles are in use as an emergency vehicle by one authorized to use such vehicle for that purpose. 
    Emergency work means any work for the purpose of preventing of alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
    Industrial area means an area as defined by the city zoning ordinance. 
    Land use category means the classification of an area, such as residential, multifamily dwelling, commercial, industrial, noise-sensitive area or public space, according to its use. Any area not otherwise classified shall be considered a commercial area. In case of multiple use, the more restrictive use category shall apply. 
    Motor vehicle means a vehicle with two (2) or more wheels, or a machine, propelled or drawn by mechanical power and used on the public roads and highways in the transportation of passengers or property, or any combination thereof, which is required to be licensed, but shall not include any vehicle, locomotive, or car operated exclusively on rail or rails. 
    Multifamily dwelling means a building or other shelter that has been divided into separate units to house more than one (1) family. 
    Noise-sensitive area means an area where a school, hospital, nursing home, church, court or public library is located. 
    Person means any individual, association, partnership or corporation and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of the State of Georgia or of the United States. 
    Powered model vehicle means any self-propelled airborne, waterborne or landborne plane, vessel or vehicle which is not designed to carry persons, including but not limited to any model airplane, boat, car or rocket. 
    Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard highway, sidewalk, alley or similar place normally accessible to the public which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
    Public space means any real property or structures thereon owned by a governmental entity and normally accessible to the public, including but not limited to parks and other public recreational areas. 
    Real property line means a line along the surface, and its vertical plane extension, which separates the real property owned, rented or leased by one (1) person from that owned, rented or leased by another person, excluding intrabuilding real property division. 
    Residential area means an area as defined in the city zoning ordinance. 
    Sound level means the A-weighted sound pressure level obtained by use of a sound level meter as specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters (ANSI SI.4-1971, as amended). 
    All terminology used herein and not defined shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
(Ord. of 9-12-88(1); Ord. of 11-3-93) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 9-62. - Excessive noise prohibited. 
    No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud unnecessary or excessive noise which unreasonably interferes with the comfort and repose of others within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. of 9-12-88(1)) 
Sec. 9-63. - Maximum permissible sound levels. 
    It shall be unlawful, except as expressly permitted herein, to make, cause or allow the making of any noise or sound which violates the provisions of this article. 
(1)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound from any location in such a manner as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth in section 9-66 for the receiving land use category more than ten (10) percent of any measurement period, which period shall not be less than ten (10) minutes, when measured at or beyond the property boundary of the land use category from which the sound emanates; however, in the case of a multifamily dwelling land use category, the sound level shall be measured within an adjacent intrabuilding dwelling. 
(2)  For any source of sound, the sound level shall not exceed the maximum permissible sound level limit set forth in section 9-66 by 15 dB(A) for all land use categories. 
(3)  Sound level measurement shall be made with a sound level meter using the A-weighting scale in accordance with the standards promulgated by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
(Ord. of 9-12-88(1)) 
Sec. 9-64. - Exemptions. 
    The following are exempt from the sound level limits of section 9-66: 
(1)  Domestic power tools, lawn mowers and agricultural equipment, when operated with a muffler, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on weekdays and 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on weekends and holidays. 
(2)  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicles when responding to an emergency. 
(3)  Any noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration, for which a special permit has been granted pursuant to this article, and which conforms to the conditions and limits stated thereon. 
(4)  Noises from church bells and chimes. 
(5)  Noises from construction activity are exempt from section 9-66, except that the industrial sound level limit shall apply in all land use categories. 
(Ord. of 9-12-88(1)) 
Sec. 9-65. - Specific prohibitions. 
    In addition to the general prohibitions set out above, the following specific acts are declared to be in violation of this article. 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any motor vehicle or any street or public place in the city continuously and/or incessantly for a period in excess of sixty (60) seconds, except as a danger warning. 
(2)  Radios, televisions, musical instruments and similar devices. 
a.  The operating or playing of any radio, musical instrument or similar device which produces or reproduces sound on the public rights-of-way in such a manner as to be plainly audible to any person other than the operator of the device. 
b.  The operating or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument or similar device which produces or reproduces sound in a motor vehicle or public park in a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet. 
c.  The operating or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument or similar device which produces or reproduces sound in such a manner as to exceed the levels set forth in section 9-66 for the land use category. 
(3)  Loudspeakers and sound amplifiers. 
a.  The using or operating of any loudspeaker, loudspeaker system, sound amplifier or other similar device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on weekends and holidays is prohibited. 
b.  The use of any loudspeaker, loudspeaker system, sound amplifier or other similar device at any location which is within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property boundary of a residential area or noise sensitive area as defined in this article is prohibited unless a special use permit has been obtained from the mayor and council of the City of Duluth for the operation of such loudspeaker, loudspeaker system, sound amplifier or other similar device. 
Such special use permits shall be granted on a case by case basis. Those desiring to obtain such a special use permit shall make application to the planning and development department. The planning and development department shall review the application and shall transmit it to the mayor and council with a recommendation. In reviewing the application, the planning and development department and the mayor and council shall consider the following: 
1.  The volume of noise to be generated by the operation of the device; 
2.  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual; 
3.  The volume and intensity of background noise in the area; 
4.  The ability of noise from the device to be heard in the residential or noise sensitive areas; 
5.  The nature and zoning of the applicant's property; 
6.  The density of inhabitants in any residential area within one thousand (1,000) feet; 
7.  The time of day or night proposed for use of the device; 
8.  Whether the noise to be produced by the device is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; and 
9.  The proposed placement of speakers to be operated in connection with the device. Should the mayor and council determine that the applicant is entitled to a special use permit, said permit may be conditioned upon limitations of the time of day or night that the device may be used, the position of the placement of speakers to be used in connection with the device, and such other limitations or restrictions as the mayor and council may deem necessary and appropriate to enforce the spirit and purpose of this section. 
(4)  Motor vehicles. The operating of any motor vehicle or motorcycle not equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation. 
(5)  Street sales. The offering for sale by shouting or outcry within any residential, commercial or noise-sensitive area except by permit issued by the city. 
(6)  Animals. The owning, possessing or harboring of any animal which frequently, or for continued duration, howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes other sounds which create excessive and unnecessary noise across a residential or commercial real property line or within a noise-sensitive area. For the purpose of this article, "barking dog" shall mean a dog that barks, bays, cries, howls or makes any other noise continuously or incessantly for a period of ten (10) minutes, or barks intermittently for one-half hour or more to the disturbance of any person at any time of day or night, regardless of whether the dog is physically situated in or upon private property; however, a dog shall not be deemed a "barking dog" if, at the time the dog is barking or making any other noise a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon property in or upon which the dog is situated. 
(7)  Construction and demolition. The operating of any equipment used in construction work within five hundred (500) feet of any residential or noise-sensitive area between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on weekends and holidays, except for emergency work. 
(8)  Powered model vehicles. The operating of, or permitting the operation of, powered model vehicles between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, and 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on weekends or holidays. 
(9)  Emergency signaling devices. 
a.  Except in case of an emergency, the intentional sounding of any alarm between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
b.  The testing of any alarm for a period in excess of sixty (60) seconds at any time. 
(10)  Exceptions : 
a.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any public performance, gathering or parade for which a permit has been obtained from the city or to any event, public performance, or gathering held in the Duluth Festival Center, the adjoining amphitheater or the town green, or other public parks or areas designated for city events if the event has been approved and authorized by the city provided such event is not occurring between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 11:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on weekends and holidays. For purposes of this provision, Friday night and Saturday morning and Saturday night and Sunday morning shall be considered weekends. 
b.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the Gwinnett County School District when the signaling device, radio, television, musical instrument(s), loudspeaker, loudspeaker system, sound amplifier or other similar device is being used in conjunction with a school sponsored event or as part of a school activity. 
(Ord. of 9-12-88(1); Ord. of 11-8-93; Ord. of 5-13-02; Ord. of 3-11-13) 
Sec. 9-66. - Maximum permissible sound levels by receiving land use category. 
    The maximum permissible sound levels by receiving land use categories is as follows: 
Land Use Category Time Sound Level 
Limit 
(dB(A)) Residential, noise-sensitive area, public space. 7:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m. 60 10:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m. 55 Multifamily dwelling 7:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m. 50 10:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m. 45 Commercial 7:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m. 65 10:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m. 60 Industrial At all times 75  
Sec. 9-67. - Penalty for violations. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article may, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-6. 
(Ord. of 9-12-88(1)) 
Sec. 9-68. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
    The city police department shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-12-88(1)) 
Secs. 9-69-9-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VECTOR CONTROL 

Sec. 9-81. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning as indicated. 
    Business building means any structure, permanent or temporary, whether public or private, that is adapted for occupancy, for transaction of business, for rendering professional service, for amusement, for the display, sale or storage of goods, wares or merchandise or for the performance of work or labor, including hotels, apartment buildings, rooming houses, office buildings, public buildings, stores, theaters, markets, restaurants, grain elevators, abattoirs, warehouses, workshops, factories and all outhouses, sheds, barns and other structures on premises used for business purposes. 
    Health authority means the local county health board. 
    Health officer means the authorized representative of the local county health board. 
    Nuisance means whatever is detrimental to human health or whatever renders or tends to render soil, air, water, or food impure or unwholesome. 
    Owner means the actual owner of a building whether an individual, partnership or corporation, who owns or holds title to a building and includes also the agents for the building or other person having custody or managerial control. In the case of business buildings leased or rented with a clause in the contract specifying that the lessee or tenant is responsible for maintenance and repairs, the lessee or tenant will be considered the owner. 
    Occupant means the individual, partnership, or corporation that uses or occupies any buildings or a part thereof, whether the actual owner or tenant. In the case of a vacant building or any portion of a building or premises, the owner, agent, or other person having custody of the building or premises shall have the responsibilities of an occupant of the building or premises. 
    Person means any person, firm, corporation, municipality, association or society. 
    Rat control means any method as may be approved by the health authority to control the rat population. 
    Rat harborage means any condition under which rats may find shelter or protection, and shall include any construction or condition which permits the entrance of rats into any business building. 
    Ratproofing means a form of building construction which will prevent the ingress of rats into business buildings through the exterior walls, ground or first floors, basements, roofs, sidewalk gratings, sidewalk openings, foundations and other places that may be reached and entered by rats by climbing, burrowing, or otherwise. The material to be used for ratproofing shall include cement concrete, brick masonry laid in cement, concrete mortar, sheet metal, and minimum eighteen (18) gauge wire cloth having a mesh not larger than one-half (1/2) inch. All material for ratproofing shall be of such strength and thickness as to be impervious to rat gnawing. Windows and other openings for light or ventilation that may be reached or entered by rats shall be covered with wire cloth screen incorporated into a metal frame conforming to the above gauge and dimensions. All exterior doors shall be protected against the gnawing of rats by the use of materials prescribed above. When closed, all exterior doors shall have a maximum clearance between doors, door sills and jambs not exceeding three-eighths ( 3/8 ) of an inch. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  290-5-58.02) 
Sec. 9-82. - General provisions. 
(a)  No person shall create, maintain, support, aid or continue a nuisance. Nuisances included, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Conditions conducive to the breeding of flies or mosquitoes. 
(2)  Trash, garbage, refuse, or any foul, decaying, or putrescent material kept or used in such a manner or place as to be or become offensive, objectionable or detrimental to health or well being. 
(3)  Keeping of horses, mules, asses, cows, sheep, goats, hogs, dogs, rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters, chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons or similar fowl or animals except under the following conditions: any housing or enclosures used by such animals or fowl shall be well drained, free from accumulations of animal excrement and objectionable odors, and otherwise clean and sanitary. Animal excrement shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the health authority. 
(b)  The owners of all business buildings shall have such buildings ratproofed, and kept ratproofed in accordance with this chapter. 
(c)  All business buildings hereafter erected, enlarged or repaired, shall be ratproofed and kept ratproofed in accordance with this chapter. 
(d)  Whenever conditions inside or under any such business buildings or on any premises provide harborage for rats such that the health authority deems it necessary that the harborage be eliminated, the owner shall take steps toward the elimination of the harborage. 
(e)  The occupants in charge of any business building or premises shall at all times comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Store all garbage in a ratproof and insect proof metal container or a type approved by the health authority pending removal of such garbage. 
(2)  Keep such buildings and/or premises free of trash, debris, rubbish, salvage or similar materials which provide nesting places and harborage for rats. 
(3)  Maintain such buildings and/or premises in a rat free conditions by pursuing a program of rat control approved by the health authority. 
(f)  Owners and occupants of any dwelling shall at all times comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Every owner of a dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units shall maintain the shared or public area of the dwelling and premises thereof in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(2)  Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit and those parts that she/he occupies and controls shall be maintained in a condition not conducive to rat infestation. 
(3)  Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall store and dispose of all rubbish in a clean, sanitary and safe manner. 
(4)  Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall store and dispose of all garbage, refuse, and any other organic waste which might provide food for insects and/or rodents in a clean, sanitary, safe manner. All garbage cans and refuse containers shall be ratproof, insect proof, water tight, structurally strong to withstand handling stress, easily filled, emptied and cleaned; shall be provided with tight-fitting covers or similar closures, and shall be maintained at all times in a clean sanitary condition. Plastic bags may be used as garbage and refuse container liners, but shall not be used without the container for on-site storage of garbage or refuse. Other types of containers meeting the requirements of this regulation may be specifically approved by the health authority. 
(5)  The total capacity of all provided garbage and/or refuse cans and bulk storage containers shall be sufficient to meet the needs of the occupants of the dwelling. 
(6)  Every owner of a dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling units shall supply facilities or refuse containers for the sanitary and safe storage and/or disposal of rubbish and garbage. In the case of a single- or two-family dwelling it shall be the responsibility of each occupant to furnish such facilities or refuse containers. 
(7)  Every owner of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of rats on the premises, and every occupant of a dwelling unit containing more than one (1) dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever the dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subparagraph, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a ratproof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two (2) or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(8)  No occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall accumulate rubbish, boxes, lumber, scrap metal, or any other materials in such a manner that may provide a rat harborage in or about any dwelling or dwelling unit. Stored materials shall be stacked neatly at least eighteen (18) inches above the ground. 
(9)  No owner of a dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling units shall accumulate or permit the accumulation of rubbish, boxes, lumber, scrap metal, or any other materials in such a manner that may provide a rat harborage in or about the shared or public areas of a dwelling or is premises. Materials stored by the owner shall be stacked neatly at least eighteen (18) inches above the ground. 
(10)  No owner or occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall store, place, or allow to accumulate any materials which may serve as food for rats in a site accessible to rats. 
(11)  Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all supplied fixtures and facilities therein in a clean, sanitary and operable condition and shall be responsible for the proper use and operation thereof. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for the occupant, owner, contractor, public utility company, plumber or other person to remove the ratproofing from any building for any purpose and fail to restore same in satisfactory condition, or to make any new openings that are not closed or sealed against the entrance of rats. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  290-5-58.03) 
Sec. 9-83. - Enforcement. 
    This regulation, upon adoption by the city shall be enforced by the county board of health, as a duly adopted ordinance of the city. Any person violating any provision in this regulation shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the city, and upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be punished either by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by confinement in the city jail for a total term not to exceed sixty (60) days, or both. The court shall have the power and authority to place any person found guilty of a violation of this regulation on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. As a condition of such suspension, the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law. 
(Ord. of 10-13-97,  290-5-58.04) 
ARTICLE V. - OUTDOOR SPRINKLER SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of December 11, 2006 amended the Code by adding a new art. V,  9-83-9-86. In order to prevent duplication of section numbers, the new sections have been numbered as 9-84-9-87 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 9-84. - Findings. 
(a)  The uncontrolled use of outdoor sprinkler systems when outdoor temperatures are near or below freezing, and where located near sidewalks and/or streets, present an inconvenience and danger to the safety and welfare of persons using the sidewalks and/or streets. 
(b)  Outdoor sprinkler systems which are left on for an excessive period of time so as to cause puddling of water on sidewalks and/or streets, or which over-spray or spray directly onto sidewalks and/or streets constitute an inconvenience or danger to persons using the sidewalks and/or streets, both by the puddling of water and through the accelerated deterioration of streets. 
(c)  These factors can cause dangerous accidents and accelerated deterioration of public sidewalks and/or streets resulting in additional city expense for repairs. 
(d)  The mayor and council recognize, however, that the use of outdoor sprinkler systems serves a useful purpose and contributes to the beauty of the city, and that the use of outdoor sprinkler systems should not be absolutely denied. 
(Ord. of 12-11-06) 
Sec. 9-85. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to recognize that although outdoor sprinkler systems are proper and necessary, these systems should be reasonably regulated in the interest of public safety and welfare by the establishment of standards for the timing, coverage and use of sprinkler systems. 
(b)  In order to protect the public safety, to protect the public investment in sidewalks and streets, and to provide for orderly and reasonable use of outdoor sprinkler systems, the mayor and council hereby determine that the public health, safety and welfare require the adoption of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-11-06) 
Sec. 9-86. - Operations prohibited. 
    It shall be a violation of this article to operate an outdoor sprinkler system when temperatures are at or below freezing. The formation of ice on a public sidewalk or street shall create a rebuttable presumption that the temperature was at or below freezing. It shall also be a violation of this article to continually operate a sprinkler system for excessive periods of time where such sprinkling creates puddling on adjacent public sidewalks and streets, or to operate a sprinkler system in a manner that results in over-spray or spray directly onto public sidewalks and public streets so as to cause an inconvenience and danger to persons and/or result in the accelerated deterioration of public sidewalks and streets. 
(Ord. of 12-11-06) 
Sec. 9-87. - Remedies; penalties. 
(a)  When the director of planning and zoning or his designee determines that an outdoor sprinkler system is being operated in violation of this article, a written violation notice shall be issued to the owner/operator of the sprinkler system setting forth the actions deemed necessary to correct or remedy the violation. 
(1)  If the violation pertains to excessive use or over-spraying the owner/operator shall, within seven (7) days of the violation notice, take such action as is necessary to correct the violation and shall certify to the director in writing the steps that have been taken to correct the violation. 
(2)  If the violation pertains to operating a sprinkler system when temperatures are at or below freezing, the owner/operator upon receipt of oral or written notice, shall immediately discontinue operation of the sprinkler system and shall also take such action as is necessary to remove any hazardous condition from the public sidewalks and streets of the city. 
(b)  When an emergency situation exists, and it is not practical to notify the owner/operator of the violation, the director of planning and zoning or his designee may cause the city to take such action as is necessary to discontinue the operation of the sprinkler system and to remove or, to the extent possible, eliminate the hazardous condition created by operation of the system. In the event that the city removes or remediates the hazardous conditions created by operation of the system, the owner/operator of the sprinkler system shall be responsible for reimbursing the city for the cost of the removal. In the event that any removal fee remains unpaid for a period of thirty (30) days after written notice, the city may pursue any and all civil remedies available to the city at law or in equity to collect the fee. The payment of any unpaid removal fee shall not bar criminal prosecution for any violation of this article. 
(c)  Any person who is convicted of a first offense under this article shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Any person who is convicted of a second violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00). Any person who is convicted of a third or any subsequent violation of this article shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and each day that this violation occurs and continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 12-11-06) 
Chapter 10 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Crimes and offenses, O.C.G.A. Title 16. 

Sec. 10-1. - Damage to city property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, damage, mar, destroy, deface, remove, sever, pull down, set fire to or carry away any furniture, fixtures, equipment, books, papers, records, magazines, periodicals, supplies or other property of the city, or any agency thereof, or to cut, dig up, pull down, break, injure, damage, remove or carry away any of the shrubbery, hedges, flowers or trees about the public grounds, parks or buildings of the city. 
(Ord. of 9-24-70(4),  13) 
Sec. 10-2. - Littering. 
(a)  Deposit on property, streets prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or place upon the ground, or cause to be thrown or be placed upon the ground, or to allow to accumulate outside a container, on or about the premises of any dwelling or business place, or upon any vacant property, or in or upon any street, road or alley, within the city, any garbage, refuse matter, filth, food scraps, litter, papers, decayed matter, or matter liable to decay, or liable to cause offensive odors, or to endanger life, limb or property or liable to create a fire hazard, except as may hereinafter to provided regarding the collection of garbage, refuse, matter, filth, food scraps, litter, papers, decayed matter, or matter liable to decay or liable to cause offensive odors. 
(b)  Vehicle loads causing litter. No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(c)  Prohibition against littering public or private property or waters. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the city or any waters in the city unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(d)  Discarding vessels, containers, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or discard any can, cup, box, bottle, or other vessel or paper or trash on any lot, yard, alley, ditch, or other place in the city. 
(Ord. of 9-24-70(4),  19; Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Cross reference- Solid waste management, Ch. 13. 
Sec. 10-3. - Malicious mischief. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to wantonly or negligently injure or prevent the free use of any property, not his own, in this city. 
(b)  Dwellings, other structures. It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or mutilate any dwelling or similar structure in the city in any manner. 
(c)  Defacing buildings. It shall be unlawful for any person to write, paint, draw, carve or cut any letter, word or device, or in any way mutilate or deface any church, public building, private house, wall or fence, belonging to another in the city. 
(d)  Defacing telegraph poles, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, or in any way deface any electric, telephone or telegraph pole in this city, or to break any lamp or insulator, or to throw any missile at any wire, or in any manner interfere with any pole, line or lamp of any electric light, telephone or telegraph company in this city, to the injury or inconvenience of such company. 
(e)  City property. It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, misplace, destroy or damage any city property, including street signs. 
(Ord. of 9-24-70(4),  20) 
Sec. 10-4. - Consumption of alcoholic beverages in public. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverages while on the public streets and places in the city or any place of business patronized by the public, except as expressly authorized under chapter 3 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 9-24-70(4),  27; Ord. of 9-14-15, pt. V ) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3. 
Sec. 10-5. - Discharging weapons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, other than law enforcement officers in actual discharge of their duties as such, or persons in actual defense of life, limb or property of themselves or others under their lawful protection, to discharge any sort of gun, pistol, rifle or firearm, or "BB" or air or spring gun, within the city, whether the same is loaded with bullet, shot, shell missile or a mere explosive blank cartridge, shell or other explosive device; however, the city council may permit the discharge of firearms at turkey shoots or other similar events upon application by a requesting nonprofit organization, the time, calibre of ammunition, supervision requirements, location, bond, insurance or such other requirements as may be deemed necessary or proper to be determined by the city council, with advice and assistance of the police chief. In all cases, until the contrary is made to appear, it shall be presumed that any discharge of a weapon within the corporate limits is in violation of this section. 
(Ord. of 9-24-70(4),  27(c)) 
Cross reference- Dove shoots,  4-51 et seq. 
Sec. 10-6. - Unlawful assembly. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly participate in either of the following acts or occurrences: 
(1)  The assembly of two (2) or more persons for the purpose of committing an unlawful act and the failure to withdraw from the assembly on being lawfully commanded to do so by a peace officer and before any member of the assembly has inflicted injury to the person or property of another. 
(2)  The assembly of two (2) or more persons, without authority of law, for the purpose of doing violence to the person or property of one (1) supposed by the accused to have been guilty of a violation of the law, or for the purpose of exercising correctional or regulative powers over any person by violence. 
(b)  It shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this section that the accused withdrew from the assembly on being lawfully commanded to do so by a peace officer or before any member of the assembly had inflicted injury to the person or property of another. 
(Ord. of 9-24-70(4),  33) 
Cross reference- Parades and processions,  8-116 et seq. 
Sec. 10-7. - Refusal to disperse. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person in a gathering to refuse to obey the reasonable official request or order of a peace officer or fire fighter to move for the purpose of promoting the public safety by dispersing those gathered in dangerous proximity to a fire or other emergency. 
(Ord. of 9-24-70(4),  35) 
Sec. 10-8. - Obstructing streets and public ways. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the mayor and council to place obstructions on any streets or public ways in the city so as to impede any pedestrian or vehicular traffic, nor shall any person walk upon or drive any vehicle upon any newly laid street or sidewalk while the same is guarded by a warning or barricade or to knowingly injure any soft or newly laid pavement or sidewalk. 
(Ord. of 9-24-70(4),  38) 
Sec. 10-9. - Shoplifting. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of theft by shoplifting when he alone or in concert with another person, with the intent of appropriating merchandise to his own use without paying for the same or to deprive the owner of possession thereof or of the value thereof, in whole or in part, does any of the following: 
(1)  Conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; 
(2)  Alters the price tag or other price marking on goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; 
(3)  Transfers the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment from one container to another; 
(4)  Interchanges the label or price tag from one item of merchandise with a label or price tag for another item of merchandise; or 
(5)  Wrongfully causes the amount paid to be less than the merchant's stated price for the merchandise. 
(b)  A person convicted of the offense of theft by shoplifting, as provided in subsection (a) of this section shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(1)  Upon conviction of a second such offense, in addition to or in lieu of any imprisonment which might be imposed, the defendant shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and the fine shall not be suspended or probated; 
(2)  Upon conviction of a third such offense, in addition to or in lieu of any fine which might be imposed, the defendant shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than thirty (30) days; and such sentence of imprisonment shall not be suspended, probated, deferred or withheld. 
(c)  In all cases involving theft by shoplifting, the term "value" means the actual retail price of the property at the time and place of the offense. The unaltered price tag or other marking on property, or duly identified photographs thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of value and ownership of the property. 
(d)  Subsection (b) of this section shall in no way affect the authority of a sentencing judge to provide for a sentence to be served on weekends or during the nonworking hours of the defendant as provided in Georgia Code Section 17-10-3, relative to punishment for misdemeanors. 
(Ord. of 4-8-85,  I; Ord. of 5-11-92,  I) 
Sec. 10-10. - Public indecency. 
(a)  A person who knowingly or intentionally, in a public place: 
(1)  Engages in sexual intercourse; 
(2)  Engages in deviate sexual conduct; 
(3)  Appears in a state of nudity; or 
(4)  Fondles the genitals of himself or another person; 
commits public indecency. 
(b)  "Nudity" means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(c)  Any person charged with a violation of this section shall be apprehended, cited or summoned to appear in the Municipal Court of the City of Duluth, and, if found guilty, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the city jail for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(d)  This section is effective from the date of its adoption by the council of the city. 
(Ord. of 4-26-93,  1) 
Editor's note- Provisions enacted by an ordinance adopted April 26, 1993, have been included herein at the discretion of the editor as  10-10. 
Cross reference- Partially nude entertainment,  7-601 et seq. 
Sec. 10-11. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to preserve the peace and tranquility of the public sector when it is endangered by the irresponsible actions of a person. The goal of this section is to empower the law enforcement arm of the city to issue citations to those persons who, in the sound judgment of such law enforcement officials, are acting irrationally, who are under mental and/or emotional strain, who are under the influence of alcohol or drugs or who are creating a disturbance which interferes with the lawful movement or actions of the general public. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to create any disturbance that is contrary to the peace and tranquility enjoyed by the people, interfere with the lawful movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or to engage in any of the following acts: 
(1)  Any person who shall act in a violent or argumentative and threatening manner to another person whereby that person is placed in fear of bodily harm or the property of another is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed. 
(2)  Any person who initiates or engages or provokes any fight or affray so as to cause injury to another's person or property. 
(3)  Any person who acts in a violent or disruptive manner through use of obscene language or words considered profane, fighting words, vulgar and/or indecent language, in any place, public or private, where such language is offensive to the surrounding public, and where the use of such language may be a breach of peace and/or potentially dangerous to the safety of persons and property. 
(4)  Any person who shall be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane loud or unbecoming language. 
(5)  Any person who engages in any noisy, boisterous or unruly conduct that disturbs or infringes upon the peace of another particularly at an hour or time which is not common for such activity. 
(6)  Any persons who assemble or congregate for any purpose other than a lawful or reasonable one; that hinder vehicular or pedestrian movements; or who may roughly crowd, push or shove any persons in any public place; or who refuse the request by a law enforcement officer to disperse. 
Any singular or combined presence of the act enumerated in this subsection may constitute a violation of this section. 
(c)  Penalty for violation of section. Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or sixty (60) days in jail, or both. 
(d)  Repeal. Any and all ordinances in conflict with this section are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 3-24-97) 
Sec. 10-12. - Fortunetelling, palmistry prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or participate in the practice of fortunetelling, phrenology, clairvoyance, palmistry or other kindred practices, businesses or professions where a charge is made or a donation accepted for such services. 
(Ord. of 11-24-97) 
Sec. 10-13. - Public solicitation of work. 
(a)  Unlawful solicitation of work on private property. It shall be unlawful for any person: 
(1)  Without the permission of the property owner, to enter onto private property for the purpose of publicly soliciting work or to remain on private property for the purpose of publicly soliciting work after having been directed to vacate by the property owner or other lawful authority; or 
(2)  Without the permission of the property owner, to enter onto private property for the purpose of hiring or providing transportation to any individual publicly soliciting work on private property. 
(b)  Enforcement and penalty. A violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per violation and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the police department. 
(Ord. of 9-27-99) 
Editor's note- An ordinance of September 27, 1999 amended the Code by adding a new section to be numbered  10-11. In order to avoid duplication of section numbers, the editor has redesignated the new section as  10-13 at his own discretion. 
Sec. 10-14. - Marijuana possession. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of possession of one (1) ounce or less of marijuana when the person possesses one (1) ounce or less of marijuana within the corporate limits of the city. The following items shall be defined as the following: 
(1)  Marijuana means all parts of the plant of the genus Cannabis, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin; but shall not include the completely defoliated mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil, or cake, or the completely sterilized samples of seeds of the plant which are incapable of germination; 
(2)  Person means an individual, corporation, government, or government subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, or association, or any other legal entity; 
(3)  Possession means either actual or constructive control of the marijuana. A person who knowingly has direct control at a given time has actual possession; a person who has the power to exercise dominion or control over the marijuana is in constructive possession. 
(b)  An exception to subsection (a) includes patient participants in the Controlled Substances Therapeutic Research Act who are immune from prosecution for possession of marijuana as authorized by O.C.G.A.  43-34-126. 
(c)  Any person charged with a violation of this section shall be apprehended, cited or summoned to appear in the municipal court of the city, and a person convicted of the offense of possession of one ounce or less of marijuana, as provided in subsection (a) of this section, shall be fined no more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and shall serve no more than twelve (12) months imprisonment or assignment to public work or by both fine and imprisonment or public work. 
(d)  Subsection (c) of this section shall in no way affect the authority of a sentencing judge to provide for a sentence to be served on weekends or during the nonworking hours of the defendant as provided by O.C.G.A.  17-10-3, relative to punishment for misdemeanors. 
(e)  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are expressly repealed. 
(Ord. of 4-23-01) 
Sec. 10-15. - Municipal jurisdiction for underage possession of alcohol. 
(a)  The city municipal court shall have jurisdiction to try and dispose of a first offense violation under O.C.G.A.  3-3-23 relating to furnishing alcoholic beverages to or the purchase or possession of alcoholic beverages by a person under twenty-one (21) years of age if the offense occurs within the corporate limits of the city, as authorized by O.C.G.A.  36-32-10. 
(b)  Any person charged with a violation of this section shall be apprehended, cited or summoned to appear in the municipal court of the city, and a person convicted of the offenses provided in subsection (a) of this section, shall be fined no more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and shall serve no more than twelve (12) months imprisonment or assignment to public work or by both fine and imprisonment or public work. 
(c)  Subsection (c) of this section shall in no way affect the authority of a sentencing judge to provide for a sentence to be served on weekends or during after school or nonworking hours of the defendant as provided by O.C.G.A.  17-10-3, relative to punishment for misdemeanors. 
(Ord. of 4-23-01) 
Chapter 10.5 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation advisory board,  2-86 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10.5-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Litter means garbage, refuse, paper, rubbish, debris, trash and all other waste material whether natural or artificial. 
    Recreational facilities means all areas located within any city park including, but not limited to any buildings, recreational fields, lakes, or other property or buildings located within any park owned, leased, or managed by the city, its parks and recreation department, or its designated agents. This definition shall include, but not be limited to, Bunten Road Park, W.P. Jones Park, Taylor Park, Hudgens Park, Church Street Park and the town green including the Duluth Festival Center building and adjoining amphitheater. 
    Vehicle means any motor-driven equipment, automobile, truck, motorcycle, bicycle or sled. 
(Ord. of 8-11-97,  1; Ord. of 1-28-02) 
Sec. 10.5-2. - Enforcement of chapter. 
    This chapter shall be enforced by any authorized law enforcement officer of the city police department. Where there has been a violation of any provisions of this chapter, the law enforcement officer in their discretion may issue a warning ticket to the person violating these provisions rather than arrest the offender. 
(Ord. of 8-11-97,  2) 
Sec. 10.5-3. - Penalties for violation of chapter. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined in a sum not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or may be confined to jail for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Ord. of 8-11-97,  3) 
Secs. 10.5-4-10.5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - USE OF RECREATION FACILITIES 

Sec. 10.5-21. - Littering prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit litter on the grounds, streets, sidewalks, fountain, pond, lake, swimming pool, stream or other body of water in any recreation facility, except within public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the recreation facility. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and shall be properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Ord. of 8-11-97,  4) 
Sec. 10.5-22. - Wheeled vehicles on tennis courts prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate a wheeled vehicle or object on the tennis courts. For the purposes of this section, a wheeled vehicle or object includes, but is not limited to, roller skates, roller blades, skateboards, bicycles, tricycles, motorized cycles, scooters, and infant strollers. This section shall not apply to wheel chairs or assistive devices or those objects intended for use in connection with the game of tennis, such as tennis ball carriers. 
(Ord. of 8-11-97,  5) 
Sec. 10.5-23. - Throwing objects prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any stone or missile at any person or at any public or private building in a recreation facility. 
(Ord. of 8-11-97,  6) 
Sec. 10.5-24. - Annoying noises prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to whistle, hiss or holler at another person in a boisterous, unbecoming or erring manner or make any unnecessary or unusual noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, peace or safety of other persons in a recreation facility. This section shall not apply to employees of the city or their designees while performing their official duties. 
(Ord. of 8-11-97,  7) 
Sec. 10.5-25. - Profanity prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use profanity or profane language in a recreation facility. 
(Ord. of 8-11-97,  1) 
Sec. 10.5-26. - Fires restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to build or maintain a fire in a recreation facility except in designated areas which are clearly marked by signs. This section shall not apply to employees of the city or their designees while performing their official duties. 
(Ord. of 8-11-97,  9) 
Sec. 10.5-27. - Damaging vegetation prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cut trees, tree limbs, shrubbery, flowers or other vegetation or dig up or damage trees, flowers or shrubbery or other vegetation in a recreation facility. This section shall not apply to employees of the city or their designees while performing their official duties. 
(Ord. of 8-11-97,  10) 
Sec. 10.5-28. - Possession, use or consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, use, or consume any alcoholic beverage in the recreational facilities of the city other than as specifically provided for in this section. Possession, use and consumption of alcoholic beverages may be allowed in the Duluth Festival Center Building, the adjoining amphitheater, the town green area and Taylor Park, provided that the alcoholic beverages are in the possession of and being used and consumed by a person authorized by law to possess and consume alcoholic beverages and that said alcoholic beverages are possessed, used and consumed only at an event which has been specifically approved by the city and for which the possession, use and consumption of alcoholic beverages has been authorized in connection with the event and provided the alcoholic beverage is possessed, used or consumed in accordance with all guidelines, rules and regulations established by the city for such an event. The possession, use and consumption of alcoholic beverages shall only be authorized in the specific area which has been approved for the authorized event, and any possession, use or consumption of alcoholic beverages in any area other than the area specifically authorized for the event shall be prohibited and shall constitute a violation of this section. 
    The possession, use and consumption of alcoholic beverages shall also be authorized in Hudgens Park during the July 4th celebration and any other celebration which has been specifically authorized and approved by the city council and in which the use of alcoholic beverages is approved as part of the approval of such event. Any possession, use or consumption of alcoholic beverages at authorized events shall be subject to all rules, regulations and restrictions of law enacted by the city and/or the state related to the possession, use or consumption of alcoholic beverages, and nothing in this provision shall be construed to authorize the possession, use or consumption of alcoholic beverages outside of the authorized event areas or at any time in any recreational facilities other than within the specific hours for the scheduled event. 
    The possession, use and consumption of alcoholic beverages shall also be authorized in Rogers Bridge Park in areas and under terms specifically authorized by a permit issued by the director of parks and recreation department. 
(Ord. of 8-11-97,  11; Ord. of 1-28-02; Ord. of 5-28-02; Ord. of 9-13-10) 
Sec. 10.5-29. - Vehicles restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle in a recreation facility except upon roadways and paths constructed, designated and maintained for vehicular traffic. This section shall not apply to employees of the city or their designees while performing their official duties. 
(Ord. of 8-11-97,  12) 
Sec. 10.5-30. - Vehicle operation restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle in a recreation facility in a manner which endangers the public. Operation which endangers the public includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Operating a vehicle in excess of the posted speed limits; 
(2)  Operating a vehicle too fast for conditions; or 
(3)  Operating a vehicle in a reckless manner. 
(Ord. of 8-11-97,  13) 
Sec. 10.5-31. - Parking restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in a recreation facility except in those areas designated by appropriate signs as vehicle parking areas. 
(Ord. of 8-11-97,  14) 
Sec. 10.5-32. - Parking limited to facility users. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park in a recreation area if the operator or occupants of the vehicle are not utilizing the recreation facility. 
(Ord. of 8-11-97,  15) 
Sec. 10.5-33. - Commercial activity restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any merchandise or operate or attempt to operate a concession or engage in any commercial activity in a recreation facility without written authorization of the city. 
(Ord. of 8-11-97,  16) 
Sec. 10.5-34. - Hours open to public restricted. 
    City recreation facility hours of operation are from dawn until 11:00 p.m. It shall be unlawful for any person, except participants in authorized programs such as recreation classes, meetings, special events or rentals and authorized city personnel to enter or be within a recreation facility outside of the hours of operation. This section shall not apply to employees of the city or their designees while performing their official duties. 
(Ord. of 8-11-97,  17) 
Sec. 10.5-35. - Hours for vehicles restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, except participants in authorized programs such as recreation classes, meetings, special events or rentals and authorized parks and recreation personnel to drive a vehicle in or on a recreation facility or attempt to park or park a vehicle on any of the streets, avenues or parking areas or at any location within a recreation facility outside of the posted hours of operation as established and posted by the parks and recreation department. This section shall not apply to employees of the city or their designees while performing their official duties. 
(Ord. of 8-11-97,  18) 
Sec. 10.5-36. - Interference with use and injurious use prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity within a recreation facility that could cause injury to another person or interfere with the use and enjoyment of the recreation facility by other persons. 
(Ord. of 8-11-97,  19) 
Sec. 10.5-37. - Public indecency prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity within a recreation facility which is a violation of the City Code  10-10, Public indecency, as that phrase is defined therein. 
(Ord. of 8-11-97,  20) 
Sec. 10.5-38. - Violation of facility regulations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any rules or regulations relating to the use of the recreation area as established by the parks and recreation department or by the city council. 
(Ord. of 8-11-97,  21) 
Sec. 10.5-39. - Prohibited activities in Taylor Park and town green. 
(a)  The city council declares that Taylor Park and the town green are public recreation areas intended for the peaceful use and enjoyment of the public. For the purposes of this section, Taylor Park and town green shall be considered the public area lying between West Lawrenceville Street, Hill Street, Main Street, and the city hall. The city council further finds that certain activities in this area constitute a danger to the public using the facilities located in this area and may result in personal injuries to those engaged in the activities and damage to the property located within this area. 
(b)  In light of the foregoing declaration the following activities are unlawful in Taylor Park and the town green: 
(1)  Skating, skateboarding and roller blading. 
(2)  Riding or operating bicycles, motorized cycles, scooters or similar vehicles. 
(3)  Throwing or striking hard balls such as baseballs, softballs, lacrosse balls, and golf balls. 
(4)  Other activities that are dangerous and interfere with the public's use of the area or pose a threat to the safety of the public and/or surrounding property. The chief of police or his designee are given authority to assess whether any activity violates this subsection. However, before any citation is issued for violation of this subsection the violator shall be given notice that the activity is prohibited and be directed to cease the activity. 
(c)  The chief of police or his designee is authorized to erect appropriate signage to notify the public of the provisions of this section and to take appropriate action to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. of 11-26-01; Ord. of 9-14-09) 
Sec. 10.5-40. - Urban camping prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section: 
(1)  Camp shall mean residing in or using a public street, sidewalk, or park for private living accommodations, such as erecting tents or other temporary structures of objects providing shelter; sleeping in a single place for any prolonged duration of time; regularly cooking or preparing means; or other similar activities. 
(2)  Storing personal property means leaving one's personal effects, such as, but not limited to, clothing, bedrolls, cookware, sleeping bags, luggage, or backpacks, unattended for any substantial prolonged length of time. This term shall not include parking a bicycle or other mode of transportation. 
(3)  Recreational facilities means all areas located within any city park including, but not limited to any buildings, recreational fields, rivers, lakes, or other property or buildings located within any park owned, leased, or managed by the city, its parks and recreation department, or its designated agents. This definition shall include, but not be limited to, Butten Road Park, W.P. Jones Park, Taylor Park, Hudgens Park, Church Street Park and the town green including the Duluth Festival Center and adjoining amphitheater. 
(4)  Public street includes all public streets and highways, street and highway underpasses, public sidewalks, public benches, public parking lots, and medians. 
(b)  Recreational facilities. It shall be unlawful to camp, to sleep, or to store personal property in any recreational facilities, as defined above, owned, leased and/or operated by the city. 
(c)  Public streets. It shall be unlawful to camp, to sleep, to store personal property, to sit or lie down on any public street, as defined herein. 
(d)  Other public property. It shall be unlawful to camp, to sleep, to store personal property, to sit or lie down on any public property so as to interfere with ingress or egress from buildings. 
(e)  Warning. No person may be arrested for violating this code section until he or she has received an oral or written warning to cease the unlawful conduct. If the violator fails to comply with the warning issued, he or she is subject to arrest for urban camping. 
(f)  Exceptions. This code section shall not be construed to prohibit the following behavior: 
(1)  Persons sitting or lying down as a result of a medical emergency; 
(2)  Persons confined to wheelchairs sitting on sidewalks; 
(3)  Persons sitting down while attending parades; 
(4)  Persons sitting down while patronizing sidewalk cafes or eateries; 
(5)  Persons lying down or napping while attending performances, festivals, concerts, fireworks, or other special events; 
(6)  Persons sitting on chairs or benches supplied by a public agency or abutting a private property owner; 
(7)  Persons sitting on seats in bus zones occupied by people waiting for public transportation; 
(8)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line outside a box office to purchase tickets for any sporting event, concert, performance, or other special event; 
(9)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line awaiting entry to any building, including shelters, or awaiting social services, such as provision of meals; or 
(10)  Children sleeping while being carried by an accompanying person or while sitting or lying in a stroller or baby carriage. 
(g)  Severability. In the event any subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this section shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, including but not limited to, a declaration or adjudication that such subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of the ordinance violates a constitutional provision under the Georgia Constitution or the United States Constitution, such adjudication shall in no manner effect the other subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this ordinance, all of which shall remain in full force and effect as if the subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. The city council hereby declares it would have adopted the remaining parts of the section if it had known that such part or parts thereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. The provisions of this section are declared severable to the maximum extent allowed by law. 
(Ord. of 1-14-02) 
Secs. 10.5-41-10.5-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TOBACCO FREE PARKS 

Sec. 10.5-51. - Tobacco use prohibited in indoor and outdoor parks and recreational facilities. 
    It shall be unlawful to use any form of tobacco including but not limited to cigarettes, E-Cigarettes and smokeless tobacco at or on any of the city-owned or operated indoor and or outdoor recreational facilities, including but not limited to the restrooms, athletic fields, rivers, parks, walking/hiking trails, agency owned vehicles, and spectator and concession areas. 
(Ord. of 12-12-11,  1) 
Sec. 10.5-52. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Appropriate signs shall be posted in the above specified areas. 
(b)  The parks and recreation facility will develop an education campaign to inform customers of the new policy. 
(c)  The community, especially facility users and staff, will be notified about this policy. 
(d)  Staff will make periodic observations of recreational facilities to monitor for compliance. 
    Visitors using tobacco products will be asked to refrain while on parks/recreation property or leave the premises. If they refuse, law enforcement officers will be contacted to escort the person off the premises or cite the person for trespassing in case the person refuses to leave the property. 
(Ord. of 12-12-11,  2) 
Sec. 10.5-53. - Opportunities for cessation. 
    The city parks staff will promote the Quit Line, a free service offered by the state, for all employees who request assistance with quitting tobacco use. 
(Ord. of 12-12-11,  3) 
Chapter 11 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to establish a police agency,  1.13(24). 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to provide police protection, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, Sec. II, Para. III(a)(1); law enforcement officers and agencies, O.C.G.A. Title 35. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Disposition of seized and forfeited money or property. 
(a)  All property and/or money and currency received by the city as a result of seizure or forfeiture under either federal or state law shall be: 
(1)  Retained by the city for official use by the city police department; or 
(2)  If said property is not required to be destroyed by law and is not harmful to the public, that said property be sold and the proceeds of sale be used as allowed by Georgia or federal laws. 
(b)  Should the city receive money or currency which is forfeited or which is realized from the sale or disposition of forfeited property in accordance with state and federal law, the city shall expend or use such funds for the police department to defray the cost of investigations, to purchase equipment, to provide matching funds to obtain federal grants or for such other law enforcement purposes as the mayor and council of the city shall deem appropriate except that no such money and currency shall be used for rewards or to pay all or part of the salaries of the law enforcement personnel of the city. 
(c)  A separate savings account and a separate checking account shall be established by the city business office for the purpose of depositing funds subject to the provisions of this section. The chief of police or assistant chief of police shall be authorized to make withdrawals from the savings account or to sign checks drawn on said checking account. All such withdrawals and/or checks shall also require the signature of the mayor or mayor pro tem. Should the city police department receive money and currency which is covered by the provisions of this section, said money shall be promptly deposited into said savings account and transferred into said checking account as needed to carry forth the provisions of this section. The city auditor shall submit an annual report to the mayor and council of the city on or before the first day of May itemizing the money, currency and proceeds of forfeited property during the previous twelve (12) months and the purposes for which said property or money was used. 
(d)  All property and/or money and currency received by the city as a result of seizure and forfeiture under the federal and state laws shall be used in accordance with all state and federal laws applying to said property. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the use of said property and/or money and currency as allowed by law, and should any provision of this section be found to be in conflict with any state or federal law governing use of said property and/or money and currency, said state or federal laws shall be deemed superior and the city shall comply with said state or federal law. 
(Ord. of 11-26-90; Ord. of 3-23-92; Ord. of 6-14-93) 
Secs. 11-2-11-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVE POLICE FORCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Special police, O.C.G.A.  35-9-1. 

Sec. 11-26. - Created, scope, oath. 
    There is hereby established in the city a reserve police force, which force shall be operated under the supervision and direction of the chief of police. The members of the reserve police force shall take and subscribe the same oath of office as regular police officers of the city. The members of the reserve police force shall be subject to call to service by the chief of police at such times as their assistance shall be required by the chief of police. 
(Ord. of 4-9-90(4),  1; Ord. of 8-12-91) 
Sec. 11-27. - Approval, certification of members. 
    No person shall be permitted to serve upon the reserve police force until such time as such person's service in such capacity has been approved by the chief of police and such person's name is certified as a member of the reserve police force. 
(Ord. of 4-9-90(4),  2; Ord. of 8-12-91) 
Sec. 11-28. - Training. 
    The chief of police shall establish such training programs as deemed necessary in order to properly train the members of the reserve police force. 
(Ord. of 4-9-90(4),  3(a); Ord. of 8-12-91) 
Sec. 11-29. - Compensation, expenses. 
    Member's of the reserve police force shall receive no compensation, except that when a member has completed the required program of training, and such fact is certified to by the chief of police a member shall be authorized to receive from the city any reimbursement of any cost incurred in the purchase of a uniform, equal to the cost of uniforms for the regular police force of the city. 
(Ord. of 4-9-90(4),  3; Ord. of 8-12-91) 
Sec. 11-30. - Authority. 
    Whenever the reserve police force, or any member thereof, has been called to official duty by the chief of police, such reserve police force and any member thereof shall be authorized to exercise all powers of law enforcement which may be exercised by regular police officers of the city, and such law enforcement powers shall continue in any instance until such time as the reserve police force, or any member thereof, has been relieved from assignment to which called. 
(Ord. of 4-9-90(4),  4; Ord. of 8-12-91) 
Sec. 11-31. - Workers' compensation. 
    Members of the reserve police force shall be covered by workers' compensation coverage the same as is provided for employees of the city. 
(Ord. of 7-10-06) 
Secs. 11-32-11-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Disposition of unclaimed property, O.C.G.A.  44-12-90. 

Sec. 11-51. - Authority to sell at auction. 
    The police department shall have the authority to sell, at public outcry, to the highest bidder for cash, any and all articles of personal property that have come into its possession and which, after diligent and faithful effort has been made to ascertain the true owner thereof without success, remain unclaimed for a period of six (6) months. 
(Ord. of 4-9-90(3),  1) 
Sec. 11-52. - Records required. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the police department to maintain a complete record in a log book of all property coming into its possession. This property shall be identified in detail by its usual name, make, model, manufacturer's name and serial number, if any, and if no identifying name or numbers, shall be fully described in this log as to its physical properties and appearance. This record shall also show the dates the property came into the possession of the police department and the final disposition thereof. 
(Ord. of 4-9-90(3),  2) 
Sec. 11-53. - Attempt to find owner. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the police department to make a faithful and diligent effort to find the true owner of any article of personal property coming into its possession, and if such owner can be found, to return the property to that owner. In the event that the rightful owner of the article cannot be found, and the article remains unclaimed for a period of not less than six (6) months next preceding the date of sale as hereinafter provided, the police department may proceed to sell the article as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. of 4-9-90(3),  3) 
Sec. 11-54. - When sales to be held. 
    The police department may hold a public sale of all unclaimed articles of personal property held by it for at least six (6) months immediately preceding the date of sale on any day or days as determined by the chief of police provided the advertisement of sale as set forth in section 11-55 has been published. 
(Ord. of 4-9-90(3),  4; Ord. of 4-12-04) 
Sec. 11-55. - Advertisement of sales. 
    The sale of unclaimed property under this article shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipal boundaries of the city, at least fifteen (15) days and not more than sixty (60) days preceding the next sale date. The advertisement shall be of sufficient size and type to be easily read and understood by the general public and shall state the specific time and place of the sale; that the sale shall be open to the public; and that all sales are to the highest bidder for cash. This advertisement shall state that only unclaimed property which has come into the possession of the police department, and which has been in possession of the police department for a period in excess of six (6) months, shall be offered for sale; and that the police department makes no warranties of any kind, either expressed or implied, as to the merchantability, title, quality or performance of the property, and that all articles are sold in an "as is" condition. 
(Ord. of 4-9-90(3),  6; Ord. of 4-12-04) 
Sec. 11-56. - Conduct of sale. 
    The police department may sell property pursuant to this article either by sealed bid or by auction to be conducted at a set time or place or to be conducted through use of an on-line auction process. If the sale is conducted through an on-line bidding process, the advertisement for the sale shall state how persons may access the on-line auction process and the time period in which the on-line auction process will be available to the public. If the auction is conducted through an on-line auction process, no property shall be delivered to the purchaser until the city has verified that good funds equivalent to cash have been received by the city. The city shall not be responsible for any shipping or delivery cost associated with any sale through an on-line auction process. 
(Ord. of 4-9-90(3),  7; Ord. of 4-12-04) 
Sec. 11-57. - Terms of sale. 
    All articles sold under this article shall be sold for cash (U.S. currency) to the highest bidder in an "as is" condition. No warranties of any nature, either expressed or implied, either as to merchantable title, quality or performance are to be made by the police department. All purchasers shall sign a release form documenting that they have been advised of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. of 4-9-90(3),  4) 
Sec. 11-58. - Public disclaimer at sale. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the person conducting a sale under this article to make a public announcement prior to opening the sale that neither the police department, the city government nor any employee or agent thereof does warranty title to any article, nor is there any other warranty, either expressed or implied, as to any article sold, and that all sales are final and all articles are sold in an "as is" condition. It shall be the duty of this individual in charge to make this announcement at intervals during the progress of the sale. 
(Ord. of 4-9-90(3),  8) 
Sec. 11-59. - Disposition of proceeds. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the police department to make a true accounting to the city council of all property sold and monies collected from the sales conducted as provided herein, which money shall be made available to the city. 
(Ord. of 4-9-90(3),  9) 
Sec. 11-60. - Purchase of property for resale. 
    No property shall be purchased under the provisions of this article for the purpose of resale. 
(Ord. of 4-9-90(3),  10) 
Sec. 11-61. - Firearms excluded from public sale. 
    No rifle, handgun or firearm of any kind shall be sold at public sale under this article. Firearms may be converted to use of the police department when such firearm has not been claimed within the six-month period, and after a faithful and diligent attempt to return the firearm to the true owner has failed, or firearms may be sold by the police department to a licensed firearms dealer provided the value of the firearm does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Illegal firearms, such as handmade guns or "sawed off shotguns," will be destroyed and a record thereof retained. 
(Ord. of 4-9-90(3),  11) 
Sec. 11-62. - Charitable donations. 
    Any unclaimed property which is offered for public sale and is not sold may be, depending on its condition, donated to a charitable purpose or discarded at the discretion of the chief of police. 
(Ord. of 4-9-90(3),  12) 
Sec. 11-63. - Conversion to city use. 
    The city council may elect to convert unclaimed property to city governmental use at its discretion rather than offer it for sale at auction. 
(Ord. of 4-9-90(3),  5) 
Secs. 11-64-11-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of May 10, 2010, amended the Code by repealing former art. IV,  11-81-11-83, and adding a new art. IV. Former art. IV pertained to alarm systems, and derived from an ordinance of April 8, 1985. 
Cross reference- False fire alarms,  6-13. 

Sec. 11-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm signal means a detectable signal; audible or visual, generated by an alarm system, to which law enforcement is, requested to respond. 
    Alarm system means any single device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the occurrence of an illegal or unauthorized entry or other activity requiring immediate attention and to which law enforcement is requested to respond, but does not include motor vehicle or boat alarms, fire alarms, domestic violence alarms, or alarms designed to elicit a medical response. 
    Alarm user means any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, or any other entity owning, leasing or operating an alarm system, or on whose premises an alarm system is maintained for the protection of such premises. 
    Automatic dial protection device means an automatic dialing device or an automatic telephone dialing alarm system and shall include any system which, upon being activated, automatically initiates to the city police department a recorded message or code signal indicating a need for law enforcement response. 
    Cancellation means the process where response is terminated when the alarm company (designated by the alarm user) notifies the city police department that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring police response after an alarm dispatch request. If cancellation occurs prior to police arriving at the scene, this is not a false alarm. 
    City means the City of Duluth. 
    False alarm means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the alarm user, his/her employees or agents, and signals activated to summon law enforcement personnel unless law enforcement response was cancelled by the alarm user or his/her agent before law enforcement personnel arrive at the alarm location. An alarm is false within the meaning of this article when, upon inspection by the city police department, evidence indicates that no unauthorized entry, robbery, or other such crime was committed or attempted in or on the premises which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a false alarm shall not include an alarm which was activated due to an electrical storm, severe winds or a power outage. 
(Ord. of 5-10-10) 
Sec. 11-82. - Duties of the alarm user. 
(a)  Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a method that will reduce or eliminate false alarms; and 
(b)  Provide and maintain with the alarm company the updated and accurate contact information for the person or persons responsible for the alarm, including name, phone numbers where the person may be reached and home address. 
(c)  Must respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system's location within thirty (30) minutes when notified by the city police department to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system. 
(d)  Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report or to perform routine maintenance as prescribed by alarm system provider. 
(Ord. of 5-10-10) 
Sec. 11-83. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to activate an alarm system for the purpose of summoning law enforcement when no burglary, robbery, or other crime dangerous to life or property is being committed or attempted on the premises, or otherwise to cause a false alarm, except as provided by subsection 11-82(d). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an automatic dial protection device that reports, or causes to be reported, any recorded message to the city police department. 
(c)  Excessive false alarms. It is hereby found and determined that three or more false alarms within a calendar year is excessive, constitutes a public nuisance, and shall be unlawful. Fines and incarceration for false alarms within a calendar year may be imposed against an alarm user as provided in section 11-84. 
(Ord. of 5-10-10) 
Sec. 11-84. - Enforcement of provisions. 
(a)  Upon a finding of a violation of any provision of this article the city police department shall be authorized to issue a citation of violation which shall be thereafter prosecuted in the city municipal court. 
(b)  Violations of section 11-83 shall be punished by up to thirty (30) days of incarceration and/or fines in the following amounts: 
Third false alarm in any one calendar year ..... $50.00 
Fourth false alarm in any one calendar year ..... 50.00 
Fifth false alarm in any one calendar year ..... 100.00 
Sixth false alarm in any one calendar year ..... 100.00 
Seventh false alarm in any one calendar year ..... 125.00 
Eighth or greater false alarm in any one calendar year ..... 150.00 
(c)  No fine issued for any violation under this article shall exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(d)  Other penalty(ies). Except as provided in subsection (c) above, violations of this article may be enforced through the assessment of fines in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation. 
(Ord. of 5-10-10; Ord. of 10-14-13) 
Sec. 11-85. - Appeals. 
    Decisions and orders of the municipal court under this article are subject to review in the county superior court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. 
(Ord. of 5-10-10) 
Sec. 11-86. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this ordinance are severable. If a court determines that a word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection, section, or other provision is invalid or that the application of any part of the provision to any person or circumstance is invalid, the remaining provisions and the application of those provisions to other persons or circumstances are not affected by that decision. 
(Ord. of 5-10-10) 
Chapter 13 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of February 26, 2007 amended the Code by repealing former ch. 13,  13-1-13-4, 13-21-13-31, 13-41-13-49 and 13-61, and adding a new ch. 13. Former ch. 13 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from an ordinance adopted March 8, 2004. 
Charter reference- Authority to provide for the collection and disposal of solid waste,  1.13(34). 
Cross reference- Disposal of dead animals,  4-21; outdoor rubbish fires,  6-7; burning certain materials prohibited,  6-9; abandoned vehicles,  8-86 et seq.; littering,  10-2; soil erosion and sedimentation control, Ch. 12. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to provide for garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, Sec. II, Para. III(a)(2); Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A.  12-8-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Title. 
    This chapter may be known and cited as the "Solid Waste Collection and Disposal Ordinance of the City of Duluth." 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 13-2. - Definitions. 
    All terms shall have their ordinary dictionary meaning except as specifically defined herein. 
    Commercial solid waste. Refuse, trash, garbage, rubbish and other waste material that is generated by apartments, condominiums, other multi-family residential units, offices, businesses, industries, restaurants and establishments other than single-family dwellings or duplexes within the city limits. 
    Construction and demolition waste. Building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, or demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings, and other structures. Such waste includes but is not limited to waste containing asbestos, wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wallboard, paper, cardboard, and other nonputrescible wastes associated with construction and demolition activities which have a low potential for ground-water contamination. Inert waste landfill materials approved by authorized state and/or federal agencies for disposal in landfills permitted by rule and regulation other than residential solid waste as defined in this chapter are also included in this definition if disposed in a construction or demolition waste landfill. 
    Garbage collector. The city, its agents or employees or such person, firm or corporation as the city may contract or otherwise delegate responsibility for the collection and/or disposal of residential, commercial and industrial solid waste within the boundaries of the city. 
    Industrial solid waste. Solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes that is not a hazardous waste regulated under the Hazardous Waste Management Act and regulations promulgated by the board of natural resources, chapter 391-3-11. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, wastes resulting from the following manufacturing processes: Electric power generation; fertilizer/agricultural chemicals; food and related products/by-products; inorganic chemicals; iron and steel manufacturing; leather and leather products; nonferrous metals manufacturing/foundries; organic chemicals; plastics and resins manufacturing; pulp and paper industry; rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; stone, glass, clay, and concrete products; textile manufacturing; transportation equipment; and water treatment. This term does not include mining waste or oil or gas waste. 
    Recovered materials. Those materials which have known use, reuse or recycling potential; can feasibly be used, reused or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse, or recycling, whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing. These materials include, but are not limited to, all newspapers, glass, food and beverage containers, plastic soda bottles and milk jugs, tin food cans, cardboard and aluminum beverage cans. 
    Recovered materials processing facility. A facility engaged solely in the storage, processing, and resale or reuse of recovered materials. Such terms shall not include a solid waste handling facility; provided, however, any solid waste generated by such facility shall be subject to all applicable laws and regulations relating to such solid waste; 
    Recycling : Any process, both commercial and residential, by which materials which would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products; 
(1)  Commercial recycling means recycling conducted from multi-family dwellings, retail, service, food, or other businesses located within the corporate limits of the city, both present and future, which properties are not eligible for residential waste collection; 
(2)  Residential recycling means recycling conducted from single-family residences located within the corporate limits of the city, both present and future, or other residences which qualify for residential waste collection; 
    Residential solid waste. All household refuse, trash, garbage, yard debris, or rubbish including but not limited to putrescible animal, fruit and vegetable matter resulting from the preparation, cooking, storage, sale and serving of food, cans, glass, paper, and other containers, material that is generated as household garbage and inert yard waste such as grass clippings, leaves, and branches generated from residences. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Secs. 13-3-13-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL AND COLLECTION 

Sec. 13-20. - Regulations. 
    The following regulations are hereby adopted in order to promote the safe, efficient and proper collection of solid waste within the city limits. 
(1)  All residential solid waste to be collected by the garbage collector shall be placed in specialized plastic bags provided to designated retail outlets and the city by the garbage collector. 
(2)  All residential yard clippings and yard debris to be collected shall be placed in designated specially marked yard clipping bags. 
(3)  Commercial and industrial solid waste to be collected by the garbage collector shall be placed in containers provided to commercial and industrial customers by the garbage collector. 
(4)  All residential solid waste to be collected shall be placed on private property at curb, alley or at the rear or side of residences, multiple unit premises, institutional or commercial buildings not earlier than 6 p.m. on the day before scheduled collection by the garbage collector. 
(5)  Residential solid waste to be collected shall be easily accessible to the garbage collector for collection, preferably in a paved area. In the event that said containers are not easily accessible or are so situated that the garbage collector must contend with dogs or other pets, animals or livestock of the owner, tenant, or person in possession of the premises, so as to cause said collector to be apprehensive about his safety, collection of residential solid waste shall be excused until such time as the problem is remedied. Such situation shall not excuse payment for the service to be rendered or responsibility of the owner, tenant, or person in possession of the premises to comply with this chapter. 
(6)  Solid waste to be collected by special haul services provided for hereinafter shall be placed so as to be easily accessible to the garbage collector. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 13-21. - Rates. 
(a)  The rates and charges for the collection of residential and commercial solid waste within the city limits shall be as established in the agreement between the city and the approved garbage collector for the city. 
(b)  The rates for industrial solid waste shall be negotiated directly between the garbage collector and the industrial customer. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Charter reference- Authority to collect a service charge for garbage and refuse collection,  1.13(10). 
Sec. 13-22. - Burning of trash, paper, etc., prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall burn or incinerate, or cause to be burned or incinerated, any rubbish, paper, pasteboard boxes, rags, straw, packing materials, shavings, and similar materials within the city, except in an incinerator equipped with spark arrestor devices and meeting all standards and requirements as may now be or as may hereafter be established by the air quality control branch of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources or the county fire marshal. The open burning of leaves, tree branches, and limbs by individual homeowners is not within the prohibition or requirements of this section, provided such burning is associated with storm clean-up and individual yard work. 
(b)  Hand-warming fires on a construction site are permitted if the weather reaches fifty (50) degrees Fahrenheit or below. Such hand warming fires shall be contained within a fifty-five-gallon barrel or drum. The barrel or drum containing the fire shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from the structure being built on the site, and only wood may be burning inside the barrel or drum. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for builder's debris to be burned within the city limits. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 6. 
Sec. 13-23. - Exclusive franchise rights. 
    It shall be unlawful for any individual, entity, company, corporation, or group either private or commercial other than the city or its designated garbage collector collect or haul or attempt to collect or haul waste materials other than construction and demolition waste, as defined in this chapter, or to interfere in any manner with any receptacle containing such waste or to remove any such receptacle from the place where the same are placed by the owner, agent, or person lawfully in control thereof or to remove the contents of such receptacles. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 13-24. - Recycling. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to encourage the practice of and facilitate the process of recycling within the corporate limits of the city by providing an open and hospitable environment for personal, private, commercial, and residential recycling. 
(b)  Residential recycling, curbside containers and collection bins. The garbage collector shall provide collection containers for the purpose of residential recycling at curbside. These containers will be made of rigid plastic construction; will be of uniform color and size. These collection containers are to be placed at the curbside of the public street at each residential location and will be serviced pursuant to city's exclusive agreement for residential recycling collection. 
The city may also, from time to time, designate certain collection points where recyclable items may be brought to a designated collection bin. It shall be an offense punishable as stated in section 13-61 to place any garbage or household waste other than recyclable items, in or around designated recycling bins. 
(c)  Commercial recycling and registration. Any individual, entity, company, corporation, or group both private or commercial, who seeks to engage in the business of commercial recycling, as defined herein, may do business within the corporate limits of the city, upon registering with the city clerk and providing a sworn statement, in the form attached as exhibit A to this chapter, affirming that it is engaged only in the business of commercial recycling as defined herein and is utilizing a recovered materials processing facility as defined herein. Each container placed within the city for purposes of commercial recycling shall contain a conspicuous notice designating the container as a container for recycled goods only. Should any individual, entity, company, corporation, or group, place a commercial recycling container at any commercial location that does not also maintain a waste disposal container, a rebuttable presumption shall exist that the commercial recycling container is being used for waste disposal in violation of this chapter. 
(d)  Enforcement. Should any person or entity deposit waste materials, as defined herein, within any curbside container or designated collection bin or should any person or entity engage in commercial recycling without proper prior registration said person or entity shall be in violation of this ordinance, and may be cited and fined an amount of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day. Each day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 13-25. - Burial pits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to bury or cause to be buried any builder's debris, commercial or industrial waste, stumps, logs, branches, limbs, trash, garbage, waste paper, refuse matter, filth, food scraps, litter, decayed matter, or any other materials or any sort within the city limits. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Sec. 13-26. - Construction and demolition waste. 
(a)  Collection of construction and demolition waste. Any individual, entity, company, corporation, or group both private or commercial, who seeks to engage in the business of collecting and hauling construction and demolition waste, as defined herein, may do business within the corporate limits of the city, upon registering with the city clerk and providing a sworn statement, in the form attached as exhibit B to this chapter, affirming that it is engaged only in the business of collecting and hauling construction and demolition waste as defined herein and is depositing all such waste in a landfill approved for disposal of such waste by the state and certified by the state department of natural resources. 
(b)  Proof of disposal. The city may require any construction and demolition waste hauler or collector to provide documentary evidence of appropriate and lawful disposal of construction and demolition waste for the previous calendar year as a prerequisite to approving registration or at any time during the period in which the hauler or collector is doing business in the city. 
(c)  Violations and enforcement. 
(1)  Should any individual, entity, company, corporation, or group either private or commercial other than the city or its designated garbage collector collect or haul or attempt to collect or haul construction and demolition waste, as defined herein, without registering with the city clerk and providing a sworn statement as required above, said person or entity shall be in violation of this chapter, and may be cited and fined an amount of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day. Each day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(2)  Should any individual, entity, company, corporation, or group haul or attempt to haul construction and demolition waste to an unauthorized or illegal site or disposal facility or should any individual, entity, company, corporation or group be unable to provide proof of proper disposal of construction and demolition waste under subsection (b) of this section said party shall be in violation of this chapter and may be cited and fined an amount of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) per day and may also be subject to revocation of their registration and right to collect construction and demolition waste in the city. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Secs. 13-27-13-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VIOLATIONS, EVIDENCE, PENALTIES 

Sec. 13-40. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this chapter or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues without abatement shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the director of planning and development or his designee, who is hereby given authority, to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The director of planning and development shall be empowered to issue citations for violations under this chapter directing offenders to appear before the municipal court of the city. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person who violates this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. of 2-26-07) 
Exhibit A 
AFFIDAVIT 
    Personally appeared before me, the undersigned attesting officer duly authorized to administer oaths, ___________ who, first being duly sworn, says on oath as follows: 
1. 
    My name is ___________ and I am over the age of eighteen and am otherwise competent to give this affidavit. If I am giving this Affidavit on behalf of a corporation or other entity, my position with that corporation or entity is ___________, and the name of the corporation or entity is ___________. 
2. 
    I understand and acknowledge the provisions set forth in Chapter 13 of the Duluth Code of Ordinances whereby recycling means any process, both commercial and residential, by which materials which would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated or processed and reused or return to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
3. 
    I understand and acknowledge that recovered materials means those materials which have known use, reuse or recycling potential; can feasibly be used, reused or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse, or recycling, whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing; [these materials include, but are not limited to, all newspapers, glass, food and beverage containers, plastic soda bottles and milk jugs, tin food cans, aluminum beverage cans, and cardboard]. 
4. 
    I understand and acknowledge that all commercially recovered materials shall be delivered to a recovered material processing facility which means a facility engaged solely in the storage, processing, and resale or reuse of recovered materials. Such terms shall not include a solid waste handling facility; provided, however, any solid waste generated by such facility shall be subject to all applicable laws and regulations relating to such solid waste. 
5. 
    I represent and warrant I or the corporation or entity that I represent engage in the business of commercial recycling, which is defined as recycling conducted from multi-family dwellings, retail, service, food, or other businesses located within the corporate limits of the City, both present and future, which properties are not eligible for residential waste collection, and that I or the corporation or entity I represent will abide by all City Ordinances related to commercial recycling. I further represent and warrant that I or the corporation or entity that I represent has paid occupation tax to the City of Duluth or that occupation tax has been paid to another city or county or is not required, and proof of payment or exemption is attached to this affidavit. 
6. 
    I understand and acknowledge that I may be required to submit documentation for inspection by City officials verifying my compliance with the representations set forth herein and recycling provisions of Chapter 13 of the Duluth Code of Ordinances. 
/s/   
      Signature   Sworn to and subscribed before 
Me this _____ day of _______, 20___. 
/s/   
      Notary Public   My Commission Expires: 
[Notarial Seal] 
Exhibit B 
AFFIDAVIT 
    Personally appeared before me, the undersigned attesting officer duly authorized to administer oaths, ___________ who, first being duly sworn, says on oath as follows: 
1. 
My name is ___________ and I am over the age of eighteen and am otherwise competent to give this affidavit. If I am giving this Affidavit on behalf of a corporation or other entity, my position with that corporation or entity is ___________, and the name of the corporation or entity is ___________. 
2. 
    I understand and acknowledge the provisions set forth in Chapter 13 of the Duluth Code of Ordinances whereby construction and demolition waste is specifically defined and excluded from the City's restriction on solid waste collection and hauling by parties other than the City, its exclusive franchisee or agents. 
3. 
    I understand and acknowledge that construction and demolition waste means building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, or demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings, and other structures. Such waste includes but is not limited to waste containing asbestos, wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wallboard, paper, cardboard, and other nonputrescible wastes associated with construction and demolition activities which have a low potential for ground-water contamination. Non-residential inert waste landfill materials approved by authorized state and/or federal agencies for disposal in landfills permitted by rule and regulation are also included in this definition if disposed in a construction or demolition waste landfill. 
4. 
    I understand and acknowledge that all construction and demolition waste collected within the City of Duluth must be disposed of in a landfill approved for disposal of such waste by the State of Georgia and certified by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
5. 
    I represent and warrant that I or the corporation or entity that I represent will engage in the business of collecting and hauling only construction and demolition waste in the City of Duluth as such waste is defined in the City's ordinance, and that I or the corporation or entity I represent will abide by all City Ordinances including requirements that construction and demolition waste be disposed of in a landfill approved by the State and certified by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. I further represent and warrant that I or the corporation or entity that I represent has paid occupation tax to the City of Duluth or that occupation tax has been paid to another city or county or is not required, and proof of payment or exemption is attached to this affidavit. 
6. 
    I understand and acknowledge that I may be required to submit documentation for inspection by City officials verifying my compliance with the representations set forth herein and compliance with the Duluth Code of Ordinances. 
/s/   
      Signature   Sworn to and subscribed before 
Me this _____ day of _______, 20___. 
/s/   
      Notary Public   My Commission Expires: 
[Notarial Seal] 
Chapter 15 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - STORMWATER UTILITY 

Sec. 15-1. - Purpose. 
    This article shall serve the purpose of establishment up of the City of Duluth Stormwater Utility. 
(Ord. of 6-13-11) 
Sec. 15-2. - Findings of fact. 
    The mayor and city council make the following findings of fact: 
(1)  The City of Duluth is authorized by the Georgia Constitution of 1983, including, without limitation, Article IX, Section II, Paragraphs I and III thereof and O.C.G.A.  36-82-62 to provide stormwater management services, systems and facilities throughout the corporate boundaries of the City of Duluth (hereinafter "the City" or "Duluth"). 
(2)  In promulgating the regulations contained in this article, Duluth is acting pursuant to authority granted by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and its City Charter to provide for stormwater collection and disposal. A system for the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater provides services to all properties within the city and surrounding areas. 
(3)  Failure to effectively manage stormwater runoff may: 
a.  Cause erosion of lands, threaten businesses and residences, and other facilities with water damage and may environmentally impair the rivers, streams and other bodies of water within, and downstream of, the city. 
b.  Adversely affect the operations of the sanitary sewer system operated by Gwinnett County thereby increasing the likelihood of infiltration and inflow into the sanitary sewer system. 
c.  Contribute to the potential degradation of the quality of both surface water and groundwater resources. 
(4)  The city presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities, which have been developed over many years. The future usefulness and operational function of the existing stormwater management systems and facilities owned and operated by the city, and the additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the city to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use, and enhance stormwater systems and facilities within the city in concert with the management of other water resources within the city. In order to do so, the city must have both a comprehensive stormwater management program as well as an adequate and stable funding source for implementation of its comprehensive stormwater management program and drainage-related capital improvement needs. 
(5)  The city is required under federal and state regulations [i.e. the Federal Clean Water Act, the city's national pollutant discharge elimination system (hereinafter "NPDES") phase I stormwater permit] to provide enhanced management of stormwater runoff quality to mitigate the impacts of pollutants which may be discharged from the public municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and stormwater conveyance system into State of Georgia or United States' waters. Therefore, it is appropriate for the city to establish a stormwater utility and impose a stormwater user fee charge upon all improved properties that may discharge, directly or indirectly, into the public MS4 and stormwater conveyance system, whether the property is private or public in nature. 
(6)  Compliance with the regulatory obligations of the city's NPDES phase i stormwater permit, the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District (MNGWPD), the city's comprehensive plan and the other applicable regulatory programs will affect the cost of providing stormwater management services, systems and facilities above what is currently being spent for stormwater management program implementation, water quality management, drainage system maintenance, floodplain management, capital construction and other program activities. 
(7)  The cost of operating and maintaining the city's stormwater management system and the funding of necessary repairs, replacements, improvements and extensions thereof should, to the extent practicable, be allocated in relationship to the services received from the city's stormwater management program. 
(8)  The professional engineering and financing analysis and related documents prepared by the city's stormwater consultant properly assesses and defines the city's stormwater management program problems, needs, goals, priorities and operational costs as well as the stormwater management program funding strategy. The applicable supporting, project-related documents that are incorporated herein by reference include the following: Stormwater Management Program Assessment and Cost Analysis (Technical Memorandum No. 1 dated January 28, 2011); Stormwater Utility User Fee Recommendations Memorandum (Project Memorandum dated April 25, 2011); and Stormwater Utility Implementation (Technical Memorandum Addendum dated April 25, 2011, or the most recent version). 
(9)  Given the stormwater management program problems, needs, goals, priorities and funding strategy identified in the aforementioned professional engineering and financing analysis, it is appropriate to authorize the formation of an organizational and accounting entity dedicated specifically to the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater management services, systems and facilities within the city in concert with other water resource management programs. 
(10)  Stormwater management is applicable and needed throughout the incorporated areas of the city. While specific service and facility demands may differ from area to area at any given point in time, a stormwater management system and service area encompassing all lands and water bodies within the incorporated areas of the City of Duluth is consistent with the present and future needs of the community. 
(11)  The stormwater management services rendered may differ depending on many factors and considerations, including but not limited to location, demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater management systems and programs, and risk exposure. It is practical and equitable to allocate the cost of stormwater management among the owners of improved properties in proportion to the demands the properties impose on the city's stormwater management program which results in services being provided to such properties and the owners thereof. The fair and equitable apportionment of costs via the user fee charge should correlate to the stormwater management services provided to that property and the runoff demand that the property imposes on the public drainage system and the city's stormwater management program. 
(12)  The stormwater management needs in the city include, but are not limited to, protection of the public health, safety, and welfare of the community. Provision of stormwater management services renders and/or results in both a service and a benefit to all properties, property owners, businesses, citizens, and residents of the city in a variety of ways even though the benefits may be indirect or immeasurable. 
(13)  A stormwater management program provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering stormwater management services throughout the city, and the most equitable means to implement an enhanced level of service for stormwater management service delivery within the city through stormwater user fee charges, user fees and other mechanisms. 
(14)  The amount of impervious surface on each improved property is the most important factor influencing stormwater runoff characteristics and these characteristics bear a rational nexus to the cost of the stormwater management services provided by the city, or to be provided by the city in the future, to that property. As a result, the amount of impervious surface on each property is therefore the most appropriate parameter for calculating a periodic stormwater user fee charge. 
(15)  A schedule of stormwater utility user fee charges based on the area of impervious surface located on each improved property is the most appropriate and equitable means of allocating the cost of stormwater management services throughout the city. Stormwater utility user fee charges may be designed with specific modifiers to further enhance customer equity, as well as customer understanding of the user fee charge rate structure, while at the same time minimizing the city's customer account management and maintenance efforts. 
(16)  Stormwater utility user fee charges may be supplemented by other types of fees and charges which address specific needs, including, but not limited to, special service fees, special assessments, revenue bonds, use of proceeds from special purpose local option sales taxes (SPLOST) and other forms of revenue, as deemed appropriate by the mayor and city council. 
(17)  The existence of privately owned and maintained on-site stormwater control facilities, activities or assets which reduce, or otherwise mitigate, the impact of a particular property on the city's stormwater management program, and the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and/or stormwater management systems and facilities, should be taken into account to reduce the user fee charge on that property either in the form of a direct reduction or a credit, and such reduction or credit should be conditioned upon continuing provision of such services, systems, facilities, activities or assets in a manner complying with the standards and codes as determined by the stormwater utility. Credits for privately owned and maintained stormwater management systems, facilities, activities or assets shall be generally proportional to the affect that such systems have on the reduction and mitigation of the stormwater runoff impacts from the property. 
(18)  It is imperative that the proceeds from all user fee charges for stormwater management services, systems or facilities, together with any other supplemental revenues raised or otherwise allocated specifically to stormwater management services, systems or facilities, be dedicated solely to those purposes, and such proceeds of user fee charges and supplemental revenues shall therefore be deposited into the City of Duluth Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund and shall remain in that fund and be dispersed only for stormwater management capital, operating and non-operating costs, lease payments and debt service of bonds or other indebtedness for stormwater management purposes. 
(19)  In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, the governing authority of the City of Duluth hereby exercises its authority to establish a stormwater utility enterprise fund. The city will enact a stormwater utility rate ordinance in the future to establish stormwater utility user fee charge rates for the provision of stormwater management services. 
(Ord. of 6-13-11) 
Sec. 15-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means and refers to the Clean Water Act as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987 (33 U.S.C.  1251 et seq.), as amended, and the rules and regulations promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant thereto. 
    Attached single family residential (ASFR) property shall mean improved property containing individually owned, attached dwelling units such as duplexes, triplexes, quadplexes, condominiums, townhouses, or other similar residential structures not listed herein where one or more family groups commonly and normally reside or could reside. Improved property may be classified as an ASFR despite the presence of incidental structures associated with residential uses such as garages, carports and small storage buildings. Improved property may be classified as ASFR property despite the presence of a commercial use. ASFR property shall not include improved property used primarily for non-residential purposes, herein defined as NSFR properties or properties defined herein as DSFR. 
    Credit means a reduction in the amount of a customer's stormwater user fee charge in recognition of a customer's efforts to mitigate the stormwater runoff impact that developed property has on the city stormwater management services and systems, and/or the efforts of a customer to offset the city's cost for implementation of stormwater management program activities such as public education, watershed stewardship, etc. 
    Customers of the stormwater utility shall include all persons, properties, and entities serviced by and/or benefiting from the services provided by the city's stormwater management program and the stormwater utility. These services include, but are not necessarily limited to, the stormwater utility's administration, management, maintenance, expansion, and improvement of the public stormwater management systems for the handling of stormwater runoff of private and public properties, and the regulation of the public and private stormwater management systems, controls, facilities, and activities. 
    Detached single family residential (DSFR) property shall mean improved property containing one (1) residential structure situated upon a single lot of record which is not attached to another dwelling, and which contains one (1) or more bedrooms, with bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed for occupancy by one (1) family. Improved property may be classified as a DSFR property even if there is present incidental structures associated with residential uses such as garages, carports, storage buildings, guest houses, servants or caretaker's quarters, cottages or barns, or the presence of a commercial use within the residence, as long as such use does not result in additional areas of impervious surfaces. DSFR properties shall not include improved property containing structures used primarily for nonresidential purposes, manufactured homes located within manufactured home parks where the land is owned by someone other than the owners of the manufactured homes, ASFR developments, or undeveloped property. 
    Dwelling unit means a structure, regardless of the type or method of construction, which contains one (1) or more bedrooms, a bathroom, and cooking facilities, designed for occupancy by one (1) or more person(s) regardless of relationship, living as a single-family unit. 
    Equivalent residential unit (ERU) means the stormwater user fee charge billing unit increment related to the median horizontal impervious surface area footprint of two thousand six hundred fifty-four (2,654) square feet for a detached, single family residential (DSFR) residential parcel within the city as defined herein. The median horizontal impervious surface area footprint for parcels defined herein as attached single family residential (ASFR) is one thousand one hundred seventy-three (1,173) square feet. 
    Hydrologic response defines the manner and means whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates, and is conveyed from a property. Hydrologic response is dependent on several factors including, but not limited to, the presence of impervious surface, the parcel's size, the parcel's shape, the parcel's topography, the parcel's vegetative canopy, the parcel's groundwater characteristics, the parcel's on-site operations, the parcel's stormwater controls, the parcel's antecedent moisture as well as the parcel's geologic and hydro-geologic characteristics. 
    Impervious area shall mean and have the same definition as impervious surface. 
    Impervious surface means those areas which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil in the manner in which it entered the soil, in natural conditions, prior to development and causes stormwater runoff to collect, concentrate or flow in a manner materially different from what would occur if the land were in an unaltered natural condition. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings or structures, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, awnings and other fabric or plastic coverings, and other surfaces which prevent or impede the natural infiltration of rainfall, or stormwater runoff, which existed prior to development. 
    Improved property (or developed property) means property altered from its natural state by construction or installation of more than five hundred (500) square feet of impervious surfaces. 
    Non-single family residential (NSFR) property shall mean a developed parcel of land that consists of various non-residential land uses including, but not limited to: (1) multi-family, commercial (including mixed commercial & residential), office/institutional, public, transportation, industrial, manufacturing and storage buildings and facilities; (2) parking lots, parks, public and private schools, universities and hospitals; (3) streets, roads, water and wastewater treatment plants; and (4) any other form of use not specifically defined as a single family residential property (SFR). 
    Parcel shall mean a designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. 
    Private stormwater management systems and facilities shall mean those natural and manmade channels, swales, ditches, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainageways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, headwalls, storm drains, lakes and other physical works, properties and improvements which transfer, control, convey or otherwise influence the movement of stormwater runoff or water quality, which are not public. 
    Public stormwater management systems and facilities (or the city's municipal separate storm sewer system) shall mean those natural and manmade channels, swales, ditches, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainageways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, headwalls, storm drains, public streets, curbs and gutters, lakes and other physical works, properties and improvements which transfer, control, convey or otherwise influence either the movement of stormwater runoff or water quality, which are owned by the City, where the City has exercised dominion and control, or over which the City has accepted dedication of an easement or other legally binding permanent right of use for stormwater drainage and for which the City has the obligation of maintenance for stormwater drainage purposes. 
    Service area means the entire land area within the corporate limits of the City of Duluth. 
    Stormwater management services mean all water quality and water quantity related services provided by the city which relate to the: 
(1)  Transfer, control, conveyance or movement of stormwater runoff through the incorporated areas of the city; 
(2)  Maintenance, repair and replacement of existing stormwater management systems and facilities; 
(3)  Planning, development, design and construction of additional stormwater management systems and facilities to meet current and anticipated needs; 
(4)  Regulation of the use of stormwater management services, systems and facilities; 
(5)  Compliance with applicable state and federal stormwater management regulations and permit requirements; and 
(5)  Other services as the deemed appropriate by the city. 
    Stormwater user fee charge means the periodic user fee charge imposed pursuant to the ordinance from which this article is derived and other applicable ordinances by the City of Duluth Stormwater Utility for providing stormwater management services and stormwater management systems and facilities. This term shall exclude special charges to the owners of particular properties for services, systems or facilities related to stormwater management, including, but not limited to, charges for development plan review, inspection of development projects, on-site stormwater control systems and other stormwater management related services provided by the City for which a corresponding fee is collected for the service rendered. 
    Stormwater utility manager means the person appointed by the mayor and city council to administer the provisions of this article. 
    Undeveloped land means land in its unaltered natural condition or which is modified to such a minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural condition shall be deemed undeveloped. For purposes of this article, undeveloped land includes property altered from its natural condition by the creation or installation of five hundred (500) square feet or less of impervious surface. 
    User is defined as any entity that owns and/or uses property, which maintains connection to, discharges to, or otherwise receives services from the city for stormwater management. 
(Ord. of 6-13-11) 
Sec. 15-4. - Stormwater utility and enterprise fund established. 
(a)  There is hereby established a stormwater utility to be known as the City of Duluth Stormwater Utility, which shall be responsible for stormwater management services throughout the incorporated areas of the city, and which shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of the city's stormwater management systems and facilities and stormwater management services. 
(b)  There is hereby established a stormwater utility enterprise fund in the city budgeting and accounting systems for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the city stormwater management program and stormwater utility, including, but not limited to, rates, charges, and fees as may be established by the mayor and city council from time to time, and other funds that may be transferred or allocated to the stormwater utility. 
(c)  All revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be placed in the stormwater utility enterprise fund in trust; to be expended solely for stormwater management related purposes and services. Stormwater utility revenue shall be used only for operating expenses and/or capital investments of the stormwater utility. However, other forms of revenue and/or financial resources, not accounted for in the stormwater utility revenue, may be allocated as deemed appropriate by the mayor and city council to provide supplemental funding to the stormwater management program and for the provision of stormwater management services. 
(d)  The city shall place responsibility with the city manager or his/her designee (hereafter referred to as the stormwater utility manager) for the operation, maintenance and regulation of the stormwater utility and stormwater management program services performed, owned and operated or maintained by the city, and other related assets, including, but not limited to, properties, other than road rights-of-way, upon which such stormwater management systems and facilities are located, easements, rights-of-entry and access and certain equipment used solely for stormwater management. 
(Ord. of 6-13-11) 
Editor's note- City administrator changed to city manager at the direction of the city. 
Sec. 15-5. - Stormwater utility service area. 
(a)  There shall be one (1) stormwater utility service area in the city which shall encompass the municipal boundaries of the City of Duluth. The city has established that all developed parcels within the municipal boundaries receive stormwater management services from the city. Improved/developed properties within the defined service area will receive a stormwater user fee charge bill because they contribute stormwater runoff to the public drainage system; they are directly or indirectly connected to the city's drainage system; and they receive stormwater management services from the city at varying service levels from which they derive some degree of benefit even through the benefit may be indirect and immeasurable. 
(Ord. of 6-13-11) 
Sec. 15-6. - Scope of responsibility for stormwater management systems and facilities. 
(a)  The stormwater utility shall provide stormwater management services for existing and proposed public stormwater management systems and facilities as defined in this article, subject to funding availability and to policy determinations made in the best interest of the public health, welfare and safety and the environment. Additionally, the stormwater utility may accept the responsibility for providing stormwater management services to private stormwater management systems and facilities, acceptance of which conforms to policies established by the mayor and city council or those persons or entities designated by the mayor and city council to set such policies. 
(b)  The city owns or has rights established by written agreements which allow it to operate, maintain, improve and access those stormwater management systems and facilities which are located: 
(1)  Within public road rights-of-way; 
(2)  On private property but within legally dedicated easements granted to, and accepted by, the city; 
(3)  On private property where the city has been granted, by written agreements, for rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other permanent provisions for operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management system facilities located thereon; 
(4)  On land dedicated to, and accepted by, the city solely for the operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management systems and facilities located thereon; or 
(5)  On public land which is owned by the city and/or land of another governmental entity upon which the city has agreements providing for the operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management systems and facilities located thereon. 
(c)  Operation, maintenance and/or improvement of stormwater management systems and facilities which are located on private or public property not owned by the city, and for which there has been no written agreement granting easements, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other form of dedication thereof to the city for operation, maintenance, improvement and access of such stormwater management systems and facilities shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, except as otherwise provided for by the state and federal laws and regulations. 
(d)  The stormwater utility may provide stormwater management services to privately owned stormwater management systems and facilities to ascertain that said facilities are functioning as designed and approved. The stormwater utility may provide for remedial maintenance of said private facilities based upon the severity of stormwater problems and potential hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare and the environment, and in cases where such remedial maintenance is required the city reserves the right to bill the owner or owners of said private facility for the costs of such maintenance. 
(e)  It is the express intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare of people and property in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person, or to any specific property within or outside the municipal boundaries of the city. The city expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages or equitable remedies upon the city, its elected officials, officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship. 
(f)  If any permit, plan approval, inspection or similar act is required by the city as a condition precedent to any activity or change upon property not owned by the city pursuant to this or any other regulatory ordinance, regulation or rule of the city, or under federal or state law, the issuance of such permit, plan approval or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall it afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit, negligent issuance of a permit, negligent plan approval, or negligent maintenance of any permitted stormwater management system or facility not expressly dedicated to and accepted by the city for further maintenance in an action seeking the imposition of money damages or equitable remedies against the city, its city council members, mayor, officers, employees or agents. 
(Ord. of 6-13-11) 
Sec. 15-7. - Stormwater user fee charges. 
(a)  It shall be the policy of the city that user fee charges for stormwater management services to be provided by the stormwater utility in the designated service area shall be equitably derived through methods which have a demonstrable relationship to the varied demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater management services by individual properties and/or the level of service rendered by, or resulting from, the provision of stormwater management services by the city. 
(b)  The basis for calculation of the stormwater user fee charge to all developed property within the city is established in this article. The city shall assign or determine the customer class, amount of impervious area and other pertinent factors as may be needed for the fair, reasonable and equitable allocation of the costs to deliver stormwater management services and to calculate the stormwater user fee charges for all developed properties in the city. 
(c)  Stormwater user fee charge rates shall be structured so as to be uniform within the customer class, and the resultant user fee charges shall bear a reasonable connection, or rational nexus, to the cost of providing stormwater management services. User fee charge rates shall be in addition to other rates, charges, or fees employed for stormwater management within the incorporated areas of the city as defined herein. 
(d)  To the extent practicable, credits against stormwater user fee charges shall be provided for on-site stormwater control systems and activities constructed, operated, maintained and performed to the city's standards by public and private property owners which eliminate, mitigate or compensate for the impact that the property or person may have upon stormwater runoff discharged to public stormwater management systems and facilities, or to private stormwater management systems and facilities which impact the proper function of public stormwater management systems and facilities. 
(e)  The stormwater user fee charges shall accrue beginning July 1, 2011 and shall be billed periodically by the city thereafter via a method established by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 6-13-11) 
Sec. 15-8. - Stormwater utility customer classes. 
(a)  The stormwater utility shall establish specified customer classes within the service area to reflect differences in impervious surface and stormwater runoff characteristics; stormwater management program services provided by the city to the stormwater utility customers; and the respective demand that those customers' properties place on the city stormwater management program and drainage system components. All publically owned, developed properties are subject to the user fee charges on the same basis as private properties, unless otherwise exempted. The stormwater utility classes will encompass all developed and undeveloped properties within the city and are defined as follows: 
(1)  The detached single family residential (DSFR) class shall consist of all developed properties classified as DSFR customers per the applicable definition. 
(2)  The attached single family residential (ASFR) class shall consist of all developed properties classified as ASFR customers per the applicable definition. 
(3)  The non-single family residential (NSFR) class shall consist of all developed properties classified as NSFR customers per the applicable definition. 
(4)  The undeveloped class shall consist of properties classified as undeveloped per the applicable definition. 
(b)  Documentation pertaining to the stormwater utility customer classes shall be kept on file in the office of the stormwater utility manager for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 6-13-11) 
Sec. 15-9. - Stormwater utility user fee charge rates. 
(a)  The stormwater utility shall impose a stormwater user fee on all developed properties within the service area in a fair and equitable manner, including, except as otherwise provided herein. The stormwater utility shall apportion the cost of delivering stormwater services to all developed properties based on the demand the property places on the city's stormwater management program, the stormwater services provided by the city to that property and the benefits derived. 
(b)  The mayor and city council shall establish by ordinance the stormwater user fee charge rates, and the billing rates may be modified by the mayor and city council from time to time to meet the financial and operational needs of the Duluth Stormwater Utility. A schedule of said rates shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection. In setting or modifying such rates, it shall be the goal of the city to establish rates that are fair, equitable and reasonable, and which, together with other funding sources available to the Duluth Stormwater Utility for services, systems, and/or facilities related to stormwater management are sufficient to support the cost of the stormwater management program, including, but not limited to, the payment of principal and interest on debt obligations, lease payments, operating expenses, capital outlays, non-operating expenses, provisions for prudent reserves and other stormwater utility related costs as deemed appropriate by the city. 
(c)  Stormwater user fee charges shall be based upon the total number of equivalent residential units (ERUs) associated with developed properties within the city. Each ERU shall correspond to two thousand six hundred fifty-four (2,654) square feet of impervious surface. 
(d)  Gravel and compacted soil associated with driveways, parking areas, roads and all other areas that consist of these type surface (or near surface) conditions on developed property will be designated as impervious surface and included in the customer's ERU calculation because of the hydrologic response characteristics of these materials. The total surface area associated with these materials will be calculated at eighty-five (85) percent of the total ERUs to reflect the hydrologic response characteristics and infiltration capabilities of these materials. 
(e)  Calculation of user fee charges. The periodic stormwater user fee charges imposed on all developed properties shall be calculated by multiplying the stormwater user fee billing rate (per ERU) times the number of ERUs for each customer account. The number of ERUs that will be utilized to calculate the user fee charge for each customer account shall be in general accordance with the following: 
(1)  DSFR customer class: Each DSFR customer account shall be charged a flat rate of 1.0 ERU except as noted below: 
a.  If a DSFR customer account consists of more than seven thousand nine hundred sixty-two (7,962) square feet of impervious surface (or three 3.0 ERUs), the customer account for that parcel will be charged as per the NSFR calculation described herein. 
(2)  ASFR customer class: Each ASFR customer account shall be charged a flat rate of 0.4 ERU. 
(3)  NSFR customer class: Each NSFR customer shall be charged 1.0 ERU for each 2,654 square feet, or increment thereof, of impervious surface located on the property to establish the total number of ERUs for billing. Fractional ERUs will be rounded to one decimal place to establish the total number of ERUs for billing. 
(4)  Undeveloped land customer class: Undeveloped land shall not be charged a stormwater user fee. 
(Ord. of 6-13-11) 
Sec. 15-10. - Stormwater user fee charge exemptions. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section or otherwise provided by law, no developed public or private property located in the incorporated area of the city shall be exempt from the stormwater user fee charges. The stormwater utility user fee charge is not a tax and no exception, credit, offset, or other reduction in stormwater user fee charges shall be granted based on age, tax status, economic status, race, religion, disability, or other condition unrelated to the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management program services and facilities. 
(b)  Exemptions to the stormwater user fee charges are as follows: 
(1)  Parcels which contain five hundred (500) square feet, or less, of impervious surfaces shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. 
(2)  Linear railroad rights-of-way (i.e. tracks, rails, roadbed) outside of the defined yard limits shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. This exemption is in recognition of routine drainage system maintenance and capital construction activities undertaken by the rail road company associated with rights-of-way and drainage conveyance systems. However, railroad stations, rail yards, maintenance buildings, and/or other improved property used for railroad operations shall not be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. 
(3)  City streets and rights-of-way shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges and the stormwater utility shall not charge the city a user fee charge for the city's impervious surface area resulting from the city's impervious surfaces which are owned and/or maintained by the city within the public rights-of-way. This exemption is in consideration of the city allowing the stormwater utility to utilize the city's existing streets, curbs, gutters, drainage ways and ditches, storm sewers, culverts, inlets, catch basins, pipes, head walls and other structures, natural and man-made within and owned by the city which controls and diverts surface water for the purposes of collecting, diverting, transporting and controlling surface and storm waters. All other developed property owned by the city shall be subject to the imposition of stormwater user fee charges in accordance with this article. 
(4)  Private streets within the city as defined by applicable city ordinances and that are part of platted subdivisions will be exempt from the stormwater user fee charge. 
(5)  Gwinnett County roads and rights-of-way located within the city limits shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges in situations where Gwinnett County has legal responsibility to perform all drainage system maintenance and capital construction activities with respect to such roads and rights-of-way. This exemption is in recognition of the drainage system maintenance and capital construction responsibilities undertaken by Gwinnett County. All other developed property owned by Gwinnett County that is within the service area shall be subject to the imposition of stormwater user fee charges in accordance with this article. 
(6)  Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) roads and rights-of-way shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. This exemption is in recognition of routine drainage system maintenance and capital construction activities undertaken by GDOT in association with GDOT rights-of-way road and drainage conveyance systems. However, maintenance buildings and/or other developed property used for GDOT purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. 
(Ord. of 6-13-11) 
Sec. 15-11. - Stormwater user fee charge credits. 
(a)  The stormwater utility manager shall grant credits or adjustments based on the technical and procedural criteria set forth in the City of Duluth Stormwater Utility Credit Manual (Credit Manual), which is incorporated into this article by reference and made a part hereof. Copies of the credit manual will be maintained by and made available from the stormwater utility manager. 
(1)  Customers may apply for credits and/or adjustments in accordance with the credit manual. 
(2)  A stormwater user fee charge credit shall be determined based on the technical requirements, standards and criteria contained in the credit manual. The amount of credit, or reduction of the stormwater user fee charge, shall be in accordance with the criteria contained in the credit manual. 
(3)  Any credit allowed against the stormwater user fee charge is conditioned on continuing compliance with the city's design and performance standards as stated in the credit manual and upon continuing provision of the controls, systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the customer. The stormwater utility manager may revoke a credit at any time for noncompliance with applicable standards and criteria as established in the credit manual or this article. 
(4)  In order to obtain a credit, the customer must make application to the city on forms provided by the stormwater utility manager for such purpose, and in accordance with the procedures outlined in the credit manual. 
(5)  The application for any credit or adjustment must be in writing and must include the information necessary to establish eligibility for the credit or adjustment, and be in the format described in the credit manual. The customer's stormwater utility account must be paid and current prior to review and approval of a stormwater utility credit application by the city, except during the initial credit application period prior to issuance of the first bill. Incomplete applications will not be accepted for consideration and processing. 
(b)  When an application for a credit is deemed complete by the stormwater utility manager, he shall have thirty (30) days from the date the complete application is received to approve the credit in whole, approve the credit in part, or deny the credit. The stormwater utility manager's decision shall be in writing and will be mailed to the address provided on the adjustment request, and service shall be complete upon mailing. Credits applied for by the customer and approved in whole or in part, shall apply to all stormwater user fee charges in accordance with the terms defined in the credit manual. 
(Ord. of 6-13-11) 
Sec. 15-12. - Stormwater user fee charge adjustments. 
(a)  Adjustments. 
(1)  The stormwater utility manager shall administer the procedures and standards for the adjustment of the stormwater user fee charge. 
a.  If a customer believes his stormwater user fee is incorrect, the customer may seek an adjustment of the stormwater user fee charge allocated to a property at any time by submitting the request in writing to the stormwater utility manager on forms provided by the city and setting forth in detail the grounds upon which relief is sought. The customer's stormwater utility account must be paid and current prior to consideration of an adjustment request by the city, except during the period prior to issuance of the first bill. 
b.  Customers requesting an adjustment shall be required, at their own expense, to provide accurate impervious area and other supplemental information to the stormwater utility manager, including, but not limited to, a survey certified by a registered land surveyor or a professional engineer, unless otherwise allowed by the city. Submittal of this information will be required if the city staff cannot make a determination based on field inspection and/or review of existing city aerial photography. Failure to provide the required information within the time limits established by the stormwater utility manager, as may be reasonably extended, may result in denial of the customer's adjustment request. 
c.  Once a completed adjustment request and all required information are received by the stormwater utility manager, the stormwater utility manager shall within thirty (30) calendar days render a written decision. 
d.  In considering an adjustment request, the stormwater utility manager shall consider whether the calculation of the stormwater user fee charge for the property is correct. 
e.  The stormwater utility manager's decision shall be in writing and will be mailed to the address provided on the adjustment request, and service shall be complete upon mailing. 
f.  If the result of an adjustment is that a refund is due the applicant, the refund will be applied as a credit on the applicant's next stormwater user fee charge bill. 
(Ord. of 6-13-11) 
Sec. 15-13. - Appeals and hearings. 
(a)  Appeals. An appeal to the city manager may be taken by any property owner or customer aggrieved by any decision of the stormwater utility manager. The appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) calendar days of the decision of the stormwater utility manager by filing with the city manager a notice of appeal in writing specifying the grounds thereof. Upon the filing of the notice of appeal, the stormwater utility manager shall forthwith transmit to the city manager all documentation constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was taken. 
(b)  Hearings. The city manager shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal and give written notice to the appellant at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing date. The notice shall indicate the place, date and time of the hearing. The city manager shall affirm, reverse, affirm in part, or reverse in part the decision of the stormwater utility manager after hearing the evidence. If the decision of the stormwater utility manager is reversed in whole or in part, resulting in a refund or credit due to the property owner or customer, then such refund or credit shall be calculated retroactive to the date of the initial appeal. The decision of the city manager shall be final, and there shall be no further administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved or dissatisfied with the decision of the city manager may petition the Superior Court of Gwinnett County for Writ of Certiorari. 
(Ord. of 6-13-11) 
Editor's note- City administrator changed to city manager at the direction of the city. 
Sec. 15-14. - Enforcement methods and inspections. 
(a)  All property owners of improved property within the incorporated areas of the city shall provide, manage, maintain, and operate on-site stormwater management systems sufficient to collect, convey, detain, and discharge stormwater runoff in a safe manner consistent with all applicable City development regulations, ordinances, and state and federal laws. Any failure to meet this obligation shall constitute a violation of this article and be subject to citation and prosecution in the City of Duluth Municipal Court. Each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In the event a public nuisance is deemed to exist by the mayor and city council, the city may elect to sue in municipal court to abate such nuisance. In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the property owner fails to abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the City of Duluth Municipal Court, the city may enter upon the property and cause work as is reasonably necessary to be performed, with the actual cost thereof assessed against the property owner in a similar manner as a tax levied against the property. From date of filing of such abatement action, the city shall have lien rights which may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lien on the general execution docket of the City of Duluth Municipal Court. 
(c)  The city shall have the right for its employees or designated agents to enter upon public and private property during reasonable hours, and after reasonable notice to the owner thereof, in order to assure compliance with the provisions of this article, and state and federal law. Such inspections shall generally be limited to the following purposes: 
(1)  Inspecting or conducting engineering analyses on existing stormwater management systems and facilities located on-site; 
(2)  Verification and review of information contained within a stormwater utility credit manual application; and 
(3)  Determining that stormwater management systems and facilities need to be constructed. 
(Ord. of 6-13-11) 
Sec. 15-15. - Severability. 
    If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-13-11) 
Sec. 15-16. - Repealer. 
    All ordinances or parts thereof which are in conflict with any provision or any section, subsection, paragraph, provision or clause of the ordinance from which this article is derived are hereby repealed to the extent of the conflict. 
(Ord. of 6-13-11) 
Secs. 15-17-15-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STORMWATER FEES 

Section 15-20. - Stormwater user fee billing, delinquencies, collections and rates. 
(a)  Billing. 
(1)  A bill for stormwater user fee charges may be sent through the United States Postal Service or by alternative means, notifying the owner of the property being billed of the amount of the stormwater user fee charge, less credits, the date the payment is due and the date when payment is past due. 
(2)  The city council authorizes the city clerk to bill and collect the Duluth Stormwater User Fee Charge as part of the property/ad valorem tax bill. The city council further authorizes the city clerk to charge and collect penalties and interest as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(3)  If a bill for a stormwater user fee charge for a particular parcel is generated, failure of the customer to receive the bill shall not be justification for nonpayment. 
(4)  Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of the property, as identified from the public land records of Gwinnett County, shall be obligated to pay the appropriate stormwater user fee charge for that property and any interest and/or penalties that have accrued. 
(5)  If a property is unbilled, or if no bill is sent for a particular tract of improved property, the Duluth Stormwater Utility may back bill for a period of up to one (1) year, but shall not be entitled to any interest or any penalty charges during the back billed period. 
(b)  Delinquencies and collection. 
(1)  A penalty or late charge in the amount of ten (10) percent of the base amount due and unpaid ninety (90) days after the due date shall be assessed against the customer. 
(2)  In addition to the penalty stated above, interest in the amount of one (1) percent per month shall accrue on all unpaid amounts beginning December 16 of the year in which the payment is due. 
(3)  The city shall assess all costs of collection, including attorneys' fees and court costs, against the property owner. 
(4)  Unpaid stormwater user fee charges shall be collected in any manner permissible by Georgia law, including but not limited to: utilizing the services of a collection agency, by filing suit to collect on an unpaid account, or by using all methods allowed by Georgia law to collect on any judgment obtained, including enforcement of any lien resulting from any such judgment. Unless reduced to a judgment and a writ of fieri facias (FiFa) issued, the unpaid user fee charge shall not constitute a direct lien against the owner and/or the property. 
(c)  Rates. 
(1)  All parcels in the City of Duluth shall be segregated into one (1) of four (4) customer classes: Detached single-family residential (DSFR), attached single-family residential (ASFR), non-single-family residential (NSFR) and undeveloped. 
(2)  The Stormwater Utility shall establish that one (1.0) equivalent residential unit (ERU) equals two thousand six hundred fifty-four (2,654) square feet of impervious surface area. The ERU of two thousand six hundred fifty-four (2,654) square feet is the mean impervious surface footprint for a typical DSFR parcel within the City of Duluth. The stormwater user fee for one (1.0) ERU shall be thirty-six dollars ($36.00) per year. 
(3)  All developed parcels with at least five hundred (500) square feet of impervious surface area shall be billed for stormwater management program (SWMP) services and undeveloped parcels shall not be billed. 
(4)  DSFR and ASFR parcels shall be billed a flat rate charge for SWMP services. All DSFR parcels will be charged one (1.0) ERU or thirty-six dollars ($36.00) per year and all ASFR parcels will be charged four-tenths (0.4) ERU or fourteen dollars and forty cents ($14.40) per year, per dwelling unit, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(5)  DSFR parcels with seven thousand nine hundred sixty-two (7,962) square feet or more of impervious surface area (or three (3.0) ERUs) shall be charged using the NSFR rate calculation method as outlined herein. 
(6)  NSFR parcels shall be billed on a parcel specific basis based on the actual amount of impervious surface area. NSFR parcels shall be billed thirty-six dollars ($36.00) per year for each increment of two thousand six hundred fifty-four (2,654) square feet impervious surface area, or fraction thereof. 
(Ord. of 6-13-11; Ord. of 7-9-12; Ord. of 5-9-16 ) 
Chapter 18 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
ARTICLE I. - DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND PURPOSE, SCOPE, DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 18-1. - Intent and purpose. 
    The City of Duluth, Georgia (the "city") is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the city and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, including but not limited to Article 9, Section 1, paragraph 1 (City), 2 (County) and/3 (both) of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A.  36-1-20 (36-34-2) and O.C.G.A. 32-4-42(6) (32-4-92), has adopted this chapter for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 2-11-13, art. I,  1) 
Sec. 18-2. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. 
(Ord. of 2-11-13, art. I,  2) 
Sec. 18-3. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
    City means the City of Duluth, Georgia. 
    City council means the legislative governing body of the city. 
    Codified ordinances means the codified ordinances of the City of Duluth, Georgia. 
    Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install wires, install conduit, install pipes, install transmission lines, install poles, install signs, or install facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way. 
    Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing wires, installing conduit, installing pipes, installing transmission lines, installing poles, installing signs, or installing facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way. 
    Director means the Director of the Planning and Development Department of the City of Duluth, Georgia, or his or her designee. 
    Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety, or of a significant loss of real or personal property. 
    Excavation means any work in the surface or subsurface of the public right-of-way, including, but not limited to opening the public right-of-way; installing, servicing, repairing or modifying any facility in or under the surface or subsurface of the public right-of-way, and restoring the surface and subsurface of the public right-of-way. 
    Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including but not limited to a utility's poles, wires, optical fibers, cables, electrical conductors, conduits, ducts, innerducts, pipes, subways, manholes, fixtures, appliances, appurtenances and future technology authorized in a permit or written service agreement. 
    Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one (1) of its facilities representatives is available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto. 
    Registration means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written service agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code of Ordinances. 
    Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities. Rights-of-way shall not include buildings, parks, bridges, river, tunnel, viaduct, conduit or other public property or easements that have not been dedicated to compatible uses, except to the extent the use or occupation of such property is specifically granted in a permit or by law. Rights-of-way shall not include private easements or public property, except to the extent the use or occupation of public property is specifically granted in a written approval of registration. 
    Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city. 
    Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all of the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof. 
    Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than fifty (50) percent at one (1) time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or more than fifty (50) percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests. 
    Underground facilities means all lines, cables, conduits, pipes, posts, tanks, vaults, wires and any other facilities which are located wholly or partially underneath rights-of-way. 
    Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for twelve (12) months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next twelve (12) months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next twelve (12) months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities. 
    Utility or utilities means any privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, servicer, contractor, sub-contractor or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
    Working day means any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday excluding legal holidays observed by the city. 
(Ord. of 2-11-13, art. I,  3) 
Secs. 18-4-18-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RIGHTS-OF-WAY REGISTRATION 

Sec. 18-11. - Administration. 
    The director of the planning and development department or his/her designee shall be the city official responsible for the administration of this chapter except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. of 2-11-13, art. II,  1) 
Sec. 18-12. - Rights-of-way occupancy registration. 
(a)  Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state, federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the department within ninety (90) days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(b)  Following the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, each utility who seeks to have facilities located in any rights-of-way under the control of city, unless specifically exempted by state, federal law or this Code, shall file a notification of construction with the department. 
(Ord. of 2-11-13, art. II,  2) 
Sec. 18-13. - Registration procedure. 
    The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the permit registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility to be installed, maintained or repaired in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner. 
(2)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one (1) or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times. 
(3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements. 
(4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(Ord. of 2-11-13, art. II,  3) 
Sec. 18-14. - Issuance of written acceptance of registration. 
(a)  If a registration is incomplete, the director shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the director shall so notify the utility in writing. 
(b)  Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining the permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
(Ord. of 2-11-13, art. II,  4) 
Sec. 18-15. - Facilities in place without registration. 
    Beginning one year after the effective date of this chapter, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
(Ord. of 2-11-13, art. II,  1) 
Secs. 18-16-18-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOTIFICATION TO CITY OF CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 18-21. - Notification required. 
    Written notification to the director from the utility is required prior to any of the following activities: 
(1)  Before any utility does any work to construct, install, maintain, remove or relocate facilities on, along, over or under the right-of-way in the city; or 
(2)  Construction adjacent to the rights-of-way in the city that require tree trimming within the rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 2-11-13, art. III,  1) 
Sec. 18-22. - Notification procedure. 
    The written notification shall be submitted on a form provided by the director and shall specifically include: 
(1)  The name and address of the utility; 
(2)  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one (1) or more facilities representative(s); 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(6)  The estimated cost of the project; 
(7)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or to any member of the public caused by work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued. 
(Ord. of 2-11-13, art. III,  2) 
Sec. 18-23. - Locate requests required. 
    As provided in O.C.G.A  25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended. No utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given forty-eight (48) hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next business day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than business days. 
(Ord. of 2-11-13, art. III,  3) 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED 

Secs. 18-24-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONDITIONS OF STREET OCCUPANCY 

Sec. 18-31. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
    Failure to comply with the terms and conditions set forth in this article may result in revocation of registration and removal of facilities from the rights-of-way. 
(1)  The 1988 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except Appendix B (Permit Forms and supporting Documents), promulgated by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this chapter. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the director or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this chapter and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the City of Duluth municipal equivalents 
(2)  Protection of traffic and roadway. In conformance with city policy, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way, or the right-of-way itself. 
(3)  Grading. If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon at least ten (10) business days notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(4)  Installation of poles and other wire holding structures and relocation. Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wire holding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
(Ord. of 2-11-13, art. V) 
Secs. 18-32-18-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESTORATION OF PROPERTY 

Sec. 18-41. - Restoration of property. 
    A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder or thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the [event] that caused such disturbance or damage. If utility does not commence such replacement or repair after twenty (20) working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Ord. of 2-11-13, art. VI) 
Secs. 18-42-18-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DISCONTINUANCE OF OPERATIONS, ABANDONED AND UNUSED FACILITIES 

Sec. 18-51. - Discontinuance of operations, abandoned and unused facilities. 
(a)  A utility who has discontinued or is discontinuing operation of any facilities in the city shall: 
(1)  Provide information satisfactory to the city that the utility's obligations for its facilities in the rights-of-way under this chapter and any other provision in the codified ordinances or other laws have been lawfully assumed by another utility; 
(2)  Submit a written proposal to re-use its facilities; 
(3)  Submit a written proposal for abandonment of facilities. Said proposal must be approved by the director; 
(4)  Remove its entire facilities within a reasonable amount of time and in a manner acceptable to the city; or 
(5)  Submit to the city, in good faith and within a reasonable amount of time, a proposal for transferring ownership of its facilities to the city. If a utility proceeds under this clause, the city may, at its option do one (1) or more of the following: 
a.  Purchase the facilities; 
b.  Accept donation of some or all facilities; or 
c.  Require the utility to post a bond in an amount sufficient to reimburse the city for its reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the facilities. 
(b)  Facilities of a utility who fails to comply with the above provision shall be deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned facilities are deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise at law or in equity. 
(Ord. of 2-11-13, art. VII) 
Secs. 18-52-18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TERMINATION OF REGISTRATION 

Sec. 18-61. - Termination of registration. 
(a)  The registration statement shall remain in place for one (1) year and renew each subsequent year automatically unless the utility is in default. The director shall give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
(1)  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a registration application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; 
(2)  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this chapter; 
(3)  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon city; or 
(4)  Made a material misrepresentation of fact in its application for registration. 
(b)  If a utility fails to cure a default within twenty (20) working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the approval of registration. If the director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  City shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of fifteen (15) calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)  If the utility fails to cure within fifteen (15) calendar days, the city may declare the registration terminated. 
(Ord. of 2-11-13, art. VIII,  1, 2) 
Secs. 18-62-18-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 18-71. - Unauthorized use of public rights-of-way. 
(a)  No utility shall use the rights-of-way to operate any facilities that have not been authorized by the city in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  No utility shall place or have placed any facilities in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through the rights-of-way, unless allowed under this chapter. 
(c)  Each and every unauthorized use shall be deemed to be a violation and a distinct and separate offense. Each and every day any violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(d)  No utility shall fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Each and every failure to comply shall be deemed a distinct and separate offense. Each and every day any violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(Ord. of 2-11-13, art. IX,  1-4) 
Secs. 18-72-18-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - OTHER PROVISIONS 

Sec. 18-81. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(Ord. of 2-11-13, art. X,  1) 
Sec. 18-82. - Reservation of regulatory and police powers. 
    The city by issuing a written approval of registration under this chapter, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or which may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and Laws of the United States, State of Georgia, and under the provisions of the city's codified ordinances to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility by applying for and being issued a written approval of registration, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(Ord. of 2-11-13, art. X,  2) 
Sec. 18-83. - Compliance. 
    No utility shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of city to enforce prompt compliance. 
(Ord. of 2-11-13, art. X,  3) 
Sec. 18-84. - Appeals. 
    All appeals provided for by this chapter and any notification to the city required by this chapter shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the director of planning and development as specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-11-13, art. X,  4) 
PART III - UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE 

Duluth, Georgia
Unified Development Code
Adopted June 8, 2015
Amended September 14, 2015
Amended December 14, 2015
Amended April 11, 2016
Amended August 8, 2016
Amended September 12, 2016
Amended March 13, 2017
Amended May 8, 2017
Amended July 10, 2017
Amended June 11, 2018
Amended January 7, 2019
Amended September 9, 2019
BLANK PAGE
City of Duluth UDC TOC-i
CITY OF DULUTH
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE
Organization of the Code
Article 1. Adoption, Purpose and Applicability
Article 1 provides for the adoption of the Unified Development Code, sets out its purpose and intent, describes the lands and development to which the Code applies, shelters approved per-mits from changes in the regulations, and provides for the continuation of preexisting uses, structures, lots and signs that are not in conformity with the provisions of this Code.
Article 2. Use of Land and Structures
Article 2 defines the zoning districts in the City and identifies the specific uses to which land and structures may be put in the various zoning districts, including certain uses or structures for which special approval is required in order to be allowed. This Article also sets out the standards that control the size of lots, the placement and size of buildings and structures on a lot, and the intensity of development on a lot. In addition, this Article identifies specific uses within each zoning district to which restrictions may apply, which are presented in Article 3 of this Code.
Article 3. Restrictions on Particular Uses
Article 3 provides land use and development regulations for specific uses that are applicable to sites throughout the City of Duluth. Unless otherwise noted, these standards are intended to be applied within all zoning districts where the particular uses are allowed, whether by right or through special use approval.
Article 4. Parking and Loading Requirements
Article 4 sets out the requirements and restrictions on the provision of automobile parking spaces for each development to accommodate its residents, employees, customers and visitors. The provisions of this Article apply equally to each designated use without regard to the zoning district in which it is located.
Article 5. Subdivisions and Planned Developments
Article 5 presents the different ways that land can be subdivided and developed, ranging from conventional subdivisions, to Conservation Subdivisions where green space and natural features are preserved by reducing lot sizes, and Planned Unit Developments which allow a wider variety of housing types in a well-planned mixed-use environment while also preserving green space and natural features.
Organization of Code
TOC-ii City of Duluth UDC
Article 6. Sign Regulations
Article 6 provides for the types of signs that may be placed on a property, and regulates such characteristics as their size, number, placement, and timing (for temporary events).
Article 7. Landscaping, Buffers and Tree Protection
Article 7 sets out the minimum requirements and standards for the protection of the natural environment through tree protection and preservation, the planting of trees and other land-scape material, the provision of natural and/or planted buffers between dissimilar uses, and the promotion of water-efficient landscaping principles and techniques.
Article 8. Environmental Protection
Article 8 sets out the minimum requirements and standards for the protection of the natural environment within the City, including restrictions on the use of land near certain rivers and streams, within water supply watersheds, within groundwater recharge areas susceptible to pol-lution, and in wetlands in order to:
a. Protect the drinking water quality of the rivers, streams, reservoirs and aquifers that supply water to the residents of the jurisdiction and the State;
b. Protect the natural habitat of animal and plant life relative to water resources; and
c. Limit the potentially damaging effects of flooding.
Article 9. Project Design and Construction Standards
Article 9 sets out the minimum requirements and standards for construction of subdivisions and other land development projects, including general principals of design and layout and require-ments for such public facilities as streets and utilities.
Article 10. Erosion Control and Stormwater Management
Article 10 contains the requirements that relate to the impact of rainfall events on the natural and manmade environment, including the erosion and siltation effects of site grading and land disturbance activities and the control of stormwater flows.
Article 11. Procedures and Permits
Article 11 describes the process through which a rezoning or special use may be approved on a property, the approval process for construction of subdivisions and other land development projects, and the approval process for other permits required by this Development Code.
Article 12. Appeals
Article 12 describes the process for addressing unusual situations or unique problems that may arise from the strict interpretation or enforcement of this Development Code, including appeals from an administrative decision, for a special exception, and for unique hardships restricting reasonable use of a property.
Organization of Code
City of Duluth UDC TOC-iii
Article 13. Administration and Enforcement
Article 13 sets out the structure, procedures and responsibilities of the various administrative officers for administering, amending and enforcing this Development Code, and set out penal-ties for violations.
Article 14. Interpretation and Definitions
Article 14 describes how figures, words and phrases used in this Development Code are to be interpreted, and provides a glossary of all definitions specifically used in the text of this Devel-opment Code.
Organization of Code
TOC-iv City of Duluth UDC
BLANK PAGE
TOC-v City of Duluth UDC
Table of Contents
Article 1. Adoption, Purpose and Applicability
Section 101. Title and Authority. .................................................................................................. 1-1
Section 102. Adoption .................................................................................................................. 1-1
Section 103. Purpose and Intent. ................................................................................................. 1-2
Section 104. General Applicability. ............................................................................................... 1-3
Section 105. Application of the Regulations. ................................................................................ 1-5
Section 106. Nonconformities. ..................................................................................................... 1-7
Article 2. Use of Land and Structures
Section 201. Zoning Districts; Established. ................................................................................... 2-1
Section 202. Official Zoning Map. ................................................................................................. 2-2
Section 203. Definitions. ............................................................................................................... 2-4
Section 204. Development Standards. ....................................................................................... 2-10
Section 205. Zoning and Overlay Districts. ................................................................................. 2-12
Section 206. Area Regulations in Each Zoning District. .............................................................. 2-22
Section 207. Uses Allowed in Each Zoning District. .................................................................... 2-25
Article 3. Restrictions on Particular Uses
DIVISION I. RESTRICTIONS THAT APPLY GENERALLY. ................................................................. 3-1
Section 301. City and County Approvals That Are Required. ....................................................... 3-1
Section 302. Additional Code and Licensing Requirements. ........................................................ 3-1
Section 303. Outdoor Lighting Standards. .................................................................................... 3-1
Section 304. Standards for Single-Family Dwellings. .................................................................... 3-6
Section 305. Standards for Multi-Family Dwellings. ..................................................................... 3-8
Section 306. Standards for Nonresidential Uses. ......................................................................... 3-8
DIVISION II. RESTRICTIONS THAT APPLY TO SPECIFIC USES. ..................................................... 3-14
Section 307. Administrative and Professional Offices. ............................................................... 3-14
Section 308. Adult Entertainment. ............................................................................................. 3-14
Section 309. Alcoholic Beverage Sales. ....................................................................................... 3-14
Section 310. Animal Production. ................................................................................................ 3-14
Section 311. Arts, Entertainment and Recreation. ..................................................................... 3-15
Section 312. Automotive Car Washes. ....................................................................................... 3-15
Section 313. Automotive Repair and Maintenance. ................................................................... 3-15
Section 314. Barber Shops and Beauty Salons. .......................................................................... 3-15
Section 315. Bulk Storage Tanks. ................................................................................................ 3-15
Section 316. Cemeteries. ............................................................................................................ 3-15
Section 317. Commercial Services. ............................................................................................. 3-15
Section 318. Continuing Care Retirement Community............................................................... 3-15
Table of Contents
TOC-vi City of Duluth UDC
Section 319. Day Care Facility. .................................................................................................... 3-16
Section 320. Dry Cleaning Services. ............................................................................................ 3-16
Section 321. Electric Power Transmission Substations (Transformer Stations). ........................ 3-16
Section 322. Florist. .................................................................................................................... 3-16
Section 323. Forestry and Logging. ............................................................................................. 3-16
Section 324. Gasoline Stations, Full Service. .............................................................................. 3-18
Section 325. Gasoline Stations, No Repairs. ............................................................................... 3-18
Section 326. Horse Riding Stables............................................................................................... 3-18
Section 327. Hotels. .................................................................................................................... 3-18
Section 328. Junk Yards. ............................................................................................................. 3-19
Section 329. Kennel. ................................................................................................................... 3-19
Section 330. Manufactured Homes. ........................................................................................... 3-20
Section 331. Manufacturing, Wholesaling and Warehousing. ................................................... 3-21
Section 332. Massage Therapy Establishments. ......................................................................... 3-21
Section 333. Mini-Warehouses and Self-Storage Units. ............................................................. 3-21
Section 334. Motor Vehicle and Parts Dealers. .......................................................................... 3-21
Section 335. Pawnshop. .............................................................................................................. 3-22
Section 336. Personal Care Home............................................................................................... 3-22
Section 337. Radio and Television Broadcasting Stations. ......................................................... 3-22
Section 338. Retail Trade. ........................................................................................................... 3-22
Section 339. Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishments.............................................................. 3-22
Section 340. Temporary Buildings. ............................................................................................. 3-23
Section 341. Temporary Events. ................................................................................................. 3-23
Section 342. Veterinary Clinics, including Animal Hospitals. ...................................................... 3-25
Section 343. Wireless Telecommunications. .............................................................................. 3-25
DIVISION III. ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. .................................................................... 3-41
Section 344. Detached Structures. ............................................................................................. 3-41
Section 345. Home Occupations. ................................................................................................ 3-41
Section 346. Farm Tenant Dwellings. ......................................................................................... 3-42
Section 347. Outdoor Display Areas. .......................................................................................... 3-43
Section 348. Outdoor Storage. ................................................................................................... 3-43
Section 349. Unattended Donation Boxes. ................................................................................. 3-44
Section 350. Mobile Kitchens.. 3-46
Article 4. Parking and Loading Requirements
Section 401. Definitions. ............................................................................................................... 4-1
Section 402. Off-Street Automobile Parking and Loading and Unloading Spaces Required. ....... 4-1
Section 403. Plan and Design Standards for Off-Street Parking. .................................................. 4-1
Section 404. Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required. ..................................................... 4-7
Section 405. Prohibited Off-Street Parking. ................................................................................ 4-11
Section 406. Off-Street Truck Loading. ....................................................................................... 4-12
Table of Contents
City of Duluth UDC TOC-vii
Article 5. Subdivisions and Planned Developments
Section 501. Minor and Major Subdivisions, Defined .................................................................. 5-1
Section 502. Conventional Subdivisions. ...................................................................................... 5-5
Section 503. Conservation Subdivisions. ...................................................................................... 5-6
Section 504. Planned Unit Development (PUD). .......................................................................... 5-9
Section 505. Conservation Areas ................................................................................................ 5-13
Section 506. Natural Resource Easements. ................................................................................ 5-15
Section 507. Conservation Easements. ....................................................................................... 5-16
Section 508. Owners Association. .............................................................................................. 5-17
Article 6. Sign Regulations
Section 601. Findings, Purpose and Intent. .................................................................................. 6-1
Section 602. Definitions. ............................................................................................................... 6-2
Section 603. Applicability. ........................................................................................................... 6-15
Section 604. Requirements that Apply to Signs in General. ....................................................... 6-18
Section 605. Regulation of Principal Freestanding and Principal Building Signs. ....................... 6-24
Section 606. Regulation of Project Entrance Signs. .................................................................... 6-32
Section 607. Landscaping Requirements for Signs. .................................................................... 6-34
Section 608. Additional Regulations for Specific Types of Signs. ............................................... 6-35
Section 609. Temporary Event Signs. ......................................................................................... 6-39
Section 610. Sign Permits; Requirements and Procedures. ....................................................... 6-41
Section 611. Nonconforming Signs. ............................................................................................ 6-45
Section 612. Special Exceptions for Signs. .................................................................................. 6-46
Section 613. Intent, Interpretation and Severability. ................................................................. 6-46
Section 614. Administration, Enforcement, and Penalties. ........................................................ 6-47
Article 7. Landscaping, Buffers and Tree Protection
Section 701. Definitions. ............................................................................................................... 7-1
DIVISION I. BUFFER REGULATIONS. ............................................................................................ 7-5
Section 702. Minimum Buffer Regulations ................................................................................... 7-5
DIVISION II. LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS. ................................................................................... 7-10
Section 703. Applicability. ........................................................................................................... 7-10
Section 704. Native Vegetation Required ................................................................................... 7-11
Section 705. Landscape Strip Planting Requirements. ............................................................... 7-11
Section 706. Parking Lot Landscape Requirements .................................................................... 7-12
Section 707. No-Access Easement Screening Requirements. .................................................... 7-12
Section 708. Buffer and Landscape Plan Specifications. ............................................................ 7-12
Section 709. Water-Efficient Design Consideration. .................................................................. 7-13
DIVISION III. TREE PRESERVATION AND TREE REPLACEMENT REGULATIONS. ........................... 7-14
Section 710. Purpose and Intent. ............................................................................................... 7-14
Section 711. Exemptions............................................................................................................. 7-14
Table of Contents
TOC-viii City of Duluth UDC
Section 712. Approval to Remove Trees. .................................................................................... 7-15
Section 713. Minimum Tree Density Requirements. .................................................................. 7-17
Section 714. Tree Survey Plan and Inventory. ............................................................................ 7-17
Section 715. Tree Protection. ..................................................................................................... 7-18
Section 716. Tree Preservation Standards. ................................................................................. 7-18
Section 717. Tree Damage. ......................................................................................................... 7-19
Section 718. Tree Planting Standards. ........................................................................................ 7-19
Section 719. Plan and Plat Specification. .................................................................................... 7-19
Section 720. Compliance............................................................................................................. 7-21
Section 721. Enforcement, Violation and Penalties. .................................................................. 7-22
Section 722. Calculating Tree Density......................................................................................... 7-23
Section 724. Specimen Trees. ..................................................................................................... 7-25
Section 725. Examples of Single Family Lot Tree Planting Requirements. ................................. 7-26
DIVISION IV. INSTALLATION AND OPERATION OF IRRIGATION SYSTEMS OR DEVICES. ............. 7-27
DIVISION V. OUTDOOR WATERING RESTRICTIONS.................................................................... 7-27
Section 726. Restriction on Outdoor Watering of Landscape. ................................................... 7-27
Article 8. Environmental Protection
DIVISION I. STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION. ................................................................................ 8-1
Section 801. Definitions Related to Stream Buffer Protection. .................................................... 8-1
Section 802. Applicability. ............................................................................................................. 8-3
Section 803. Land Development Requirements. .......................................................................... 8-4
Section 804. Special Buffer Regulations and Requirements. ........................................................ 8-7
Section 805. Responsibility. .......................................................................................................... 8-9
Section 806. Inspection. ................................................................................................................ 8-9
Section 807. Violations, Enforcement and Penalties. ................................................................... 8-9
Section 808. Administrative Appeal and Judicial Review. .......................................................... 8-11
DIVISION II. CHATTAHOOCHEE RIVER TRIBUTARY PROTECTION. .............................................. 8-12
Section 809. Regulations Adopted by Reference. ...................................................................... 8-12
DIVISION III. WETLANDS PROTECTION. ...................................................................................... 8-12
Section 810. Purpose. ................................................................................................................. 8-12
Section 811. Definitions Relating to Wetlands Protection. ........................................................ 8-12
Section 812. Establishment of the Wetlands Protection District. .............................................. 8-13
Section 813. Protection Criteria. ................................................................................................. 8-13
Section 814. Allowed Uses. ......................................................................................................... 8-13
Section 815. Prohibited Uses. ..................................................................................................... 8-13
Section 816. Administration and Enforcement Procedures. ...................................................... 8-14
DIVISION IV. WATER SUPPLY WATERSHEDS. .............................................................................. 8-16
Section 817. Purpose. ................................................................................................................. 8-16
Section 818. Definitions Related to Water Supply Watersheds. ................................................ 8-16
Section 819. Establishment of a Water Supply Watershed District. .......................................... 8-17
Section 820. Protection Criteria. ................................................................................................. 8-17
Table of Contents
City of Duluth UDC TOC-ix
Section 821. Administration and Enforcement. ......................................................................... 8-18
DIVISION V. GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREAS. ...................................................................... 8-20
Section 822. Purpose. ................................................................................................................. 8-20
Section 823. Definitions Related to Groundwater Recharge Areas. ........................................... 8-21
Section 824. Establishment of the Groundwater Recharge Area Protection District................. 8-21
Section 825. Protection Criteria. ................................................................................................. 8-21
Section 826. Exemptions............................................................................................................. 8-22
Section 827. Administration and Enforcement Procedures. ...................................................... 8-22
DIVISION VI. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ................................................................................. 8-25
Section 828. Findings. ................................................................................................................. 8-25
Section 829. Purpose and Intent. ............................................................................................... 8-25
Section 830. Definitions Related to Floodplain Management. ................................................... 8-26
Section 831. Applicability. ........................................................................................................... 8-30
Section 832. Designation and Duties of Division Administrator. ................................................ 8-30
Section 833. Basis for Area of Special Flood Hazard-Flood Area Maps and Studies. ................. 8-31
Section 834. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. ...................................................................... 8-32
Section 835. Permit Procedures and Requirements ................................................................... 8-32
Section 836. Standards for Development. .................................................................................. 8-34
Section 837. Provisions for Flood Damage Reduction ................................................................ 8-36
Article 9. Project Design and Construction Standards
DIVISION I. PROJECT DESIGN. ..................................................................................................... 9-1
Section 901. General Design Standards. ....................................................................................... 9-1
Section 902. Unsuitable Land Must Be Included in Buildable Lots. .............................................. 9-1
Section 903. Zoning and Other Regulations. ................................................................................ 9-1
Section 904. Access Requirements. .............................................................................................. 9-3
Section 905. Streets. ..................................................................................................................... 9-4
Section 906. General Layout Requirements. .............................................................................. 9-10
Section 907. Traffic Control Devices. .......................................................................................... 9-12
Section 908. Sidewalks. ............................................................................................................... 9-14
Section 909. Performance Guidelines......................................................................................... 9-15
DIVISION II. PROJECT DESIGN. ................................................................................................... 9-25
Section 910. Specifications. ........................................................................................................ 9-25
Section 911. Project Access Improvement Standards. ............................................................... 9-25
Section 912. New Local and Minor Collector Streets. ................................................................ 9-26
Section 913. New Major Thoroughfares. .................................................................................... 9-28
Section 914. Sidewalks. ............................................................................................................... 9-29
Section 915. Utilities and Easements. ......................................................................................... 9-31
Section 916. Street Cuts. ............................................................................................................. 9-38
Article 10. Erosion Control and Stormwater Management
DIVISION I. SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL. .............................. 10-1
Table of Contents
TOC-x City of Duluth UDC
Section 1001. Standards Incorporated by Reference. ................................................................ 10-1
Section 1002. Definitions Related to Soil Erosion, Sedimentation Pollution Control. ................ 10-1
Section 1003. Exemptions. .......................................................................................................... 10-4
Section 1004. Minimum Requirements Using BMPs .................................................................. 10-6
Section 1005. Application/Permit Process ................................................................................ 10-11
Section 1006. Inspection and Enforcement .............................................................................. 10-14
Section 1007. Penalties and Incentives .................................................................................... 10-15
Section 1008. Education and Certification ................................................................................ 10-17
Section 1009. Administrative Appeal and Judicial Review ....................................................... 10-17
Section 1010. Liability ............................................................................................................... 10-17
DIVISION II. SITE GRADING ...................................................................................................... 10-18
Section 1011. Requirements ..................................................................................................... 10-18
DIVISION III. STORMWATER CULVERT AND PIPE DRAINAGE SYSTEMS .................................... 10-19
Section 1012. Purpose .............................................................................................................. 10-19
Section 1013. Standards Incorporated by Reference. .............................................................. 10-19
Section 1014. Standard Specifications ...................................................................................... 10-19
Section 1015. Pipe Installation. ................................................................................................ 10-20
Section 1016. Stormwater System Design Criteria ................................................................... 10-21
DIVISION IV. POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT. ....................................... 10-24
Section 1017. Purpose and Intent............................................................................................. 10-24
Section 1018. Standards Incorporated by Reference. .............................................................. 10-25
Section 1019. Definitions Related to Post-Development Stormwater Management. ............. 10-25
Section 1020. Applicability. ....................................................................................................... 10-28
Section 1021. Post-Development Stormwater Permit Procedures and Requirements ........... 10-29
Section 1022. Post-Development Stormwater Management Performance Criteria ................ 10-36
Section 1023. Construction Inspections ..................................................................................... 10-42
Section 1028. Ongoing Inspection and Maintenance of Stormwater Facilities and Practices . 10-42
DIVISION VI. ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION. ................................................. 10-44
Section 1029. Purpose and Intent ............................................................................................. 10-44
Section 1030. Definitions Related to Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection .......................... 10-44
Section 1031. Applicability ........................................................................................................ 10-47
Section 1032. Illicit Non-Stormwater Discharge and Illicit Connection .................................... 10-47
Article 11. Procedures and Permits
Section 1101. OverviewZoning and Land Development. ........................................................ 11-1
DIVISION I. ZONING AND SPECIAL USES. .................................................................................. 11-3
Section 1102. Zoning and Special Uses, in General. ................................................................... 11-3
Section 1103. Zoning or Special Use Approval Process. ............................................................. 11-4
Section 1104. Public Hearing Procedures and Standards for Approval. ..................................... 11-6
Section 1105. Special Use Considerations. ................................................................................. 11-8
Section 1106. Withdrawal. .......................................................................................................... 11-9
Table of Contents
City of Duluth UDC TOC-xi
Section 1107. Applications for a Map Amendment or Special Use Approval. .......................... 11-10
Section 1108. Refiling Restrictions after Denial of an Application. .......................................... 11-12
Section 1109. Timely Implementation Required. ..................................................................... 11-13
DIVISION II. PERMITS REQUIRED FOR DEVELOPMENT OR CONSTRUCTION. .......................... 11-13
Section 1110. Authorization Required for Land Disturbance or Development Activities. ....... 11-13
Section 1111. Land Disturbance Permits. ................................................................................. 11-14
Section 1112. Approval to Remove Trees. ................................................................................ 11-16
Section 1113. Building Permits. ................................................................................................ 11-20
DIVISION III. PLAN AND PLAT SPECIFICATIONS. ........................................................................ 11-23
Section 1114. Concept Plan Specifications. .............................................................................. 11-23
Section 1115. Subdivision Development Plans. ........................................................................ 11-24
Section 1116. Site Development Plans. .................................................................................... 11-36
Section 1117. Tree Protection Plan Specifications. .................................................................. 11-41
Section 1118. Buffer and Landscape Plan Specifications.......................................................... 11-41
Section 1119. Digital Submission Requirements: As-Built Data and Final Plats. ............................ 11-41
DIVISION IV. PROCEDURES. ....................................................................................................... 11-41
Section 1120. Subdivision Review Procedures. ........................................................................ 11-41
Section 1121. Non-Subdivision Review Procedures. ................................................................ 11-45
Section 1122. Assignment of Names and Address. .................................................................. 11-47
Section 1123. Developments of Regional Impact. .................................................................... 11-49
Section 1124. Payment of Fees. ................................................................................................ 11-50
DIVISION V. DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES AND COMPLETION. .................................................. 11-50
Section 1125. Initiation of Development Activities. ................................................................. 11-50
Section 1126. Field Changes. .................................................................................................... 11-52
Section 1127. Approval of Development Conformance. .......................................................... 11-54
Section 1128. Project Closeout and Continuing Maintenance. ................................................ 11-55
Section 1129. Maintenance Warranty. ..................................................................................... 11-55
Section 1130. Performance Guarantee. ................................................................................... 11-58
Section 1131. Example Instruments Relating to Improvement Guarantees. ........................... 11-61
Article 12. Appeals
Section 1201. Appeals; in General. ............................................................................................. 12-1
Section 1202. Intent of this Article. ............................................................................................ 12-2
Section 1203. Special Exceptions. ............................................................................................... 12-3
Section 1204. Hardship Variances. ............................................................................................. 12-6
Section 1205. Floodplain Management Variances. .................................................................... 12-7
Section 1206. Process for Granting a Special Exception or Variance. ........................................ 12-9
Section 1207. Appeals of an Administrative Decision. ............................................................. 12-14
Table of Contents
TOC-xii City of Duluth UDC
Article 13. Administration and Enforcement
Section 1301. Director of Planning and Development. .............................................................. 13-1
Section 1302. Duluth Planning Commission. .............................................................................. 13-2
Section 1303. Zoning Board of Appeals. ..................................................................................... 13-3
Section 1304. Schedules and Fees. ............................................................................................. 13-4
Section 1305. Development Code Amendments. ....................................................................... 13-4
Section 1306. Annexations. ........................................................................................................ 13-6
Section 1307. Violation and Penalties. ....................................................................................... 13-6
Section 1308. Liability. .............................................................................................................. 13-10
Article 14. Interpretation and Definitions
Section 1401. Purpose ................................................................................................................ 14-1
Section 1402. Interpretation. ...................................................................................................... 14-1
Section 1403. Definitions ............................................................................................................ 14-4
1-i
Article 1. Adoption, Purpose and Applicability
Article 1 provides for the adoption of the Unified Development Code, sets out its purpose and intent, describes the lands and de-velopment to which the Code applies, shelters approved permits from changes in the regulations, and provides for the continua-tion of pre-existing uses, structures, lots and signs that are not in conformity with the provisions of this Code.
Table of Contents Page
Section 101. Title and Authority. .............................................................................................................1-1
101.01 Short Title. .................................................................................................................................................... 1-1
101.02 Authority. ..................................................................................................................................................... 1-1
Section 102. Adoption. ...........................................................................................................................1-1
102.01 Components of the Development Code. ..................................................................................................... 1-1
102.02 Conflict with Other Regulations. .................................................................................................................. 1-1
102.03 Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances. ................................................................................................................ 1-1
102.04 Severability. .................................................................................................................................................. 1-1
102.05 Effective Date. .............................................................................................................................................. 1-2
Section 103. Purpose and Intent. ............................................................................................................1-2
103.01 Purposes of the Development Code. ........................................................................................................... 1-2
103.02 Purposes of Comprehensive Plan. ............................................................................................................... 1-2
103.03 Intent in Interpretation. ............................................................................................................................... 1-3
103.04 Intent Relative to Private Property Agreements. ......................................................................................... 1-3
Section 104. General Applicability. ..........................................................................................................1-3
104.01 Land to Which this Development Code Applies. .......................................................................................... 1-3
104.02 Exemptions................................................................................................................................................... 1-3
Section 105. Application of the Regulations.............................................................................................1-5
105.01 Use, Occupancy, and Construction. ............................................................................................................. 1-5
105.02 Height and Density. ...................................................................................................................................... 1-5
105.03 Reduction in Lot Size. ................................................................................................................................... 1-6
105.04 Yards and Other Spaces. .............................................................................................................................. 1-6
105.05 Only One Principal Building or Use on a Residential Lot. ............................................................................. 1-6
105.06 Classification of Streets. ............................................................................................................................... 1-6
105.07 Dedication of Public Lands and Facilities. .................................................................................................... 1-6
105.08 Transfer of Land Ownership. ........................................................................................................................ 1-6
Section 106. Nonconformities. ................................................................................................................1-7
106.01 Intent of Nonconformities Section............................................................................................................... 1-7
106.02 Nonconforming Development; In General. .................................................................................................. 1-7
106.03 Continuation of Illegal Nonconformity Prohibited. ...................................................................................... 1-7
Table of Contents Continued City of Duluth UDC
1-ii
106.04 Nonconforming Uses. .................................................................................................................................. 1-7
106.05 Nonconforming Structures. ......................................................................................................................... 1-8
106.06 Nonconforming Lots. ................................................................................................................................... 1-8
106.07 Nonconforming Signs. ................................................................................................................................. 1-9
1-1
Article 1. Adoption, Purpose and Applicability
Section 101. Title and Authority.
101.01 Short Title.
This code shall be known as and may be cited as The Unified Development Code of the City of Duluth, Georgia, and may be referred to generally as The Development Code or The UDC.
101.02 Authority.
Pursuant to authority conferred by the Constitution of Georgia, and for the purposes of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and the general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the City of Duluth, Georgia, this Development Code is adopted as contained and detailed herein.
Section 102. Adoption.
Under the authority and for the purposes stated herein, the Council of the City of Duluth, Georgia, hereby ordains and enacts into law the Articles and Sections contained in this Unified Development Code of the City of Duluth, Georgia.
102.01 Components of the Development Code.
This Development Code and the official zoning map of the city on file and maintained in the Planning and Development Department shall together constitute the Unified Development Code of the City of Duluth, Georgia.
102.02 Conflict with Other Regulations.
(a) Whenever the provisions of this Development Code impose greater restrictions upon the use of land or buildings or upon the height of buildings or require a greater lot width or depth or size of yard or a larger percentage of lot to be left unoccupied or impose other more restrictive stand-ards than are required in or under other ordinances, rules, regulations, statutes, permits of any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, the provisions of this Development Code shall govern, unless otherwise stated herein.
(b) Whenever the provisions of any other statute or covenants require more restrictive standards than those of this Development Code, the provision of such statutes or covenants shall govern.
102.03 Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances.
All resolutions, regulations or ordinances and parts of resolutions, regulations or ordinances in conflict with this Development Code are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
102.04 Severability.
If any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Development Code is for any rea-son declared invalid or unconstitutional by any Court of Competent Jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of this Development Code as a whole nor of any part thereof that is not specifi-cally declared to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the intent of the Mayor and City Council of the City of Duluth in adopting this Development Code that no portion thereof or provision contained herein shall become inoperative or fail by reason of the unconstitutionality or invalidity of any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or provisions of this Development Code.
Section 103 Purpose and Intent. City of Duluth UDC
1-2
102.05 Effective Date.
This Development Code shall take effect and shall be in force from and after the date of its adoption by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Duluth, the public welfare demanding it.
Section 103. Purpose and Intent.
103.01 Purposes of the Development Code.
The purpose of this Development Code is to promote the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and the general welfare of the community, and is intended:
(a) To lessen congestion in the streets;
(b) To secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers;
(c) To provide adequate light and air;
(d) To prevent the overcrowding of land and avoid both undue concentration of population and ur-ban sprawl;
(e) To facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements;
(f) To protect property against blight and depreciation;
(g) To encourage the most appropriate use of land, buildings, and other structures throughout the City of Duluth;
(h) To provide a system for the subdividing of lands and the accurate recording of land titles;
(i) To provide assurance that lots shown on recorded subdivision plats are usable by the purchasers for their intended and permitted functions;
(j) To encourage economically sound and orderly land development in accordance with the policies and objectives of the City of Duluth Comprehensive Plan;
(k) To assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to new land developments in conformance with the public improvement policies of the City;
(l) To assure adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments;
(m) To assure the provision of needed open spaces and public facility sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservation for purchase of land for public purposes;
(n) To assure equitable review and approval of all subdivisions and site plans by providing uniform procedures and standards for the developer.
103.02 Purposes of Comprehensive Plan.
The City of Duluth, Georgia Comprehensive Plan is intended for the following purposes, among others:
(a) To guide and direct growth and development in the City of Duluth;
(b) To protect, preserve, and enhance the Citys cultural, environmental, economic and social re-sources;
(c) To identify current land uses in order to assist the City in making budgetary, utility and other resource allocations;
City of Duluth UDC Section 104 General Applicability.
1-3
(d) To enable the City of Duluth to predict future land uses for planning purposes;
(e) To assist the City in fulfilling its statutory and other legal obligations; and
(f) To provide a public document that will serve as a means of general information on land use and development for the citizens of Duluth and other interested parties.
103.03 Intent in Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying this Development Code, the requirements contained herein are declared to be minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purposes of this Development Code.
103.04 Intent Relative to Private Property Agreements.
Except as herein provided, this Development Code shall not be deemed to interface with, abrogate, annul or otherwise affect in any manner whatsoever easements, covenants, or other agree-ments between parties; provided that, when the regulations of this Development Code are more re-strictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such private easements, covenants, or other legal relationships, the regulations of this Development Code shall govern. In no case, however, shall the City of Duluth be required to enforce such private easements, covenants, or other private agree-ments or legal relationships, whether they are more restrictive or less restrictive than the standards or requirements of this Development Code.
Section 104. General Applicability.
104.01 Land to Which this Development Code Applies.
This Development Code applies to all lands and the buildings, structures, and uses thereon within the incorporated limits of the City of Duluth, Georgia.
104.02 Exemptions.
(a) Conditions of Approval.
Nothing herein shall be construed as repealing or modifying the conditions of approval associated with any zoning, special use, conditional use, or variance approved prior to the effective date of this Development Code.
(b) Subdivisions with Prior Approval.
A subdivision that received preliminary plat approval prior to the adoption of this Development Code shall be allowed to continue development according to said preliminary plat and its associ-ated development plans under the Development Regulations in effect at the time the preliminary plat and its development plans were approved. This provision shall expire one year following the date of preliminary plat approval, unless construction has begun and continuous work is being performed on the project.
(c) Previously Issued Permits.
The provisions of this Development Code shall not affect the validity of any lawfully issued and effective site development plan approval, building permit, or development permit if:
(1) The development activity or building construction authorized by such site development plan or permit approval has started prior to the effective date of this Development Code, or will be commenced after such effective date but within one year of issuance of the site develop-ment plan or permit approval; and
Section 104 General Applicability. City of Duluth UDC
1-4
(2) The development activity or building construc-tion must comply with all time frames associ-ated with said approval or permit, and must continue without interruption (except in the in-stance of a natural disaster) until the develop-ment or construction is complete. If the ap-proved site development plan or permit ex-pires and is not renewed by the permittee, any further development or construction on the site shall occur only in conformance with the requirements of this Development Code in ef-fect on the date of the permit expiration.
(d) Recently Approved Rezoning.
In order to provide a smooth transition to the new Unified Development Code, any property rezoned or granted special use approval within the six calen-dar months preceding adoption of the Unified De-velopment Code, but for which such use is not al-lowed under the Unified Development Code, shall nonetheless be allowed to be used for such purpose as previously approved, provided that:
(1) A development permit or building permit authorizing such use is issued within six calendar months after the effective date of the Unified Development Code; and
(2) The development activity or building construction must comply with all time frames associ-ated with said approval or permit, and must continue without interruption (except due to natural disaster) until the development or construction is complete. If the permit expires and is not renewed, any further development or construction on that site shall occur only in con-formance with the requirements of the Unified Development Code in effect on the date of the permit expiration.
(e) Previously Submitted Applications.
(1) Any valid and complete application accepted by the Planning and Development Depart-ment prior to the effective date of this Development Code for the development of, construc-tion upon, or use of land shall be processed and approved or issued under the applicable City of Duluth regulations in place prior to the effective date of this Development Code, provided that:
a. The Development Permit is approved within six calendar months of the effective date of this Development Code; and
b. The use, development, or construction begins within six calendar months after approval of the application, all time frames associated with said permit are observed, and devel-opment activity or building construction continues without interruption (except be-cause of natural disaster) until the development or construction is complete.
City of Duluth UDC Section 105 Application of the Regulations.
1-5
(f) Agricultural Uses.
Clearly agricultural uses, limited to the cultivation of the land, dairying or animal husbandry, that are in operation on the effective date of this Development Code but are nonconforming uses ac-cording to their zoning may continue as grandfathered uses and may be resumed after a lapse of no more than two years, provided that land proposed to be converted to a new agricultural use is zoned RA-200 to be exempt from the provisions herein.
(g) Effect of Unified Development Code on Exempt Properties.
(1) To the extent that exemption under this Section 104.02 results in nonconformity with the provisions of this Development Code, such properties shall be governed by the requirements of Section 106, Nonconformities.
(2) Any new application for a zoning map change, a variance, a concept plan, a preliminary sub-division plat, a site development plan, a development permit, a building permit, or any other action affecting an exempt property covered under the provisions of this Section shall be considered and acted upon under the procedural provisions of this Development Code, as applicable.
(3) The owner of a property that is otherwise exempt under this Section may, at his or her op-tion, develop the property in conformity with the provisions of this Development Code.
Section 105. Application of the Regulations.
105.01 Use, Occupancy, and Construction.
(a) No building or structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, moved, or altered except in conformity with the regulations of this Development Code.
(b) Any land disturbance activity or any development activity must first comply with this Develop-ment Code.
105.02 Height and Density.
(a) Density shall be calculated based on the density definition in Article 2.
(b) No building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered to:
(1) Exceed the height limits.
(2) House a greater number of units per acre or occupy a smaller lot area than is herein required.
(3) Have narrower or smaller front, rear, or side yards than are herein required.
(4) Be in nonconformance with the minimum lot size requirements of the zoning district in which they are located, with the exception of lots served by on-site sewer, septic tank, which shall be subject to the approval and lot -size standards of the Gwinnett County Environmental Health Department.
(c) See Table 2-B for maximum density per zoning district.
These maximum densities are per the adopted Comprehensive Plan (also referred to as the Duluth Community Agenda) and are added for clarity. The current density is set by the restrictions set forth in lot size, lot coverage percentage, lot width, lot frontage, and setbacks requirements.
Section 105 Application of the Regulations. City of Duluth UDC
1-6
105.03 Reduction in Lot Size.
No lot shall be reduced in size so that lot width or depth, size of yards, lot area per family, or any other requirement of this Development Code is not maintained. This limitation shall not apply when a por-tion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose.
105.04 Yards and Other Spaces.
No part of a yard or the off-street parking or loading spaces that are required in connection with any building or use for the purpose of complying with the regulations of this Development Code shall be for another building, except as specifically provided herein.
105.05 Only One Principal Building or Use on a Residential Lot.
Only one principal building or structure or use and its customary accessory building and uses shall be permitted on any lot of record within a residential zoning district. All buildings within a non-residential or multi-family zoning district shall be considered principal buildings.
105.06 Classification of Streets.
(a) For the purpose of this Development Code, all of the streets, roads, and highways in the City of Duluth are classified as local streets (minor or major), collector streets (minor or major), residen-tial or principal arterial streets, and freeways. These same streets and roads will also be known as interstate routes, U.S. or state routes, county roads, and local streets or roads.
(b) The classification of each street in the City of Duluth is on file in the office of the City of Duluth Planning and Development Department. Private streets shall be classified as local streets for pur-poses of determining building setbacks.
105.07 Dedication of Public Lands and Facilities.
No land dedicated as a public street or other public purpose shall be opened or accepted as a public street or for any other public purpose, and no subdivision of land shall be made, nor subdivision plat, nor part thereof, shall be recorded before obtaining final approval from the City of Duluth Department of Planning and Development. Said approval shall be entered in writing on the Final Plat by the Planning and Development Director. Said Director is hereby authorized to accept such dedications of lands and public facilities on behalf of City of Duluth and to cause such dedications to be recorded by the Clerk to Superior Court of Gwinnett County, subject to ratification by the City Council.
105.08 Transfer of Land Ownership.
(a) No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, developer, subdivider or any other owner or agent shall transfer title or attempt to record the title to any land in the city limits of Duluth, and no building permit may be issued on said land, unless:
(1) Said land existed as a single parcel of ownership, recorded as such in its entirety and present boundaries with the Clerk to Superior Court of Gwinnett County prior to the adoption of these Regulations; or,
(2) Said land is shown in its entirety and present boundaries on a final plat as approved (under these or any previous applicable regulations) and duly recorded with the Clerk to Superior Court of Gwinnett County; or,
(3) Said land is shown in its entirety and present boundaries on a plat authorized by the Director and recorded with the Clerk to Superior Court of Gwinnett County pursuant to the regula-tions governing minor subdivisions contained herein; or,
City of Duluth UDC Section 106 Nonconformities.
1-7
(4) Said land is an aggregation of properties for land assembly purposes, and no building permit will be requested prior to the filing of an application for an issuance of a development permit, pursuant to this Development Code.
(b) No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, developer, subdivider or any other owner, or agent shall transfer title to any property by reference to, exhibition of, or any other use of any map of plat illustrating the subdivision of land without a final plat of said land showing said property first having been duly approved under the procedures of this Development Code or any previously applicable regulations and recorded with the Clerk to Superior Court of Gwinnett County.
Section 106. Nonconformities.
106.01 Intent of Nonconformities Section.
This Section defines the provisions that protect uses, structures, lots, and signs that lawfully existed prior to the adoption of this Development Code or a subsequent amendment, but no longer conform to the regulations herein. The primary intent of the treatment of nonconformity is to allow continua-tion of these uses, structures, lots and signs until the end of their useful life, while encouraging con-formance to the new regulations when it becomes reasonable to do so.
106.02 Nonconforming Development; In General.
(a) Lawful nonconforming uses, structures, lots, and signs are declared by this Development Code to be incompatible with land uses, structures, lots, and signs that conform to the requirements of the zoning districts in which the nonconformity exists. However, such nonconforming develop-ment may continue under the circumstances presented in this Code Section for each type of non-conformity.
(b) For the purpose of this Section 106, value shall be computed from the amount a building or structure, as applicable, is appraised for tax purposes by the City of Duluth.
106.03 Continuation of Illegal Nonconformity Prohibited.
Any use, structure, lot, or sign that did not conform to the applicable codes or ordinances of the City of Duluth at the time of its creation, construction, or placement, or as a result of subsequent enlarge-ment or expansion, shall not be considered a lawful nonconforming use, structure, lot, or sign and is prohibited.
106.04 Nonconforming Uses.
(a) Nonconforming Use; Defined.
A lawful nonconforming use is a use or activity that was lawfully established prior to the adoption or amendment of this Development Code, but which, by reason of such adoption or amendment, is no longer a use or activity permitted by right or no longer meets or conforms to the require-ments of this Development Code.
(b) Continuance of Nonconforming Uses.
The lawful nonconforming use of any building structure or tract of land existing at the time of the adoption of this Development Code or any subsequent amendment may be continued even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this Development Code except that the non-conforming use shall not be:
(1) Extended in any way, either on the same or adjoining property.
Section 106 Nonconformities. City of Duluth UDC
1-8
(2) Extended to occupy a greater area of a building or structure.
(3) Re-established after discontinuance for three months regardless of the intent of the owner or occupier to resume the nonconforming use.
(4) Changed to another nonconforming use.
106.05 Nonconforming Structures.
(a) Nonconforming Structure; Defined.
A lawful nonconforming structure is a structure or building whose size, dimensions, location on a property, or other features were lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of this Development Code, but which, by reason of such adoption or amendment, no longer meets or conforms to one or more requirements of this Development Code.
(b) Continuance of Nonconforming Structures.
(1) A nonconforming structure may not be enlarged or extended unless a variance for such has been granted by the Duluth Zoning Board of Appeals. A legal nonconforming structure may be maintained or repaired, under permit, in accordance with all pertinent building codes and ordinances.
(2) Structures that are nonconforming for reasons of design standards, landscaping require-ments, or buffer standards may be occupied by another tenant, regardless of use, without having to bring the structure/building into compliance with the current standards provided the footprint or the height of the structure/building is not increased.
(3) Change of ownership, tenancy, or management of a nonconforming structure shall not affect its legal, nonconforming status.
(4) Whenever a nonconforming structure is damaged by any means and the extent of the dam-age is 50% or less of the floor area of the structure or 50% or less of the replacement value of the structure, as determined by the Building Official, the structure may be restored, pro-vided it is replaced within six months.
(5) Whenever a nonconforming structure is damaged by any means and the extent of the dam-age is more than 50% of the floor area of the structure or 50% or more of the replacement value of the structure, as determined by the City Building Official, the structure shall not be restored unless in conformity with all applicable ordinances.
106.06 Nonconforming Lots.
(a) Nonconforming Lot; Defined.
A lawful nonconforming lot is a lot of record whose area, frontage, width, or other dimensions, or location were lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of this Development Code, and which, by reason of such adoption or amendment, no longer meets or exceeds one or more such require-ments of the applicable zoning district.
(b) Treatment of Nonconforming Lots.
(1) A lawful nonconforming lot of record located in a residential district may be used for a single-family dwelling without the need for a variance from the Duluth Zoning Board of Appeals provided that all yard requirements are met. When it is not possible to provide the required side yards and at the same time build a minimum width single-family dwelling, the Zoning
City of Duluth UDC Section 106 Nonconformities.
1-9
Board of Appeals is hereby authorized to grant a variance reducing the side yard require-ments for such lot the minimum amount necessary for a reasonable dwelling but, in no case shall each of the side yards be less than 5 feet in width.
(2) When two or more adjoining lots of record with continuous frontage are in one ownership at any time after the adoption or amendment of this Development Code and such lots, indi-vidually, have an area or width that is less than is required by this Development Code, then such contiguous lots shall be considered as a single lot or several lots of the minimum width and area required in the zoning district in which they are located.
(3) For a lawful nonconforming lot of record, when it is not possible to provide the required side yards and at the same time build a minimum width single-family dwelling, the Planning and Development Director is hereby authorized to grant a special exception reducing the side yard requirements for such lot the minimum amount necessary for a reasonable dwelling but, in no case shall each of the side yards be less than 5 feet in width. See the Appeals Article of this Development Code for procedures.
106.07 Nonconforming Signs.
See the Nonconforming Signs Section of Article 6 of this Development Code.
1-10
BLANK PAGE
2-i
Article 2. Use of Land and Structures
Article 2 defines the zoning districts in the City and identifies the specific uses to which land and structures may be put in the var-ious zoning districts, including certain uses or structures for which special approval is required in order to be allowed. In ad-dition, this Article identifies specific uses within each zoning dis-trict to which restrictions may apply, that are presented in Article 3 of this Code, and sets out the standards that control the size of lots, the placement of buildings and structures on a lot, and the bulk and intensity of development on a lot in each district.
Table of Contents Page
Section 201. Zoning Districts; Established. ...............................................................................................2-1
Section 202. Official Zoning Map. ............................................................................................................2-2
202.01 Official Zoning Map Adopted. ...................................................................................................................... 2-2
202.02 Amendments to the Official Zoning Map. .................................................................................................... 2-2
202.03 Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries. .............................................................................................. 2-2
202.04 Conversion of Previous Zoning Districts. ...................................................................................................... 2-2
Table 2-A: Conversion of Previous Zoning Districts ...................................................................................... 2-3
Section 203. Definitions. .........................................................................................................................2-4
Section 204. Development Standards. ................................................................................................... 2-10
204.01 Area Regulations for Lots and Principal Buildings. ..................................................................................... 2-10
204.02 Street Frontage Requirement. ................................................................................................................... 2-10
204.03 Minimum Lot Width. .................................................................................................................................. 2-10
204.04 Determination of Side Yard Setback Distances. ......................................................................................... 2-11
204.05 Minimum Setbacks for Accessory Buildings and Structures. ..................................................................... 2-11
204.06 Exceptions. ................................................................................................................................................. 2-11
Section 205. Zoning and Overlay Districts. ............................................................................................. 2-12
205.02 RA-200 Residential-Agricultural District. .................................................................................................... 2-12
205.03 R-100 Single-Family Residential District. .................................................................................................... 2-12
205.04 R-75 Single-Family Residential District. ...................................................................................................... 2-12
205.05 RM Residential Multi-Family District. ........................................................................................................ 2-13
205.06 MH Manufactured Housing District. .......................................................................................................... 2-13
205.07 HRD Historic Residential District. ............................................................................................................... 2-13
205.08 C-1 Neighborhood Business District. .......................................................................................................... 2-13
205.09 C-2 General Business District. .................................................................................................................... 2-13
205.10 HC-Retail Highway Commercial-Retail District. .......................................................................................... 2-13
205.11 HC-Auto Highway Commercial-Auto District. ............................................................................................ 2-13
205.12 O-I Office-Institutional District. .................................................................................................................. 2-13
205.13 O-N Office-Neighborhood District.............................................................................................................. 2-13
Table of Contents Continued City of Duluth UDC
2-ii
205.14 CBD Central Business District. .................................................................................................................... 2-14
205.15 M-1 Light Industrial District. ...................................................................................................................... 2-21
205.16 M-2 Heavy Industrial District. .................................................................................................................... 2-21
205.17 RD Research and Development District. .................................................................................................... 2-21
205.18 PUD Planned Unit Development District. .................................................................................................. 2-21
205.19 DOD Downtown Overlay District. .............................................................................................................. 2-22
Section 206. Area Regulations in Each Zoning District. ........................................................................... 2-22
206.01 Chart of Area Regulations. ......................................................................................................................... 2-22
Table 2-B: Area Regulations by Zoning District .......................................................................................... 2-23
Section 207. Uses Allowed in Each Zoning District. ................................................................................ 2-25
207.02 Chart of Uses. ............................................................................................................................................. 2-25
207.03 Allowed Principal, Accessory and Temporary Uses. .................................................................................. 2-25
207.04 Special Uses. ............................................................................................................................................... 2-25
207.05 Restrictions on Particular Uses. ................................................................................................................. 2-25
207.06 Prohibited Uses. ......................................................................................................................................... 2-25
207.07 Interpretation of Uses. ............................................................................................................................... 2-26
Table 2-C: Principal Uses Allowed by Zoning District ................................................................................. 2-27
Table 2-D: Accessory and Temporary Uses Allowed by Zoning District ...................................................... 2-44
2-1
Article 2. Use of Land and Structures
Section 201. Zoning Districts; Established.
For the purposes of this Development Code, the incorporated area of the City of Duluth, Georgia, is divided into zoning districts and overlay districts designated as follows:
Residential Zoning Districts:
RA-200
Residential-Agricultural District
R-100
Single-Family Residential District
R-75
Single-Family Residential District
RM
Residential Multi-Family District
MH
Manufactured Housing District
HRD
Historic Residential District
Commercial Zoning Districts:
C-1
Neighborhood Business District
C-2
General Business District
HC-R
Highway Commercial-Retail District
HC-A
Highway Commercial-Auto District
O-I
Office-Institutional District
O-N
Office-Neighborhood District
CBD
Central Business District
Industrial Zoning Districts:
M-1
Light Industrial District
M-2
Heavy Industrial District
RD
Research and Development District
Planned Development Zoning Districts:
PUD
Planned Unit Development District
Overlay Districts:
DOD
Downtown Overlay District
Section 202 Official Zoning Map. City of Duluth UDC
2-2
Section 202. Official Zoning Map.
The incorporated area of the City of Duluth, Georgia is hereby divided into zoning districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Duluth, Georgia which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, and accompanying pages, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Code.
202.01 Official Zoning Map Adopted.
(a) The Official Zoning Map of the City of Duluth, Georgia is hereby adopted and identified as that map or series of maps, adopted by the City Council, that show the precise location and boundaries of the zoning districts and that is certified by the Mayor and City Clerk of Duluth, Georgia.
(b) A certified copy of the Official Zoning Map shall be kept in the Department of Planning and Devel-opment, where it shall be available for public inspection.
(c) The Official Zoning Map may be amended from time to time pursuant to the provisions of this Code.
202.02 Amendments to the Official Zoning Map.
The Official Zoning Map may be amended from time to time by the City Council, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have first been submitted to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation in conformity with the procedures set forth in this Code.
202.03 Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the location and boundaries shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
(a) Where a zoning district boundary line is shown as approximately following a corporate limits line, a militia district line, a land lot line, a lot line or the center line if a street, a county road, a state highway or a railroad right-of-way or such lines extended, then such lines shall be construed to be the zoning district boundary lines.
(b) Where a zoning district boundary line is shown as being set back from a street, a county road, a state highway, an interstate highway or a railroad right-of-way and approximately parallel thereto, then such zoning district boundary line shall be construed as being at the scaled distance from the center line of the street, county road, state highway, interstate highway or railroad right-of-way and as being parallel thereto.
(c) Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot, the location of the line shall be the scaled distance from the lot lines. In this situation, the requirements of the zoning district in which the greater portion of the lot lies shall apply to the balance if the lot except that such extension shall not include any part of a lot that lies more than 50 feet beyond the zoning district boundary line.
(d) In the case of a through lot fronting on two approximately parallel streets that is divided by a zoning district boundary line paralleling the streets, the restrictions of the zoning district in which each frontage of the through lot lies shall apply to that portion of the through lot.
202.04 Conversion of Previous Zoning Districts.
Zoning districts as were established under the provisions of the previous Zoning Ordinance of the City of Duluth are hereby renamed to the following zoning district names and designations under this De-
City of Duluth UDC Section 202 Official Zoning Map.
2-3
velopment Code, as shown on Table 2-A. All regulations, requirements and provisions of this Devel-opment Code applicable to a zoning district established under this Chapter shall apply to the previously named zoning district as shown on Table 2-A.
Table 2-A: Conversion of Previous Zoning Districts Previous Zoning District Designation Zoning District Designation Under This Code
RA-200
Residential-Agricultural District
RA-200
Residential-Agricultural District
R-100
Single-Family Residential District
R-100
Single-Family Residential District
R-75
Single-Family Residential District
R-75
Single-Family Residential District
RM
Residential Multi-Family District
RM
Residential Multi-Family District
MH
Manufactured Housing District
MH
Manufactured Housing District
CPD-R
Core Preservation District - Residential
HRD
Historic Residential District
C-1
Neighborhood Business District
C-1
Neighborhood Business District
C-2
General Business District
C-2
General Business District
HC
Highway Commercial District
HC-R
Highway Commercial-Retail District
HC-A
Highway Commercial-Auto District
O-I
Office-Institutional District
O-I
Office-Institutional District
O-N
Office-Neighborhood District
O-N
Office-Neighborhood District
CBD
Central Business District
CBD
Central Business District
CPD-C
Core Preservation District - Commercial
CBD
Central Business District
M-1
Light Industry District
M-1
Light Industrial District
M-2
Heavy Industry District
M-2
Heavy Industrial District
RD
Research and Development District
RD
Research and Development District
PRD
Planned Residential Development Dis-trict
PUD
Planned Unit Development District
POD
Planned Office Development District
PUD
Planned Unit Development District
PCD
Planned Commercial Development Dis-trict
PUD
Planned Unit Development District
PID
Planned Industrial Development District
PUD
Planned Unit Development District
PUD
Planned Unit Development District
PUD
Planned Unit Development District
BHOD
Buford Highway Overlay District
n/a
DOD
Downtown Overlay District
DOD
Downtown Overlay District
HSO
Historic Structure Overlay District
n/a
CSO
Conservation Subdivision Overlay Dis-trict
n/a
Section 203 Definitions. City of Duluth UDC
2-4
Section 203. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed, in addition to the definitions contained in Article 14 of this Development Code. If the same word or phrase is defined in this Article, below, and in Article 14, the definition contained in this Article shall be taken as the correct definition and applied throughout this Development Code.
Accessory Structures and Uses. A detached structure and/or use on the same lot with, and of a size and nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal structure and/or use of land.
Alteration of a Building. Any change, addition or modification in construction of the structural mem-bers of a building, such as walls, partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any change that results in an addition to enclosed floor area of a building or the movement of the building from one location to another.
Apartment. See Multi-Family Dwelling.
Basement. The lower level of a building having a floor-to-ceiling height of at least 6 feet and a portion of its floor subgrade (below ground level) on at least one side.
Block. A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public streets (other than alleys), railroads or other rights-of-way, or boundaries of the development within which the block is located.
Buildable Area of Lot. The area of lot within the setback lines as defined by this Code.
Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or material of any kind.
Building Height. The height of a building is the vertical distance measured from the mean elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building to the highest point on the deck line of a mansard roof, the highest edge on a shed roof, or the ridge of a hip, gambrel or gable roof. For flat roofs, the height shall be measured to the top of the roof or parapet along the exterior building wall, whichever is higher.
Building Story. See Story, Building.
Building Line. A line formed by the outer face of the exterior wall of a building or portion thereof and the surface of the ground.
Building, Main. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. Also referred to as a Principal Building.
Condominium. A multiple unit dwelling in which each dwelling unit is owned or financed by the occupant, but in which halls, entrance ways and underlying lands are owned jointly.
Customary Home Occupation. An occupation, service, profession or enterprise conducted entirely within a dwelling and which is carried on by a resident thereof and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential dwelling purposes.
Duplex. See Two-Family Dwelling (Duplex).
Dwelling. Any building or portion thereof which is designed for or used for residential purposes.
Dwelling Unit. A room or suite of two or more rooms that is designed for the occupancy, cooking, and sleeping of one or more than one person living as a single household.
Family. One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single household, as distin-guished from persons occupying a boarding house or motel, as defined herein.
City of Duluth UDC Section 203 Definitions.
2-5
Floor Area, Single-Family Dwelling. The floor area of a single-family dwelling is the gross horizontal area of several floors of the one-family residential structure, excluding; carports, unfinished base-ments, attics, and open porches.
Floor Area, Gross. The sum of all floors of a structure as measured to the outside surfaces of exterior walls or the center of connected or common walls, including; common public areas (such as lobbies), restrooms and hallways, spaces devoted exclusively to elevator shafts but, excluding; internal parking and loading areas, attics, porches, balconies, and other areas outside of the exterior walls of the build-ing. Gross floor area is used to determine the building sizes for all but single-family dwellings and to determine required parking when floor area is the designated measure for a use.
Floor, Ground. The floor of a building that is nearest the surrounding surface of the ground.
Floor Area, Heated. The gross floor area of all spaces within a dwelling or dwelling unit that are heated by mechanical means, measured to the inside surfaces of exterior walls, excluding: porches, balconies, attics, unfinished basements, garages, patios, and decks.
Floor Area, Net. The sum of all floors of a structure as measured to the outside surfaces of exterior walls, excluding halls, stair-ways, elevator shafts, attached and detached garages, porches, balconies, and attics with less than 7 feet of headroom, base-ments, patios, and decks.
Frontage, Lot. The distance over which the boundary line of the lot and the street line are coincident.
Heated Floor Area. See Floor Area, Heated.
Household. A family or a group of up to three unrelated individ-uals living together in a single dwelling unit, sharing common use of and access to all living and eating areas, bathrooms, and food preparation areas, who mutually combine their efforts and share responsibilities for domestic chores.
Lot. A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be sepa-rately owned, used, developed, or built upon.
(1) Corner Lot. A lot that occupies the interior angle of two street lines which make an angle of less than 135 degrees with each other.
(2) Double Frontage Lot. A lot, other than a corner lot, abutting upon two or more streets.
(3) Interior Lot. A lot having frontage on only one street.
(4) Flag Lot. A lot having a street frontage and initial lot width notably less wide than the body of the lot (usually where the principal building is intended to be located), such that the lot appears to be a flag on a pole extending to the street frontage.
Lot Area. The computed ground area bounded by the front, side and rear lot lines.
Lot Coverage. The computed ground area that is covered by buildings, structures, accessory structures, driveways, parking areas, and any other impervious surface.
Lot Depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot meas-ured within the lot boundaries.
Section 203 Definitions. City of Duluth UDC
2-6
Lot Line. The boundary dividing a given lot from the street or adjacent lots; the boundary defining the limit of ownership of a property.
(1) Front Lot Line. Any boundary line of a lot that abuts a street. A lot adjacent to more than one street will have more than one front lot line.
(2) Rear Lot Line. Any boundary line of a lot that does not intersect with a street right-of-way line and is not a front lot line.
(3) Side Lot Line. Any boundary line of a lot that intersects with a street right-of-way line and is not a front lot line.
Lot of Record. A lot or parcel whose existence, location, and dimensions have been recorded in the Office of the Clerk to Superior Court of Gwinnett County.
Lot Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured along the front principal build-ing line.
Manufactured Home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections that, in the traveling mode, is 8 body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and that is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes; plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein, except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the National Mo-bile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq., as amended. This definition excludes travel trailers, recreational vehicles, and mobile homes as defined below.
Manufactured Home Park. A tract of land of individual ownership that has been developed with all necessary facilities and services in accordance with a site development plan for the placement of man-ufactured homes for non-transient use.
Mobile home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the travelling mode, is 8 body feet or more in width, or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumb-ing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976.
Modular Home. A factory fabricated, transportable building con-sisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a structure to be used for residential purposes. A modular home shall be designed and constructed in
compliance with Georgia State Minimum Standard One and Two Family Dwelling Code and shall be certified by the manufacturer to meet the approval of the State Building Administrative Board (SBAB) to meet the same requirements as an on site-built home within the City of Duluth. The term shall not include manufactured homes as defined by the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq.
Multi-Family Dwelling. A residential building designed exclusively for occupancy by three or more fam-ilies in separate dwelling units living independently of each other.
Illustrative
Illustrative Example of a Mod-Example of a Mod-ular Homeular Home
City of Duluth UDC Section 203 Definitions.
2-7
(1) Apartment. A multi-family dwelling in which a dwelling unit may be located above another.
(2) Triplex. A detached residential structure containing three dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than four families living independently of each other.
(3) Quadruplex. A detached residential structure containing four dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than four families living independently of each other.
Parcel. See Lot.
Principal Building. The building in which is conducted the principal use of the parcel on which it is located. Parcels with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings, but storage build-ings, garages, and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings.
Principal Building Setback Line. A line delineating the minimum allowable distance between a prop-erty line (or the right-of-way line) of an abutting street and a principal building on a lot.
(1) Front Building Setback. The minimum allowable distance between the right-of-way line of any abutting street and any part of a principal building on a lot. The front setback distance is applied along the full length of the right-of-way line and is parallel to it.
(2) Rear Building Setback. The minimum allowable distance between a rear lot line and any part of a principal building on a lot. The rear building setback extends along and is parallel to the full length of the rear lot line.
(3) Side Building Setback. The minimum allowable distance between a side lot line and any part of a principal building on a lot. The side building setback extends along and is parallel to the
side lot line between the front building setback and a rear building setback (if any).
Principal Use. The specific, primary purpose for which land or a building is used, such as residential living, professional services, retail sales, or manufacturing.
Quadruplex. A detached residential structure containing four dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than four families living independently of each other.
Roof line. The top of a flat roof or the ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof.
Right-of-Way. A portion of land over which a local or state government has designated a right of use.
Setback, Minimum. The shortest distance allowed between a street line or lot line and any principal or accessory build-ing on a lot. Minimum setback requirements for buildings are associated with the type of lot line from which the set-back is taken; for instance, a side yard setback is meas-ured from a side lot line.
(1) Front Building Setback. The minimum allowable
distance between a street line or lot line and the front building line of a principal building or structure, projected to the side lines of the lot and including driveways and parking areas, except where otherwise prohibited by this Code.
Section 203 Definitions. City of Duluth UDC
2-8
(2) Rear Building Setback. The minimum allowable distance between a rear lot line and the building line. The rear building setback extends along and is parallel to the full length of the rear lot line.
(3) Side Building Setback. The minimum allowable distance between a side lot line and the build-ing line. The side building setback extends along and is parallel to the side lot line between the front building setback and a rear building setback (if any).
Single-Family Attached Dwelling (Townhome or Townhouse). A residential building containing three to eight one-dwelling units adjoined by vertical walls.
Single-Family Detached Dwelling. A detached building containing one dwelling unit. See also Manu-factured home, Modular home, and Site-Built Single-Family Detached Dwelling.
Site-Built Single-Family Detached Dwelling. A single-family detached dwelling constructed on the building site from basic materials delivered to the site, in contrast to assembly of pre-constructed ma-terials and that is constructed in accordance with all requirements of the construction codes as adopted by the City of Duluth.
Slope. The degree of deviation of a surface from horizontal, measured in a numerical ratio, percent or degrees. Expressed as a ratio or percentage, the first number is the vertical distance (rise) and the second is the horizontal distance (run), as 2:1 or 200 percent (200%). Expressed in degrees, it is the angle of the slope from the horizontal plane with a 901 slope being vertical (maximum) and 451 being a 1:1 slope.
Special Use. The term applied to those uses specifically iden-tified and approved by the City Council under the requirements set forth herein.
Street Line. The dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street.
Story, Building. That portion of a build-ing included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor above it. If there is no floor above it, a room, suite, or story with more than one-half of its height below grade shall not be considered a story for the purposes of height regulations. One-story measures 12 feet in height. The first floor of a two or multi-story building shall be deemed
the story that has no floor immediately below it that is designed for living quarters or for human occu-pancy but has at least one-half () of its height on one side below grade (see also Basement). Those stories above the first floor shall be numbered consecutively.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to something on the ground, including, but not limited to: buildings, signs, gasoline pumps, parking lots, patios, pools, decks, man-ufactured homes, gas or liquid storage tanks, and canopies.
Townhome (Townhouse). See Single-Family Attached Dwelling (Townhome or Townhouse).
Triplex. A detached residential structure containing three dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than three families living independently of each other.
City of Duluth UDC Section 203 Definitions.
2-9
Two-Family Dwelling (Duplex). A building containing two single-family dwelling units totally separated from each other by an unpierced wall extending from basement to roof.
Use. a) Any purpose for which, a building, structure or a tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained or occupied or b) any activity, occupation, business, or operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in a building or other structure or on a tract of land.
Yard (with principal building). An area that lies between the principal building on a lot and the nearest lot line.
(1) Front Yard. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, measured between the front lot line and the front line of the main building. Corner lots shall be considered to have two front yards or one exterior side and one front yard.
(2) Rear Yard. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, measured between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the main building.
(3) Exterior Side Yard. A yard between the building and attached structures, and the adjacent street right-of-way line along the lot extending from front yard to rear yard.
(4) Interior Side Yard. A yard between the building and attached structures, and adjacent side-line of the lot adjoining another lot, and extending from the front yard to the rear yard.
Examples of Required Yards in Corner Lots
Section 204 Development Standards. City of Duluth UDC
2-10
Yard (no principal building). An area beginning from the nearest lot line or street right-of-way line, as described below, to the interior of a lot.
(1) Front Yard. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, measured at a point beginning from the adjacent street right-of-way line. Corner lots shall be considered to have two front yards or one side and one front yard.
(2) Rear Yard. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, measured at a point beginning from the rear line of the lot. The rear line shall be opposite the street right-of-way line used to designate the front yard.
(3) Side Yard. A yard that is not a front yard or rear yard.
Zero Lot Line. The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more of the buildings sides rest directly on a lot line, such as patio homes or fee simple townhouse condominiums.
Section 204. Development Standards.
204.01 Area Regulations for Lots and Principal Buildings.
Provisions relating to the minimum area and width, the maximum height of a building, and the mini-mum setbacks for front, side and rear yards as they relate to a principal building are included in Section 206. Setback provisions for accessory buildings and structures are contained in Section 204.05.
204.02 Street Frontage Requirement.
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected on a lot that does not abut for at least 40 feet upon an open street which shall be a public street, a publicly approved street, a publicly maintained street, or a private street constructed in accordance with this Code.
204.03 Minimum Lot Width.
The minimum lot width shall be achieved between the side lot lines measured along the front principal building line.
Example of Zero Lot Line:
Patio Homes
Examples of Required Yards in Irregular Shaped Lots
City of Duluth UDC Section 204 Development Standards.
2-11
204.04 Determination of Side Yard Setback Distances.
In the determination of side yard setback distances, lots whose side yard shares a common property line with those of adjacent properties shall observe the setback distance required under "interior side" of the bulk and area regulations of each zoning classification in Section 205. Lots whose side yard does not share common property lines with those of adjacent lots (i.e., street side) shall observe the side yard setback distance required under "exterior side of the bulk and area regulations of each zoning classification in Section 205.
(a) The Planning and Development Director has the discretion to reduce the front building setback accordingly to achieve this goal. See the Appeals Article of this Development Code for procedures.
(b) Changes in topography or other unusual circumstances may be reviewed by the Planning and De-velopment Director, who at his or her discretion, may modify requirements of this Section 204.04, provided the intent of the Development Code is maintained.
(c) Corner lots shall be considered to have one exterior side yard and one interior side yard.
(d) Setbacks for an exterior side yard shall be the same as the front yard with the exception of specific alternative requirements provided in
(e) Table 2-B: Area Regulations by Zoning District.
204.05 Minimum Setbacks for Accessory Buildings and Structures.
(a) Accessory uses or structures shall be permitted only in rear yards with the exception of detached garages in a residentially zoned area (R-100, R-75, RA-200, or any residential portion of a PUD), provided they are no closer to any street than the principal structure, except as otherwise pro-vided in this Code.
(b) No accessory building shall be erected on a lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory.
(c) Accessory structure requirements apply only to residential zoning districts. In a residentially zoned area, there shall be a minimum setback requirement from side and rear property line of 5 feet and a minimum separation requirement between accessory structures of 20 feet. Multiple accessory structures are permitted on a single platted lot, provided the combined square footage of the accessory structures complies with the size limitations set forth in Article 3.
(d) Any structure built on commercial or industrial zoned property shall be considered a principal use.
(e) The setback requirements of this Code shall not prohibit any necessary retaining wall nor prohibit any wall or fence except that in a residential district. See also Section 3.03.02.
204.06 Exceptions.
(a) Exceptions to Front Yard Requirements.
Any lot where the average depth of the front yards of existing buildings on adjoining lots (which are located wholly or in part within 100 feet on each side of such lot, and are within the same block and zoning district and fronting on the same side of the street) is either greater or less than the minimum required front yard depth shall meet the following requirements:
(1) If the average depth of the front yards is greater than the required minimum front yard depth, the depth of the front yard of such lot shall be the average of the front yards of the above mentioned buildings, but need not be greater than 150% of the required front yard depths.
Section 205 Zoning and Overlay Districts. City of Duluth UDC
2-12
(2) If the average depth of the front yards is less than the required minimum front yard depth, the depth of the front yard of such lot may be less than the required front yard depth, but shall not be less than the average of the front yards of the aforementioned buildings.
(b) Exceptions to Height Limitations.
The height limitations of this Development Code shall not apply to the following structures nor architectural features: church spires, belfries, flag poles, monuments, cupolas, domes, ornamen-tal towers, observation towers not intended for human occupancy, water towers, transmission towers, radio or television towers or aerials, chimneys, smokestacks, conveyors, derricks, parapet walls extending not more than 4 feet above the roof line of the building, necessary mechanical roof appurtenances or barns and silos when located on a farm.
Section 205. Zoning and Overlay Districts.
(a) All lands in the incorporated area of the City of Duluth, Georgia are included in one or another of the zoning districts established by this Development Code.
(b) Overlay districts, that provide additional requirements or restrictions on the portions of these zoning districts over which they are established, are found under Section 204.01 of this Article.
(c) Except for individual nonconformities addressed in Article 1 of this Development Code:
(1) No property shall be used except in accordance with its zoning designation on the Official Zoning Map, application conditions of zoning approval for the property, and all applicable provisions of this Development Code.
(2) The regulations set by this Development Code within each zoning district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly, and to each class or kind or structure or land, except when modifications are provided in this Code.
(d) Area Regulations.
Unless otherwise specified in this Development Code, principal uses and lots shall conform to the requirements in
Table 2-B.
(e) Allowed Uses.
Unless otherwise specified in this Development Code, see Section 207 for allowed principal uses, accessory uses, temporary uses, and restrictions that apply to particular uses.
205.02 RA-200 Residential-Agricultural District.
The RA-200 District is comprised of land having a predominantly rural character. It is the intent of this District to discourage the subdivision of land for urban development requiring such urban services as a public water supply, sanitary sewers, fire protection and the like.
205.03 R-100 Single-Family Residential District.
The R-100 District is intended primarily for single-family residences and related uses at low suburban residential densities on land served by a public sewer system. The development of lots in this District is also permitted with septic tanks provided that the placement of each such septic tank shall be ap-proved by the Gwinnett County Health Department.
205.04 R-75 Single-Family Residential District.
City of Duluth UDC Section 205 Zoning and Overlay Districts.
2-13
The R-75 District is intended primarily for single-family residences and related uses at low suburban residential densities on land served by a public sewer system. The development of lots in this district is permitted with septic tanks, provided lot sizes correspond to the area in square feet in the R-100 District and the placement of each such septic tank is approved by the Gwinnett County Health De-partment.
205.05 RM Residential Multi-Family District.
The RM District is intended primarily for two-family (duplex) and multi-family dwellings at low-to-me-dium suburban residential densities on land which is served by a public sewer system and where there is convenient access to collector streets or major thoroughfares.
205.06 MH Manufactured Housing District.
The MH District is intended exclusively for the placement of manufactured homes and their accessory uses in accordance with the Manufactured Home Regulations of Article 3 of this Development Code. All manufactured homes, manufactured home parks and manufactured home subdivisions shall meet the requirements set forth in the Manufactured Home Regulations.
205.07 HRD Historic Residential District.
The HRD zoning district is intended to preserve the low-density residential uses and established devel-opment pattern along the West Lawrenceville Street corridor in the downtown area.
205.08 C-1 Neighborhood Business District.
The C-1 District is intended to define residential neighborhoods with convenient shopping and service facilities not to exceed 2,500 square feet. Allowed uses include those businesses and services that are desired by nearby residents on a day-to-day basis and that are compatible with the neighborhood commercial character of the district.
205.09 C-2 General Business District.
The C-2 District is intended primarily for a wide variety of businesses and services that benefit from close proximity to each other, that require a location accessible to large numbers of people, and that serve a substantial portion of the community.
205.10 HC-Retail Highway Commercial-Retail District.
The HC-Retail District is intended to serve a variety of business activities that are generally oriented to highway corridors while assuring that these roadways can achieve their designated purpose of provid-ing rapid and safe passage and accommodating alternative transportation modes.
205.11 HC-Auto Highway Commercial-Auto District.
The HC-Auto District is intended to serve business activities, including auto-related businesses, which are generally oriented to highway corridors. The district is further intended to assure that these road-ways can achieve their designated purpose of providing rapid and safe passage and accommodating alternative transportation modes.
205.12 O-I Office-Institutional District.
The O-I District is established to provide a location for offices, institutions, and limited related retail business and service activities in areas that have ready access to major thoroughfares or O-N Office-Neighborhood District.
205.13 O-N Office-Neighborhood District.
Section 205 Zoning and Overlay Districts. City of Duluth UDC
2-14
The O-N District is established to provide for a transition of intensity from commercial and office to a less intensive residential use without changing the character of established residential neighborhoods. This transitional zoning district may also serve as a buffer between major traffic arteries and residential uses. Ingress and egress must be from a non-residential street classified as a collector or arterial.
205.14 CBD Central Business District.
(a) Purpose and Intent of the CBD Zoning District.
The CBD zoning district is intended to serve as the center of the communitys retail trade, civic functions, and financial and professional activity. Its primary purpose is to group uses together in a compact area to facilitate pedestrian movement and encourage development and redevelop-ment that enhances, stabilizes and preserves the traditional character of the area.
(b) Area Regulations.
Principal uses and lots in the CBD District shall conform to the requirements in Table 2-B. This conformity shall be depicted on proposed concept plans and site plans (see the Procedures and Permits Article for submittal requirements).
(c) Uses Allowed in the CBD Zoning District.
See Section 207 for allowed principal uses and restrictions that apply to particular uses. In addi-tion, the Downtown Duluth Master Plan shall guide the location of uses.
(d) Architectural and Design Guidelines, Non-Residential and Multi-Family (Apartment) Uses.
The following architectural and design guidelines shall apply to all new construction in the CBD District with the exception of residential development, which shall be subject to the requirements of paragraph (f), Residential Development of this subsection. Proposed designs shall be re-viewed by the Planning and Development Director. All development shall meet the intent of the CBD District and requirements.
(1) Building Facades.
a. Exterior building materials shall be real brick, stucco or stone (primary materials) or wood or cementitious fiberboard siding that exhibits a horizontal or clapboard profile (secondary materials). Brick or stucco shall be of a color to match existing facade or, on new structures, be of a color that is compatible with surrounding buildings. Siding using secondary materials shall be painted or stained to match existing colors or be of a color that is compatible with surrounding buildings. Stand-alone buildings larger than 50,000 square feet and at least three (3) stories in height may use architecturally treated ma-terials as defined by this code on portions of each faade higher than the lowest visible floor. In no case shall architecturally treated materials be used on any portion of a build-ing lower than ten feet (10) from the finished lot grade per facade. Buildings using ar-chitecturally treated materials shall incorporate a horizontal architectural band of at least eighteen vertical inches (18) or an off-set in the horizontal plane at least six (6) feet in depth to act as a transition between the architecturally treated material and the lower primary building material. In all cases, the color of the architecturally treated ma-terials should be lighter than the base primary material.
b. Primary materials shall comprise a minimum of 60% of exterior wall surfaces, with the exception that stucco may comprise no greater than 25% of any exterior wall surface.
c. Secondary materials may be used for up to 40% of the exterior wall surfaces.
City of Duluth UDC Section 205 Zoning and Overlay Districts.
2-15
d. Any development consisting of a building longer than 100 feet must have off-sets in the horizontal plane that are at least 18 inches in depth and at least 5 feet in length for every 100 feet of frontage.
e. At least 30% of all facades shall be non-reflective glass. U-Factor of glass shall be 0.65 or less and the Solar Heat Gain Coefficient less than or equal to 0.40.
f. Doors, windows, and other architectural features shall embellish a minimum of 50% of the front facade and be used to break large wall planes into smaller components.
g. The primary facade facing onto a street or public area shall have defining elements that differentiate the first floor from the upper facade. Defining element examples include entries, windows, awnings, grill work, piers, cornices and fascia.
h. Cornice and fascia on the upper faade shall not exceed 6 feet in their vertical dimen-sions or 20% of the vertical length of the faade, whichever is less. For purposes of this subsection, the vertical length of the faade is measured from the finished grade to the top of the cornice or eave.
(2) Roofs
a. Allowed styles and forms include flat, gable, shed, or hip roofs.
b. Secondary roof forms created by dormers, porches, entries, bays, and projections shall not comprise more than 50% of the roof area.
c. New dormers shall be aligned with the facade windows or located between the open-
ings below.
d. The pitch of the dormer shall conform to that of the main roof.
e. Shed dormers are permitted for roof slopes that are not visible from the street or public areas.
f. If such dormers are to be used in a new construction project, they shall be included in secondary el-evations.
g. Allowed roofing materials in-
clude: tile, slate, stone, wood shake, or textured composite shingles with a shake, slate, or tile appearance. Exposed metal flashing shall be copper or factory finished sheet metal; if used as a standing seam, the color must blend with adjacent materials or be a color to simulate weathered copper or bronze.
h. Flat roofs shall have parapets or cornice features.
i. Flat roof materials shall be any material that meets local codes. Rooftop equipment shall be screened by building elements (such as a parapet wall) rather than through add-on screening (such as wood or metal slats).
j. Any parapet or cornice details used on a street faade should be continuous on all walls of the building.
Parapet &
Parapet & CorniceCornice
Parapet
Parapet
& Cornice
& Cornice
Section 205 Zoning and Overlay Districts. City of Duluth UDC
2-16
(3) Architectural and Landscape Lighting. Architectural or landscape lighting may be used to highlight the unique features of a building and/or surrounding landscape treatment. High-lighting fixtures shall be located and designed in such a manner that the actual lamp and reflector are shielded or louvered so that it is not seen from a public area. See also the Out-door Lighting Standards section of Article 3.
(4) Signage. See the Sign Regulations, Article 6 of this Code.
(5) Parking. Off-street parking will not be required for any use occupying a building that existed prior to the adoption of this Development Code. Off-street parking for any use associated with a building that is constructed subsequent to this Code adoption shall be provided in accordance with Article 4, with the exception that restaurant and retail uses are exempt from the requirements of Article 4.
(6) Streetscape. Refer to the Downtown Duluth Master Plan.
(7) Dumpster Enclosures.
a. Dumpsters shall be screened on all sides with minimum 6 foot high walls with the fourth side serving as an access gate.
b. The walls shall be finished with the same exterior materials as the principal structure.
c. Pedestrian and vehicle access shall be screened by a solid operable gate of the same height as the wall.
d. Dumpsters cannot be located within the front or side yard.
e. Dumpsters shall be placed on a concrete pad with sufficient strength to prevent them from sinking into asphalt or soil; the pad shall also be able to support service vehicles.
f. A common refuse container may be shared between uses on separate lots that do not have sufficient area to store refuse with the submittal of a shared access agreement signed by all parties involved.
(8) Mechanical and Communications Equipment.
The following equipment shall be screened from the public right-of-way:
a. Mechanical equipment shall utilize screening that is integrated with the building in terms of the buildings architectural form, materials, color, shape, and size.
b. Roof mounted mechanical and communication equipment shall be screened by building elements (such as a parapet wall) rather than through add-on screening (such as wood or metal slats).
c. No supply or exhaust vents shall be located along the public right-of-way or within 20 feet of any pedestrian entrance.
(9) Utilities.
a. Utilities (electric, telephone, cable, gas, sewer, and water) shall be placed underground in new construction or installation of new utility infrastructure.
b. Utilities shall provide for interconnections such as the installation of sleeves for future extension of piping, shared, and oversized utility connections between buildings and shared entry courts or loading areas.
(e) Architectural and Design Guidelines, Residential Uses.
City of Duluth UDC Section 205 Zoning and Overlay Districts.
2-17
The following architectural and design guidelines shall apply to all new single-family and town-house construction in the CBD District. All development shall meet the intent of the CBD District and requirements. Final building plans, including elevations and materials, must be submitted and approved by the Planning and Development Director prior to the issuance of any building permits. Where the provisions of this Subsection e) conflict or overlap with other sections in the UDC, this subsection shall prevail and be controlling.
(1) Single-Family Dwellings. The following standards shall apply to single-family dwellings:
a. Minimum heated floor area: 2,800 square feet.
b. Exterior Construction Materials.
1. Brick, stone, stucco and/or cementious siding (which may be board, shingle or lap siding) are required. Variations in material may be approved by the Planning and Development Director.
2. Split-faced concrete block, vinyl, and metal siding shall be prohibited.
3. There shall be a minimum of eight different exterior elevations in a single-family development that exceeds two acres.
4. No two adjacent dwelling units shall have identical elevations.
c. Garage Requirement.
i. Each dwelling unit shall provide a two-car garage.
ii. See also subsection d below.
d. Front Entry Garages.
iii. There shall be a 22-foot minimum driveway distance measured from the back edge of sidewalk to the garage face.
iv. The garage face shall be recessed a minimum of 5 feet back from the front building faade so as not to be the predominate feature of the front faade.
v. No more than 30% of homes in a single-family development shall be designed with front-entry garages.
(2) Townhouses. The following standards shall apply to townhouses:
a. Townhouses shall have an average of 2,400 square feet of heated floor area.
b. Townhouses shall be designed to be rear entry.
c. Each dwelling unit shall provide a two-car garage.
d. Exterior Construction Materials.
vi. Brick, stone, and/or cementious siding (which may be board, shingle or lap siding) are required. Variations in material may be approved by the Planning and Devel-opment Director.
vii. Split-faced concrete block, stucco, or granite block may only be used in an accent capacity for any building elevation.
viii. There shall be a minimum of three different exterior elevations in a townhouse development that exceed two acres.
Section 205 Zoning and Overlay Districts. City of Duluth UDC
2-18
(3) Apartments. See Section 205.14(d) and Section 305.01 Standards for Multi-Family Dwellings, Apartments.
(4) Residential Driveways.
b. Front loaded driveways shall be scored or finished with decorative treatment.
c. With the exception of tapered aprons, driveway widths shall not be expanded beyond the width of the garage face.
(5) Walls and Fences.
d. Retaining Walls.
1. Retaining walls shall be constructed of interlocking masonry block, brick or other decorative material as approved by the Planning and Development Director.
2. Timber walls are prohibited.
3. Walls shall meet all City design standards and must be included in site development plans.
4. All walls shall require a separate review and permit.
e. Fencing.
1. Fencing shall be decorative in design. See also Section 304.02(b) Design Standards for Decorative Fences for additional requirements.
2. Fencing within a front yard setback shall not exceed 3 feet in height.
3. A fencing plan for any residential development shall be submitted for review and approval by the Planning and Development Director prior to the issuance of devel-opment permits.
(6) Landscaping and Buffers.
a. Sod shall be installed within all front, side and year yards.
b. Required front yards shall have a combination of sod, shrubs and ground cover.
c. A landscape plan prepared in accordance with this Section and Article 7 shall be submit-ted for review and approval by the Planning and Development Director prior to the is-suance of any development permits.
i. The landscape plan shall indicate the installation of trees along all streets.
ii. Tree spacing, specimen, and caliper shall be as required in Article 7 of this UDC.
d. Buffers shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Article 7, Division I Buffer Regulations.
(7) Common Areas. All proposed common areas and parks shall be privately owned and main-tained by one or more community associations in accordance with Article 5, Section 508 Owners Association of this UDC.
(8) Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Article 4 of this UDC.
(9) Roadways.
City of Duluth UDC Section 205 Zoning and Overlay Districts.
2-19
a. All streets, alleys, and roadways shall be constructed to standards of Article 9 of this UDC unless approved by the Planning and Development Director due to unusual topo-graphic conditions or property configuration.
b. Public roadways and private roadways, if applicable, shall be noted on the final plat.
(10) Utilities.
f. Utilities shall be placed underground and shall meet all Gwinnett County utility metering requirements.
g. Utilities shall be located in the rear of lots, when feasible.
h. Placement of utilities shall be designed to maximize the quality and quantity of land-scaping visible from the street and in no case should utility placement be designed to limited opportunities for improved streetscapes.
i. Street lighting shall be consistent with existing downtown Duluth standards.
(f) Residential Development
(1) Requirements for All Residential Developments in the CBD Zoning District.
a. Protective covenants. Residential development shall be subject to protective covenants which establish one or more mandatory membership community associations with the power to levy monetary assessments against all property owners and which have an obligation to maintain and operate all common areas for the benefit of the owners. The covenants shall be subject to the review and approval of the Planning and Development Department for compliance with this requirement.
b. Parking. Each single-family detached and townhouse dwelling unit is required to have a two-car garage.
c. Front-loaded driveways. If permitted, front-loaded driveways shall be scored or finished with decorative treatment.
d. Common areas and parks. All common areas and parks identified on any site plan for a residential development shall be privately owned and maintained by one or more com-munity associations.
e. Walls. All retaining walls, as needed, shall be constructed of interlocking concrete block, brick, or other decorative material as approved by the Department of Planning and De-velopment. Timber walls are prohibited.
All walls shall meet all City design standards and must be included in the site develop-ment plans. All walls require separate review and permit.
f. Utilities. Utilities shall be installed underground throughout the development. When feasible, utilities shall be located to the rear of lots. Placement of utilities shall be de-signed to maximize the quality and quantity of landscaping visible from a street and in no case should utility placement be designed to limit opportunities for improved streetscapes.
g. Landscaping. A landscaping plan for the residential development shall be submitted for review and approval by the Planning and Development Department prior to the issu-ance of any development permit. The plan shall indicate the installation of trees along all streets. Tree spacing, specimen and caliper of the trees shall be as required in this Duluth Unified Development Code of Article 7.
Section 205 Zoning and Overlay Districts. City of Duluth UDC
2-20
h. Fencing. An overall fencing plan for the residential development shall be submitted for review and approval by the Department of Planning and Development prior to the issu-ance of any development permit. Any proposed fencing shall be decorative in design (see Sec. 304.02(b) of this Development Code for standards). Fencing within any front yard shall not exceed three (3) feet in height.
i. Roadways. All streets, whether public or private, shall be constructed to the street and alley standards of this Development Code (Sec. 905). The residential development, and any final plat thereof if required, shall clearly distinguish between public and private roadways.
j. Street lighting and signage. Street lighting and signage for the residential development shall be installed consistent with Duluth downtown standards as approved by the De-partment of Planning and Development.
k. Sidewalks and Trails. Sidewalks and any multi-purpose trails shall be constructed con-sistent with the locations and widths as shown on a final site plan approved by the De-partment of Planning and Development.
l. Driveway Widths. With the exception of tapered aprons, no driveway shall exceed or expand beyond the width of the garage face.
(2) Requirements for Townhouses in the CBD Zoning District.
a. Minimum lot size. For fee-simple townhouses, each lot shall have a minimum area of 1,800 square feet. This requirement may be waived by the Department of Planning and Development for zero lot line townhomes, provided that the developer includes a pro-vision in the Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions for the project that clearly describe the maintenance and access of all common areas, streets, alleys and driveways.
b. Minimum lot width and street frontage. Each lot shall have a minimum width of twenty-two (22) feet. Notwithstanding the requirements of Section 204.02 of this Development Code, fee-simple townhouse lots shall have a minimum street frontage of twenty-two (22) feet.
c. Maximum building coverage. Building coverage shall not exceed 80% of any lot. This requirement may be waived by the Department of Planning and Development for zero lot line townhomes.
d. Principal building setbacks. Townhome units shall have a minimum five (5) foot principal building setback from a front lot line; ten (10) feet form a side lot line from an end or corner unit and twelve (12) feet from a rear lot line.
e. Heated floor area per dwelling unit. The minimum heated floor area for a townhouse unit shall be 2,200 square feet.
f. Minimum building separation. Townhouse buildings shall be separated by a minimum of twenty (20) feet. Architectural features may be allowed to extend into the building separation requirement.
g. Rear entry. All townhouses shall be designed to be rear entry: that is, garages shall not be located on the front elevation of accessed from the front of the lot, but rather, shall be designed with the required garage located to the rear of the lot and accessed via a street or alley. Garages shall have raised panel garage doors or decorative door equiva-lent.
City of Duluth UDC Section 205 Zoning and Overlay Districts.
2-21
h. Faade differentiation. No adjacent units shall be alike.
i. Required construction materials. Construction materials shall consist of the following: brick, stone, stucco and/or cementitious siding (which may be board, shingle or lap sid-ing). Variations in material may be approved by the Planning and Development Director. Split-faced concrete block, stucco or granite block may be used in an accent capacity for any elevation.
Additional requirements. Townhouses in the CBD Zoning district are also subject to the requirements of Sec. 304.03 of this Development Code.
(g) Alternate Architectural and Design Guidelines.
(1) In the event the intent of Section 205.14(d) and Section 205.14(e) can be achieved with minor deviations that do not substantially affect the purpose and intent of this Section, the Planning and Development Director has the authority to modify the specific provisions on a case-by-case basis. If substantial modifications or changes are desired for a particular property or project, the property owner may present proposed modifications to the Planning Commis-sion for review.
(2) Any application for alternate architectural design standards shall be accompanied with pro-posed elevations, building material descriptions and renderings necessary for the Planning Commission to make a determination whether the alternate proposal meets the intent of these standards. The Planning Commission, as part of the approval process, may include conditions, modifications or requirements deemed necessary to maintain the high level of development quality intended by this Code Section.
205.15 M-1 Light Industrial District.
The M-1 District is established to provide for light industrial uses such as assembling, wholesaling, warehousing and commercial services in areas that are located on or have ready access to a major thoroughfare, but whose proximity to residential or commercial districts makes it desirable to limit industrial operations and processes to those that are not objectionable by reason of the emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors, or radiation and that do not create fire or explosion hazards or other objectionable conditions.
205.16 M-2 Heavy Industrial District.
The M-2 District is established to provide for manufacturing, assembling, storage and distribution ac-tivities that are generally high intensity, but whose operations and processes are not public nuisances and are not dangerous to health, safety, or the general welfare. The M-2 District shall be located on or have ready access to a major thoroughfare or state highway.
205.17 RD Research and Development District.
The purpose of the RD District is to provide an environment for research, education, office and light industrial uses, all of a non-nuisance type. The district shall be comprised of lands that are located on or have ready access to a major thoroughfare.
205.18 PUD Planned Unit Development District.
(a) Purpose and Intent of the PUD Zoning District.
The intent of the PUD District is to provide accommodate relatively large scale, planned develop-ments that allow a mix of uses, master planned single use developments, and higher residential
Section 206 Area Regulations in Each Zoning District. City of Duluth UDC
2-22
densities than allowed in other zoning districts and which incorporate innovative concepts of ef-ficiency in land use, public services delivery, energy conservation, and environmental preserva-tion.
(b) Area Regulations in the PUD District.
Area regulations are established by a Master Concept Plan that is approved by City Council; see Article 5.
(c) Uses Allowed in the PUD Zoning District.
Uses are established by a Master Concept Plan that is approved by City Council; see Article 5.
(d) Special Provisions Applicable to the PUD Zoning District.
See Article 5.
205.19 DOD Downtown Overlay District.
(a) Purpose and Intent of the DOD Overlay District.
The purpose of the DOD Overlay District is to encourage new development and redevelopment adjacent to the Duluth Central Business District that follows the compact development pattern, architectural styles and mix of uses found in the CBD. The DOD is intended to allow the downtown area to extend across Buford Highway, consistent with the intent of the Buford Highway Corridor Redevelopment Plan by supplementing the base zoning regulations within the overlay district with tailored building and design standards.
(b) Architectural and Design Standards.
All new construction, redevelopment and alterations shall comply with Section 205.14(d), with the exception that off-street parking requirements shall comply with Section 205.19(c).
(c) Parking.
Off-street parking requirements shall use the parking ratios that are recommended in the Down-town Duluth Master Plan, with final approval by the Planning and Development Director.
Section 206. Area Regulations in Each Zoning District.
206.01 Chart of Area Regulations.
(a) This Section lists, by the following matrix chart (
(b) Table 2-B), area regulations in each of the zoning districts. Regulations include, but are not limited to: the minimum area and width, the maximum building height, and the minimum setbacks for front, side and rear yards in each of the zoning districts.
(c) Within the following table a dash --- indicates no development standard applies for the specified category.
City of Duluth UDC Section 206 Area Regulations in Each Zoning District.
2-23
Table 2-B: Area Regulations by Zoning District Zoning District Lot size Density Lot Coverage Lot Frontage (minimum, feet) Lot Width Front Setback Side Setback Rear Setback Height (minimum, square feet)(8) (maximum, dwelling units per gross acre) (maximum, percent) (minimum, feet) (minimum, feet) (minimum, feet) (minimum, feet) (feet) RA-200 40,000
3
---
40 200 75, local streets 85, collector street or major thoroughfare 15, interior side 35, exterior side 40 50 R-100 18,000 with sewage 25,000 with septic tank
3
---
40 100 50 10, interior side 25, exterior side 40 50 R-75 12,000
3
---
40 75 50 10, interior side 20, exterior side 40 50 RM 18,000
15 60% 40 100 50 20(1) 40(1) 50 MH 5,000 6
---
40
---
---
---
---
--- HRD 25,000
3
---
40
---
50
10, interior side
25, exterior side
40
50 C-1 ---
---
---
40
--- 10 10(2) 15(2) 50 C-2 ---
---
---
40
--- 10 10(2) 15(2) 50 HC-Auto ---
---
---
40
--- 10 10(2) 15(2) 50 HC-Retail ---
---
---
40
--- 10 10(2) 15(2) 50 O-I ---
---
---
40
--- 10, from right-of -way 10(3) 15(3) 50 O-N ---
---
35%
40
--- 10, from right away 20(4) 20(4) 34 M-1 43,560
---
---
40
100 50, from right-of-way 20(5) 15(6) 50 M-2 43,560
---
---
40
100 50, from right-of-way 20(5) 15(6) 50 PUD
Established by Master Concept Plan Approved by City Council (see Article 5)
Section 206 Area Regulations in Each Zoning District. City of Duluth UDC
2-24
Table 2-B: Area Regulations by Zoning District Zoning District Lot size Density Lot Coverage Lot Frontage (minimum, feet) Lot Width Front Setback Side Setback Rear Setback Height (minimum, square feet)(8) (maximum, dwelling units per gross acre) (maximum, percent) (minimum, feet) (minimum, feet) (minimum, feet) (minimum, feet) (feet) CBD (Residential uses) ---(9) (
18
---(9)
---(9)
---(9) Single-family: Detached - 12 Attached - 12 Single-family: De-tached - 5 (7) Attached- 5 (7) Single-family: Detached - 15 Attached - 15 4 stories Townhouse: 5(9) Townhouse: 10 End/corner unit: ---(9) Townhouse: 12(9) Apartment: 10 Apartment: Apartment: 2 stories - 15 3 stories or more - 25 2 stories - 20 3 stories or more - 40 CBD (Commer-cial uses) ---
---
---
---
--- --- --- --- 15,000 sq. ft. or less: 25 (or 2 stories) Greater than 15,000 sq. ft.: 4 stories RD 43,560
---
60%
40
50 15 10 15 35
(1) Exception: When a multi-family structure abuts a single-family or residential-agricultural district, in which case, 50 feet - one story 90 - two story.
(2) Exception: When a commercial structure abuts a single-family or residential agricultural district, in which case, 70 feet  one story structure, 120 feet  two or more story structure.
(3) Exception: When an office or institutional structure abuts a single-family or residential agricultural district, in which case, 25 feet  one story structure, 75 feet  two or more story structure
(4) Exception: When an office or institutional structure abuts a single-family or residential agricultural district, in which case, 25 feet  one story structure, 40 feet  two or more story structure
(5) Exception: When an institutional structure abuts a single-family or residential agricultural district, in which case, 90 feet  one story structure, 120 feet  two or more story structure
(6) Exception: When an institutional structure abuts a single-family or residential agricultural district, in which case, 90 feet  one story structure, 120 feet  two or more story structure. If abutting a railroad track, the minimum real setback shall be zero.
(7) Zero between attached units and 10 feet side setback for corner lots.
(8) Exception: Minimum lot sizes on properties utilizing septic systems will be determined by the Gwinnett County Health Department.
(9) Exception: For residential development in the CBD zoning district, see Subsection 205.14, CBD, Central Business District, Paragraph (e), Architectural and Design Guidelines, Residential Uses for
dimensional requirements.
City of Duluth UDC Section 207 Uses Allowed in Each Zoning District.
2-25
Section 207. Uses Allowed in Each Zoning District.
This Section identifies the uses that are allowed by right or by Special Use approval in each of the zoning districts, and uses to which certain restrictions apply.
(a) In specific areas covered by an overlay district, the overlay district imposes restrictions on uses not noted on the following use tables. The specifics of each overlay district under this Article must be consulted as applicable to a particular property or area.
(b) In Planned Unit Developments (PUDs), uses that are allowed are established through approval of the planned development. See the Subdivisions and Planned Developments Article of this Devel-opment Code for details.
207.02 Chart of Uses.
This Section lists by the following matrix chart (Table 2-C: Principal Uses Allowed by Zoning District) the uses allowed by right and by Special Use approval in each zoning district. A listed allowed use is one that is allowed in the zone without any qualifications, except wherever such qualifications may be indicated in this Development Code. A listed special use is one that may be granted only when certain conditions are met. In the following chart an A means that the use is automatically allowed in the zoning district listed by the abbreviation at the top of the column. An S means that the use is allowed only by special use approval. A blank space indicates that the use is not allowed under any circum-stances.
207.03 Allowed Principal, Accessory and Temporary Uses.
(a) A Principal Use is the specific, primary purpose for which land or a building is used.
(b) An Accessory Use is a use that is permitted on a property in conjunction with a principal use. An accessory use is incidental to the principal use and would not exist independent of the principal use.
(c) A Temporary Use is a use having a specific duration or the end of which is related to a specific action, usually lasting for only a few days or months at a time.
(d) Principal uses that are allowed by right or allowed only by Special Use approval in each zoning district are shown on the following Table 2-C. Accessory uses and temporary uses that are allowed in conjunction with a principal use are shown on Table 2-D.
207.04 Special Uses.
Principal and accessory uses that are Special Uses may be granted subject to Special Use approval procedures as set forth in the Procedures and Permits Article of this Code.
207.05 Restrictions on Particular Uses.
Restrictions that apply to certain principal uses and to certain zoning districts are referenced on Table 2-C and on Table 2-D, and are contained in Article 3. The restrictions also apply to Special Uses unless specifically waived or modified as a stipulation of Special Use approval. For those uses that have spe-cific restrictions associated with them, a reference is given on the two tables to the pertinent Section in Article 3. The provisions of Division I of Article 3 that apply to development in general, however, are not indicated in either of the two tables.
207.06 Prohibited Uses.
(a) Any principal use not shown on the following on Table 2-C as allowed in a zoning district, whether by right or with approval as a Special Use, is specifically prohibited.
Section 207 Uses Allowed in Each Zoning District.
City of Duluth UDC
2-26
(b) Any accessory use not shown on the following
(c) Table 2-B as allowed in a zoning district, whether by right or with approval as a Special Use, is specifically prohibited.
207.07 Interpretation of Uses.
Some degree of interpretation will occasionally be required. It is not possible to list each and every variation or name of a given use.
(a) In addition to other generally accepted references and resources, the North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS), published by the U.S. Department of Commerce (2012 edition), may be referred to in order to interpret the definition of uses listed on Table 2-C and Table 2-D and to identify similar uses that may be allowed along with each listed use. The NAICS classification num-ber is shown on the tables for each applicable use for reference and interpretation only; the NAICS is not adopted as part of this Code.
(b) The NAICS assigns classification numbers to businesses and industries based on the primary busi-ness activity in which the company is engaged. While business activity usually corresponds to land use type, and therefore can be easily assigned to appropriate zoning districts, there are excep-tions. Some businesses may be primarily engaged in a certain industrysuch as telecommunica-tions, for instance, like AT&Tbut individual locations host notably different activities. For a com-pany like AT&T, for instance, different facilities may include retail stores for telephones, offices for administrative functions, satellite and exchange switching stations, and repair and installation staging lots where heavy equipment vehicles, telephone poles, wire spools and materials are stored. As a result, interpretation is occasionally needed for an individual use, regardless of the business activity in which the parent company is engaged.
(1) If no NAICS classification number is shown on the table, there is no corresponding category to the land use listed. The use may be residential in nature (there are no NAICS categories for residences) or may be a land use activity not generally recognized as a business activity or industry type.
(2) In all cases of uncertainty, the determination of whether or not a particular use is allowed in a particular zoning district shall reflect the purpose of the zoning district as stated in this Article, both the common and dictionary definitions of the use, and the array of listed uses that are allowed in the district as to their character and intensity.
Table 2-C and Table 2-D are organized under the following land use categories:
Table 2-C organizes the various principal uses under the following headings:
? Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing
? Residential Uses
? Administrative and Professional Offices
? Commercial Services
? Arts, Entertainment and Recreation
? Retail Trade
? Manufacturing, Wholesaling and Warehousing
? Transportation, Communications and Utilities
? Public and Institutional Uses
Table 2-D presents the various accessory uses and temporary uses allowed in each zoning district.
Section 207 Uses Allowed in Each Zoning District. City of Duluth UDC
2-27
Table 2-C: Principal Uses Allowed by Zoning District
A
Use is allowed by right in the zoning district indicated.
S
Use is allowed in the district if approved as a Special Use.
A/S
Use is allowed by right unless approval as a Special Use is required in Article 3.
NAICS 2012 PRINCIPAL USES RA-200 R-100 R-75 RM MH HRD CBD C-1 C-2 HC-Retail HC-Auto O-I O-N M-1 M-2 RD See Also Article 3 For Parking, See Table 4-B:
Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing
111
Agriculture, Forestry and Animal production
A
Sec. 310
Sec. 329
Sec. 323
b.1
c.1
1114
Greenhouse, Nursery and Floriculture Produc-tion
A
A
A
A
c.2.
Residential Uses
Single-Family Detached: Site-Built or Modular Home
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
Sec. 304
a.1.
Single-Family Detached: Manufactured Home
S
S
S
S
A
Sec. 331
a.1.
Single-Family Attached: Townhomes or
Condominiums
A
A
Sec. 304
a.3.
Two-Family Dwelling: Duplex
A
A
A
A
a.2.
Three-Family Dwelling: Triplex
A
a.4.
Four-Family Dwelling: Quadruplex
A
a.4.
Multi-Family: Apartments
A
A
Sec. 305
a.4.
Manufactured Home Park
A
Sec. 330
a.1.
7213
Rooming and Boarding Houses
A
S
S
a.7
Upper Floor Residential Lofts in Mixed-Use Build-ing
A
---
623
Nursing and Residential Care Facilities:
a.6.
6231
Nursing Care Facilities
S
A
a.6.
6232
Residential Mental Retardation, Mental Health and Substance Abuse Facilities
S
S
S
S
d.1.
623311
Continuing Care Retirement Community with on-site nursing care facilities
S
S
S
Sec. 318
a.6
623312
Assisted-Living Facilities and Other Homes for the Elderly without on-site nursing care facilities
A
a.5.
Section 207 Uses Allowed in Each Zoning District. City of Duluth UDC
2-28
Table 2-C: Principal Uses Allowed by Zoning District
A
Use is allowed by right in the zoning district indicated.
S
Use is allowed in the district if approved as a Special Use.
A/S
Use is allowed by right unless approval as a Special Use is required in Article 3.
NAICS 2012 PRINCIPAL USES RA-200 R-100 R-75 RM MH HRD CBD C-1 C-2 HC-Retail HC-Auto O-I O-N M-1 M-2 RD See Also Article 3 For Parking, See Table 4-B:
6239
Personal Care Homes, Family (2 to 6 under care)
S
S
S
S
S
A
S
Sec. 336
a.6
6239
Personal Care Homes, Group (up to 15 un-der care)
A
A
S
S
S
Sec. 336
a.6.
6239
Personal Care Homes, Congregate (more than 15 under care)
A
S
S
Sec. 336
a.6.
Administrative, Financial and Professional Offices
55
Corporate Management Offices
A/S
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
Sec. 307
b.1.
51
Publishing and Information Technology
A/S
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
Sec. 307
b.1.
52
Financial, Credit and Insurance
A/S
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
Sec. 307
b.1.
53
Real Estate Office
A/S
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
Sec. 307
b.1.
54
Professional, Scientific and Technical Services
A/S
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
Sec. 307
b.1.
55
Management of Companies
A/S
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
Sec. 307
b.1.
52239
Mortgage Servicing and Other Activities Re-lated to Credit Intermediation (includes check cashing, money orders, payday lending ser-vices)
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
b.2.
54194
Veterinary Clinics, including Animal Hospi-tals
S
S
A
A
A
A
Sec. 342
b.3.
Medical Offices:
621
Medical Offices
A/S
A
A
A
A
A
A
Sec. 307
b.3.
6215
Medical and Diagnostic Laboratories
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
b.3.
Call Centers:
4541
Electronic Shopping and Mail-Order Houses
A
A
A
A
A
A
b.1.
4543
Direct Selling Establishments, except Fuel Dealers (see under Manufacturing, Whole-saling and Warehousing)
A/S
A
A
A
A
A
A
Sec. 307
b.1.
Commercial Services
Finance, Insurance and Real Estate Services:
b.1.
5221
Banks, Credit Unions and Savings Institu-tions, no drive-in window
A/S
A
A
A
A
A
Sec. 317
b.2.
City of Duluth UDC Section 207 Uses Allowed in Each Zoning District.
2-29
Table 2-C: Principal Uses Allowed by Zoning District
A
Use is allowed by right in the zoning district indicated.
S
Use is allowed in the district if approved as a Special Use.
A/S
Use is allowed by right unless approval as a Special Use is required in Article 3.
NAICS 2012 PRINCIPAL USES RA-200 R-100 R-75 RM MH HRD CBD C-1 C-2 HC-Retail HC-Auto O-I O-N M-1 M-2 RD See Also Article 3 For Parking, See Table 4-B:
5221
Banks, Credit Unions and Savings Institu-tions, with drive-in window
A
A
S
A
A
b.2.
Day Care Services:
6244
Day Care Center (more than 18 persons in care)
S
A
A
S
S
Sec. 319
b.5.
6244
Group Day Care Home (18 or fewer per-sons in care)
S
Sec. 319
b.5.
Transient Lodging:
7211
Hotels, not Extended Stay
A
A
A
A
S
S
S
Sec. 327
a.8.
7211
Hotels, Extended Stay
S
A
A
S
S
S
Sec. 327
a.8.
721191
Bed-and-Breakfast Inns
S
a.7.
721214
Fishing Camps
A
- -
8111
Automotive Repair and Maintenance, except for Automotive Car Washes and Auto Emissions Testing
S
A
A
A
Sec. 313
b.7.
811192
Automotive Car Washes
S
S
S
A
Sec. 312
b.7.
811198
Auto Emissions Testing
S
A
A
A
b.7.
Other Repair and Maintenance Services:
8112
Electronic and Precision Equipment Repair and Maintenance
A
A
A
A
b.18.
8113
Commercial and Industrial Machinery and Equipment Repair and Maintenance (ex-cept Automotive and Electronic Repairs, Tractor Repairs and Welding Shops)
S
S
S
A
A
b.22.
81131
Tractor and Other Farm Equipment Repairs and Maintenance (Includes Welding Shop)
S
A
A
b.22.
811411
Home and Garden Equipment Repair and Maintenance
A
A
A
b.22.
811412
Home Appliance Repair and Maintenance
A
A
A
b.23.
81142
Reupholstery and Furniture Repair and Maintenance
A
A
A
A
A
b.23.
81143
Shoes and Leather Goods Repair and Maintenance
A
A
A
A
b.23.
Section 207 Uses Allowed in Each Zoning District. City of Duluth UDC
2-30
Table 2-C: Principal Uses Allowed by Zoning District
A
Use is allowed by right in the zoning district indicated.
S
Use is allowed in the district if approved as a Special Use.
A/S
Use is allowed by right unless approval as a Special Use is required in Article 3.
NAICS 2012 PRINCIPAL USES RA-200 R-100 R-75 RM MH HRD CBD C-1 C-2 HC-Retail HC-Auto O-I O-N M-1 M-2 RD See Also Article 3 For Parking, See Table 4-B:
81149
Other Personal and Household Goods Re-pair and Maintenance, such as jewelry, musical instruments, watch and clock re-pair, and bicycle repair
A
A
A
A
b.23.
8121
Personal Care Services:
81211
Barber Shops and Beauty Salons
A/S
A
A
A
A
S
Sec. 314
Sec. 317
b.23.
812113
Nail Salons
A/S
A
A
A
A
Sec. 317
b.23.
812191
Diet and Weight Reducing Centers
A
A
A
A
b.23.
812199
Massage Therapy Establishment, Saunas
A
Sec. 332
b.23.
812199
Tanning Salons
A
A
A
A
b.23.
812199
Tattoo and Body Piercing Studios
A
Sec. 339
b.23.
8123
Dry-Cleaning and Laundry Services:
81231
Coin-Operated Laundries
A
A
A
b.17.
81232
Dry-Cleaning and Laundry Services (ex-cept Coin-Operated)
A
A
A
A
Sec. 320
b.17.
812331
Linen and Uniform Supply; Industrial Laun-derers
A
A
b.17.
Health Related Services:
6216
Home Health Care Services
A
A
b.1.
62191
Ambulance Services
A
b.1.
621991
Blood and Organ Banks
A
b.1.
Other Personal Services:
81221
Funeral Homes
A
A
A
A
S
S
b.4.
81291
Pet Care, such as Grooming and Training (not including Veterinary Services and Pet Boarding Kennels)
A
A
A
b.23.
81291
Pet Boarding Kennel, without Outdoor Runs
A
A
Sec. 329
b.23.
81291
Pet Boarding Kennel, with Outdoor Runs
S
Sec. 329
b.23.
City of Duluth UDC Section 207 Uses Allowed in Each Zoning District.
2-31
Table 2-C: Principal Uses Allowed by Zoning District
A
Use is allowed by right in the zoning district indicated.
S
Use is allowed in the district if approved as a Special Use.
A/S
Use is allowed by right unless approval as a Special Use is required in Article 3.
NAICS 2012 PRINCIPAL USES RA-200 R-100 R-75 RM MH HRD CBD C-1 C-2 HC-Retail HC-Auto O-I O-N M-1 M-2 RD See Also Article 3 For Parking, See Table 4-B:
81293
Parking Lots and Garages
A
A
A
- -
81299
Bail Bonding or Bondsperson Services
S
b.23.
532
Rental and Leasing Services:
53211
Passenger Car Rental and Leasing
A
b.8.
53212
Truck, Utility Trailer and RV (Recreational Vehicle) Rental and Leasing
A
A
b.8.
5322
Consumer Goods Rental
A
A
A
Refer to Table 4-B
53241
Construction, Transportation, Mining and Forestry Machinery and Equipment Rental and Leasing
A
A
b.19.
5614
Business Support Services:
561422
Telemarketing Bureaus
A
A
b.1.
56143
Business Service Centers (including photo-copying shops, blueprinting shops, mailbox rental, etc.)
A
A
A
A
b.21.
Other Business Services:
323111
Commercial Printing Services, with or without Photo-Copying Services (except Screen and Books)
A
A
A
A
c.5.
5182
Data Processing, Hosting and Related Ser-vices
A
A
c.3.
51911
News Syndicates
A
A
b.1.
54138
Testing Laboratories
A
A
A
c.5.
5415
Computer Systems Design and Related Services
A/S
Sec. 317
b.1.
72232
Caterers except Special Event Facilities
A
A
A
c.1.
72232
Special Event Facilities
S
S
S
d.7.
541921
Photography Studios, Portrait
A/S
A
A
A
A
Sec. 317
b.1.
54193
Translation and Interpretation Services
A/S
S
A
Sec. 317
b.1.
56191
Packaging and Labeling Services
A
A
c.5.
Section 207 Uses Allowed in Each Zoning District. City of Duluth UDC
2-32
Table 2-C: Principal Uses Allowed by Zoning District
A
Use is allowed by right in the zoning district indicated.
S
Use is allowed in the district if approved as a Special Use.
A/S
Use is allowed by right unless approval as a Special Use is required in Article 3.
NAICS 2012 PRINCIPAL USES RA-200 R-100 R-75 RM MH HRD CBD C-1 C-2 HC-Retail HC-Auto O-I O-N M-1 M-2 RD See Also Article 3 For Parking, See Table 4-B:
5616
Investigation and Security Services:
561611
Investigation Services
A/S
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
Sec. 317
b.1.
561612
Security Guards and Patrol Services
A
A
b.1.
561613
Armored Car Services
A
A
b.1.
561621
Security Systems Services, except Lock-smiths
A
A
b.19.
561622
Locksmiths
A
A
A
A
A
b.19.
5617
Services to Buildings and Dwellings
A
A
A
A
A
b.1.
561710
Exterminating and Pest Control Services
A
A
A
A
A
b.1.
561720
Janitorial Services
A
A
A
A
A
b.1.
561730
Landscaping Services
A
A
A
A
A
b.1.
561740
Carpet and Upholstery Cleaning Services
A
A
A
A
A
b.1.
Construction Services:
2382
Construction Contractors, Builders and De-velopers, with outdoor storage
S
S
S
S
A
A
b.22.
23835
Carpentry Shop, Woodworking
S
S
S
A
A
c.5.
Job Training Services:
6114
Private Business, Technical and Cosmetol-ogy Schools and Computer and Manage-ment Training
A
S
S
A
d.4.
b.23
6116
Private Schools: Personal Enrichment:
61161
Performing Arts Studios (Art, Drama, Mu-sic and Dance Studios)
A/S
A
A
A
A
A
A
S
S
A
Sec. 317
b.13.
61162
Sports and Recreation Instruction
A
A
A
A
S
S
A
b.13.
61163
Language Schools
S
A
S
S
A
d.4.
611691
Exam Preparation and Tutoring
A
S
S
A
S
S
A
d.4.
611699
Yoga, Pilates and similar Studios
A/S
A
A
A
A
Sec. 317
b.13.
611692
Automobile Driving Schools
A
A
S
S
A
d.4.
City of Duluth UDC Section 207 Uses Allowed in Each Zoning District.
2-33
Table 2-C: Principal Uses Allowed by Zoning District
A
Use is allowed by right in the zoning district indicated.
S
Use is allowed in the district if approved as a Special Use.
A/S
Use is allowed by right unless approval as a Special Use is required in Article 3.
NAICS 2012 PRINCIPAL USES RA-200 R-100 R-75 RM MH HRD CBD C-1 C-2 HC-Retail HC-Auto O-I O-N M-1 M-2 RD See Also Article 3 For Parking, See Table 4-B:
6117
Educational Counseling, Testing and Other Sup-port Services
A
A
A
A
S
S
A
b.23.
Arts, Entertainment and Recreation
51912
Libraries and Archives
A/S
Sec. 311
d.7.
7111
Performing Arts Theater: Drama, Dance, Music, Comedy (except Adult Entertainment)
A/S
A
S
S
Sec. 311
d.2.
7111
Adult Entertainment
A
A
Sec. 308
b.12.
7115
Artist's Studios (includes Galleries), except Taxi-dermists
A/S
A
A
Sec. 311
b.23.
71151
Taxidermists
A
A
A
b.1.
712
Museums, Commercial Historical Sites, and Simi-lar Institutions
A/S
A
A
A
S
S
Sec. 311
d.7.
512131
Motion Picture Theaters (except Drive-Ins)
A
A
A
S
S
b.6.
512132
Motion Picture Theaters, Drive-In
A
S
S
- -
7139
Amusement and Recreation Uses:
71312
Amusement Arcades
A
A
A
b.12.
71399
Archery or Shooting Ranges, Indoor
A
S
S
b.13.
71394
Batting Cages
A
b.13.
71399
Billiard and Pool Halls
A
A
b.12.
71395
Bowling Centers
A
S
S
b.11.
71394
Fitness Centers, Health Clubs
S
A
A
A
A
b.13.
71391
Golf Course, with or without a Country Club
A
b.13.
71399
Golf Driving Ranges
A
A
S
S
b.13.
71399
Horse Riding Stables
A
Sec. 326
b.12.
71394
Ice or Roller Skating Rink
A
S
S
b.12.
71399
Miniature Golf
A
S
S
b.12.
71394
Paintball Competition Courses
A
S
S
b.12.
Section 207 Uses Allowed in Each Zoning District. City of Duluth UDC
2-34
Table 2-C: Principal Uses Allowed by Zoning District
A
Use is allowed by right in the zoning district indicated.
S
Use is allowed in the district if approved as a Special Use.
A/S
Use is allowed by right unless approval as a Special Use is required in Article 3.
NAICS 2012 PRINCIPAL USES RA-200 R-100 R-75 RM MH HRD CBD C-1 C-2 HC-Retail HC-Auto O-I O-N M-1 M-2 RD See Also Article 3 For Parking, See Table 4-B:
71399
Recreational Day Camps
S
b.12.
71394
Water Slides and Wave Pools
A
S
S
b.13.
71399
Recreation Centers, including Non-Profit (e.g. YMCA, Senior Center or Area-wide Recreation Center) and For Profit (e.g. Private Playgrounds, Tennis, Community Swimming Pools or Other Recreation Amenities)
A
A
A
A
S
S
b.13.
Retail Trade
441
Motor Vehicle and Parts Dealers:
4411
All Motor Vehicle Dealers
A
Sec. 334
b.8.
4413
Automotive Parts, Accessories, and Tire Stores
A
S
A
Sec. 334
Sec. 313
b.8.
442
Furniture and Home Appliance Stores
A
A
A
A
b.18.
443
Electronics and Appliance Stores
A
A
A
A
b.21.
4441
Building Material and Supplies Dealers:
44411
Home Centers, no outdoor storage
A
A
A
b.20.
44411
Home Centers, with outdoor storage
A
Sec. 348
b.20.
44412
Paint and Wallpaper Stores
A
A
A
b.19.
44413
Hardware Stores
A
A
A
A
b.19.
44419
Lumber Yards
A
A
Sec. 348
b.22.
44419
Electrical, Heating or Plumbing Stores, no outdoor storage
A
A
A
b.22.
44419
Electrical, Heating or Plumbing Supply Stores, with outdoor storage
S
S
S
A
A
Sec. 348
b.22.
44419
Wood or Ceramic Tile Flooring Stores
S
S
S
Sec. 348
b.20.
44419
Log Home Sales Lots
S
S
S
Sec. 348
b.22.
44419
Other Building Material Dealers not listed above
A
A
Sec. 348
b.22.
City of Duluth UDC Section 207 Uses Allowed in Each Zoning District.
2-35
Table 2-C: Principal Uses Allowed by Zoning District
A
Use is allowed by right in the zoning district indicated.
S
Use is allowed in the district if approved as a Special Use.
A/S
Use is allowed by right unless approval as a Special Use is required in Article 3.
NAICS 2012 PRINCIPAL USES RA-200 R-100 R-75 RM MH HRD CBD C-1 C-2 HC-Retail HC-Auto O-I O-N M-1 M-2 RD See Also Article 3 For Parking, See Table 4-B:
4442
Lawn and Garden Equipment and Supplies Stores:
44421
Lawn and Garden Equipment and Supplies Stores
A
A
A
b.20
445
Food and Beverage Stores:
44511
Supermarkets and Other Grocery (except Convenience) Stores
A
A
A
A
Sec. 309
b.15.
44512
Convenience Food Stores with fuel pumps (excluding automated car wash)
A
A
S
A
Sec. 309
Sec. 325
b.7.
44512
Convenience Food Stores with fuel pumps (including automated car wash)
S
S
A
Sec. 309
Sec. 312
Sec. 325
b.7.
44512
Convenience Food Stores without fuel pumps
A
A
S
A
Sec. 309
b.23.
4452
Specialty Food Stores, including Meat, Fish, Fruit and Vegetable Markets, Candy Stores
A/S
A
A
A
A
Sec. 309
Sec. 338
b.23.
4453
Beer, Wine and Liquor Stores
A/S
A
A
A
Sec. 309
Sec. 338
b.23.
311811
Retail Bakeries and Pastry Shops
A/S
A
A
A
A
Sec. 338
b.23.
446
Health and Personal Care Stores:
4461
Health and Personal Care Stores
A/S
A
A
A
A
Sec. 338
b.16
b.23.
448
Clothing and Clothing Accessories Stores:
4481
Clothing Stores
A/S
A
A
A
Sec. 338
b.23.
4482
Shoe Stores
A/S
A
A
A
Sec. 338
b.23.
44831
Jewelry Stores
A/S
A
A
A
Sec. 338
b.23.
44832
Luggage and Leather Goods Stores
A
A
A
b.23.
451
Sporting Goods, Hobby, Book and Music Stores
A/S
A
A
A
A
Sec. 338
b.23.
Section 207 Uses Allowed in Each Zoning District. City of Duluth UDC
2-36
Table 2-C: Principal Uses Allowed by Zoning District
A
Use is allowed by right in the zoning district indicated.
S
Use is allowed in the district if approved as a Special Use.
A/S
Use is allowed by right unless approval as a Special Use is required in Article 3.
NAICS 2012 PRINCIPAL USES RA-200 R-100 R-75 RM MH HRD CBD C-1 C-2 HC-Retail HC-Auto O-I O-N M-1 M-2 RD See Also Article 3 For Parking, See Table 4-B:
452
General Merchandise and Department Stores, except Warehouse Clubs and Warehouse Super-centers
A
A
A
S
S
b.14.
45291
Warehouse Clubs and Warehouse Super-centers
S
S
S
S
S
Sec. 309
b.14.
453
Miscellaneous Store Retailers:
b.23.
4531
Florists
A/S
A
A
A
A
S
Sec. 322
Sec. 338
45321
Office Supplies Stores
A
A
A
b.23.
45321
Stationery Stores
A/S
A
A
A
A
S
Sec. 338
b.21.
45322
Gift, Novelty and Souvenir Stores
A/S
A
A
A
A
S
Sec. 338
b.23.
4533
Antiques Shop
A/S
A
A
A
Sec. 338
b.23.
4533
Used Books, Second-Hand Clothing, Indoor Flea Markets and Other Used Merchandise Stores (not including Pawnshops or An-tique Shops)
A
A
A
b.23.
4533
Pawnshop
S
S
S
Sec. 335
b.23
45391
Pet and Pet Supply Stores
A
A
A
b.23.
45392
Art Dealers
A/S
A
A
A
Sec. 338
b.23.
45393
Manufactured Home Dealers
S
S
S
b.8.
453991
Cigar, Tobacco and Other Smokers Supply Stores
S
b.23.
453998
Swimming Pool and Pool Supply Stores, no outdoor storage
A
A
A
S
S
b.23.
453998
Swimming Pool and Pool Supply Stores, with outdoor storage
S
S
S
Sec. 348
b.8.
453998
Permanent Fireworks Shop
A
A
A
A
A
722
Food Services and Drinking Places:
722511
Restaurants, Full-Service
A/S
A
A
A
Sec. 309
b.9.
722511
Brewpubs
A/S
A
A
A
Sec. 309
b.9.
City of Duluth UDC Section 207 Uses Allowed in Each Zoning District.
2-37
Table 2-C: Principal Uses Allowed by Zoning District
A
Use is allowed by right in the zoning district indicated.
S
Use is allowed in the district if approved as a Special Use.
A/S
Use is allowed by right unless approval as a Special Use is required in Article 3.
NAICS 2012 PRINCIPAL USES RA-200 R-100 R-75 RM MH HRD CBD C-1 C-2 HC-Retail HC-Auto O-I O-N M-1 M-2 RD See Also Article 3 For Parking, See Table 4-B:
722513
Restaurants, Limited-Service, including Fast Food and Take-Out, with drive-through windows
A
S
A
b.10.
722513
Restaurants, Limited-Service, including Fast Food and Take-Out, without drive-through windows.
A/S
A
A
A
Sec. 309
b.10.
722513
Restaurants, Drive-In
A
S
A
b.10.
722514
Cafeterias, Grill Buffets and Buffets
A/S
A
A
A
Sec. 338
b.9.
722213
Specialty Snack Shops and Non-Alcoholic Beverage Bars, including Coffee Shops, Donut Shops, Ice Cream Shops and Bagel Shops
A/S
A
A
A
A
Sec. 338
b.10.
7224
Bars, Taverns and Other Drinking Places (Alcoholic Beverages)
A/S
A
Sec. 309
Sec. 338
b.10.
722
Mobile Kitchens
S
S
S
S
S
Sec. 350
Manufacturing, Wholesaling and Warehousing
Sec. 348
311
Food Manufacturing, except Animal Slaughtering and Retail Bakeries (Retail Bakers are addressed under Retail Trade)
A
A
c.5.
31211
Beverage Product (non-alcoholic) Manufacturing
A
A
c.5.
31212
Brewery
A/S
S
S
S
A
A
Sec. 309
Sec. 338
c.5.
31213
Winery
A/S
A
A
Sec. 309
Sec. 338
c.5.
31214
Distillery
A
A
Sec. 309
c.5.
3122
Tobacco Product Manufacturing
A
A
c.5.
312113
Ice Manufacturing
A
A
c.5.
313
Textile Mills
A
A
c.5.
Section 207 Uses Allowed in Each Zoning District. City of Duluth UDC
2-38
Table 2-C: Principal Uses Allowed by Zoning District
A
Use is allowed by right in the zoning district indicated.
S
Use is allowed in the district if approved as a Special Use.
A/S
Use is allowed by right unless approval as a Special Use is required in Article 3.
NAICS 2012 PRINCIPAL USES RA-200 R-100 R-75 RM MH HRD CBD C-1 C-2 HC-Retail HC-Auto O-I O-N M-1 M-2 RD See Also Article 3 For Parking, See Table 4-B:
314
Textile Product Mills
A
A
c.5.
315
Apparel Manufacturing, except Tailors and Dressmakers
A
A
c.5.
31521
Tailors and Dressmakers
A/S
A
A
A
Sec. 338
b.23.
316
Leather and Allied Product Manufacturing
A
A
c.5.
321
Wood Product Manufacturing, except Sawmills and Wood Preservation
A
A
c.5.
321113
Sawmills with Storage Lots
S
S
S
A
A
c.5.
321999
Mulching Operation
S
S
S
c.5.
322
Paper Manufacturing
S
S
c.5.
323
Printing and Related Support Activities, except Photocopying and Duplicating Services (instant printing)
A
A
c.5.
324
Petroleum and Coal Products Manufacturing, ex-cept Petroleum Refining and Asphalt Paving, Roofing, and Saturated Materials Manufacturing
S
S
c.5.
32411
Petroleum Refining
S
S
c.5.
32412
Asphalt Paving, Roofing, and Saturated Materials Manufacturing
A
c.5.
325314
Composting Operation
S
S
S
c.5.
3254
Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manufacturing
S
S
c.5.
32592
Explosives Manufacturing
S
S
c.5.
3261
Plastics Product Manufacturing
S
S
c.5.
3262
Rubber Product Manufacturing
S
S
c.5.
327
Concrete, Clay, Stone, Glass and other Nonmet-allic Mineral Product Manufacturing
A
c.5.
331
Primary Metal Manufacturing
A
c.5.
332
Fabricated Metal Products Manufacturing
A
A
c.5.
City of Duluth UDC Section 207 Uses Allowed in Each Zoning District.
2-39
Table 2-C: Principal Uses Allowed by Zoning District
A
Use is allowed by right in the zoning district indicated.
S
Use is allowed in the district if approved as a Special Use.
A/S
Use is allowed by right unless approval as a Special Use is required in Article 3.
NAICS 2012 PRINCIPAL USES RA-200 R-100 R-75 RM MH HRD CBD C-1 C-2 HC-Retail HC-Auto O-I O-N M-1 M-2 RD See Also Article 3 For Parking, See Table 4-B:
334
Computer and Electronic Product Manufacturing
A
A
c.5.
335
Electrical Equipment, Appliance and Component Manufacturing
A
A
c.5.
336
Motor Vehicle and Other Transportation Equip-ment Manufacturing
A
A
c.5.
337
Furniture and Related Product Manufacturing
A
A
c.5.
339
Miscellaneous Manufacturing:
33911
Medical Equipment and Supplies Manufac-turing, except Dental Laboratories
A
A
A
c.5.
339116
Dental Laboratories
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
c.5.
33991
Jewelry and Silverware Manufacturing
A
A
c.5.
33992
Sporting and Athletic Goods Manufacturing
A
A
c.5.
33993
Doll, Toy, and Game Manufacturing
A
A
c.5.
33994
Office Supplies (except Paper) Manufactur-ing
A
A
c.5.
33995
Sign Manufacturing
A
A
c.5.
339991
Gasket, Packing, and Sealing Device Man-ufacturing
A
A
c.5.
339992
Musical Instrument Manufacturing
A/S
A
A
Sec. 332
c.5.
339993
Fastener, Button, Needle, and Pin Manu-facturing
A
A
c.5.
339994
Broom, Brush, and Mop Manufacturing
A
A
c.5.
339995
Burial Casket Manufacturing
A
A
c.5.
33999
Other Miscellaneous Manufacturing not listed above
A
A
c.5.
42
Wholesale Trade:
42
Wholesale Trade with Customer Show-rooms, no Outdoor Storage (includes Dis-tribution Centers)
A
A
A
A
A
c.4.
42
Wholesale Trade with Outside Storage, ex-cept Junk and Scrap Yards
A
A
c.1.
Section 207 Uses Allowed in Each Zoning District. City of Duluth UDC
2-40
Table 2-C: Principal Uses Allowed by Zoning District
A
Use is allowed by right in the zoning district indicated.
S
Use is allowed in the district if approved as a Special Use.
A/S
Use is allowed by right unless approval as a Special Use is required in Article 3.
NAICS 2012 PRINCIPAL USES RA-200 R-100 R-75 RM MH HRD CBD C-1 C-2 HC-Retail HC-Auto O-I O-N M-1 M-2 RD See Also Article 3 For Parking, See Table 4-B:
4542
Vending Machine Operators
A
A
A
A
A
c.1.
45431
Fuel Dealers
A
c.2.
493
Warehousing and Storage:
49311
General Warehousing and Indoor Storage
A
A
A
c.3.
49311
General Warehousing and Outdoor Storage
S
S
S
c.3.
49312
Refrigerated Warehousing (Cold Storage)
A
A
c.3.
49313
Farm Product Warehousing and Storage
A
c.3.
49319
Bulk Petroleum Storage and other Bulk Storage Tanks
A
Sec. 315
c.2.
53113
Mini-Warehouses and Self-Storage Units
S
A
A
Sec. 333
c.4.
5121
Motion Picture Industries
S
S
S
A
A
c.5.
5122
Sound Recording Industries
A/S
A
A
Sec. 337
c.5.
562
Waste Management and Remediation Services (includes Junk Yards, Scrap Yards)
A
Sec. 328
c.2.
Transportation, Communications and Utilities
481
Airports and Other Air Transportation:
4811
Airport
A
- -
4812
Private Airstrip or Heliport
S
A
A
- -
482
Rail Transportation:
4821
Rail Transportation Company Office
S
b.1.
4882
Rail Yards, Rail and Train Service and Re-pair
S
c.5.
484
Truck Transportation:
48411
General Freight Trucking, Local
A
A
c.3.
48412
General Freight Trucking, Long-Distance
A
A
c.3.
48422
Specialized Freight (except Used Goods) Trucking, Local
A
A
c.3.
City of Duluth UDC Section 207 Uses Allowed in Each Zoning District.
2-41
Table 2-C: Principal Uses Allowed by Zoning District
A
Use is allowed by right in the zoning district indicated.
S
Use is allowed in the district if approved as a Special Use.
A/S
Use is allowed by right unless approval as a Special Use is required in Article 3.
NAICS 2012 PRINCIPAL USES RA-200 R-100 R-75 RM MH HRD CBD C-1 C-2 HC-Retail HC-Auto O-I O-N M-1 M-2 RD See Also Article 3 For Parking, See Table 4-B:
48423
Specialized Freight (except Used Goods) Trucking, Long-Distance
A
A
c.3.
485
Transit and Ground Passenger Transportation:
4853
Taxi and Limousine Service
A
A
A
b.1.
4855
Charter Bus Industry
A
b.1.
485991
Special Needs Transportation
A
b.1.
485999
Shuttle Services, Vanpools and Other Ground Passenger Transportation
A
b.1.
488
Support Activities for Transportation:
b.1.
48841
Motor Vehicle Towing and Wrecker Ser-vices
A
A
A
4885
Freight Transportation Arrangement Agents and Brokers
A
A
A
b.7.
488991
Packing and Crating
A
A
A
b.1.
492
Couriers and Messengers:
c.3.
4921
Intercity Couriers (FedEx, UPS), package drop-off only
A
A
A
b.1.
4921
Intercity Couriers (FedEx, UPS), sorting and forwarding
A
A
A
c.3.
4922
Local Messengers and Local Delivery
A
A
A
b.1.
515
Broadcasting and Telecommunications:
5151
Radio and Television Broadcasting Stations
A/S
A
A
A
A
Sec. 337
b.1.
5152
Cable and Other Subscription Distribution
A
A
b.1.
5171
Telephone and Other Wired Telecommuni-cations Carriers
A
A
A
b.1.
5172
Cellular and Other Wireless Telecommuni-cations Carriers (except Satellite)
A
A
A
b.1.
5173
Telecommunications Resellers
A
A
A
b.1.
5174
Satellite Telecommunications
A
A
A
b.1.
5179
Radio, Television and Telecommunications An-tennae and Towers:
Section 207 Uses Allowed in Each Zoning District. City of Duluth UDC
2-42
Table 2-C: Principal Uses Allowed by Zoning District
A
Use is allowed by right in the zoning district indicated.
S
Use is allowed in the district if approved as a Special Use.
A/S
Use is allowed by right unless approval as a Special Use is required in Article 3.
NAICS 2012 PRINCIPAL USES RA-200 R-100 R-75 RM MH HRD CBD C-1 C-2 HC-Retail HC-Auto O-I O-N M-1 M-2 RD See Also Article 3 For Parking, See Table 4-B:
5179
Freestanding Towers and Antennae
See Article 3, Section 343
- -
5179
Additions to Existing Towers (Colocation)
- -
22
Utilities:
- -
22112
Electric Power Transmission Substations (Transformer Stations)
A
Sec. 321
- -
2212
Natural Gas Distribution (includes Gas Regulator Stations)
S
- -
Public and Institutional Uses
8131
Churches, Mosques, Temples, Synagogues and Other Facilities for Religious Organizations Wor-ship
S
S
S
S
S
A
A
d.2.
8132
Charitable Organization Offices
S
S
S
S
S
A
A
b.1.
8133
Social Advocacy Organizations
S
S
S
S
S
A
A
S
S
b.1.
8134
Fraternal Lodges, Veterans Membership Organi-zations, and Other Civic and Social Organizations
S
S
S
S
S
A
A
S
S
d.7.
8139
Business, Professional, Labor, Political and Simi-lar Organizations
S
S
S
S
S
A
A
S
S
b.1.
622
Hospitals:
622
General, Surgical and Specialty Hospitals
A
A
S
S
d.1
6214
Clinics and Outpatient Medical Care Centers
A
A
A
A
b.3.
6241
Social Services Assistance, including Individual and Family Services
A
A
S
S
b.1.
6242
Community Food and Housing, and Emergency and Other Relief Services
A
S
S
b.1.
81222
Cemeteries
S
A
Sec. 316
- -
81222
Mausoleums
S
- -
81222
Crematories
S
- -
6111
Private Schools: Kindergarten, Elementary, Sec-ondary, Junior College and Universities
S
S
S
S
A
S
S
d.5., d.6.
City of Duluth UDC Section 207 Uses Allowed in Each Zoning District.
2-43
Table 2-C: Principal Uses Allowed by Zoning District
A
Use is allowed by right in the zoning district indicated.
S
Use is allowed in the district if approved as a Special Use.
A/S
Use is allowed by right unless approval as a Special Use is required in Article 3.
NAICS 2012 PRINCIPAL USES RA-200 R-100 R-75 RM MH HRD CBD C-1 C-2 HC-Retail HC-Auto O-I O-N M-1 M-2 RD See Also Article 3 For Parking, See Table 4-B:
92214
Correctional Institutions
S
S
- -
Section 207 Uses Allowed in Each Zoning District. City of Duluth UDC
2-44
Table 2-D: Accessory and Temporary Uses Allowed by Zoning District
A
Use is allowed by right in the zoning district indicated.
S
Use is allowed in the district if approved as a Special Use. NAICS 2012 USES RA-200 R-100 R-75 RM MH HRD C-1 C-2 HC-Retail HC-Auto O-I O-N CBD M-1 M-2 RD See Also Article 3: ACCESSORY USES
Agricultural Accessory Uses
Accessory Structures Customary to a Work-ing Farm, Such as a Barn, Stable, Silo, Poultry House, Corral, Shed, etc.
A
Sec. 310
Agricultural Produce Stand:
Farmers Market, Agricultural Products Pro-duced On-Premises)
A
42441
Farmers Market, Agricultural Products Pro-duced Off-Premises
A
Farm Tenant Dwelling
A
Sec. 346
Farm Pond and Fishing Lake
A
Horse Stable, Personal A
Sec. 326
Residential Accessory Uses
Accessory Uses and Structures Customary to a Dwelling, such as a carport, private gar-age, shed, outdoor swimming pool, play equipment, etc. A
A
A
A
A
A
A
Home Occupation:
Home Office
A
A
A
A
A
A
Sec. 345
Beauty Parlor or Barber Shop
S
S
S
S
S
S
Sec. 345
Family Day Care
S
S
S
S
S
S
Sec. 319
Horse Stable, Personal
A
Sec. 326
Raising and Keeping of Farm Animals for Non-Commercial Purposes
1121
Cattle
S
Sec. 310
1122
Hogs and Pigs
A
Sec. 310
1123
Poultry
A
S
Sec. 310
City of Duluth UDC Section 207 Uses Allowed in Each Zoning District.
2-45
Table 2-D: Accessory and Temporary Uses Allowed by Zoning District
A
Use is allowed by right in the zoning district indicated.
S
Use is allowed in the district if approved as a Special Use. NAICS 2012 USES RA-200 R-100 R-75 RM MH HRD C-1 C-2 HC-Retail HC-Auto O-I O-N CBD M-1 M-2 RD See Also Article 3:
1124
Sheep and Goats
A
Sec. 310
11291
Bees and Bee Products
A
S
Sec. 310
11292
Horses and Other Equines
A
Sec. 310
11293
Rabbits and Other Fur-Bearing Animals
A
S
Sec. 310
Nonresidential Accessory Uses
Automatic Teller Machine (ATM) customary to a bank or financial institution without drive-in facilities
A
A
A
A
A
S
Automatic Teller Machine (ATM) customary to a bank or financial institution with drive-in facilities
A
S
A
A
?
Accessory Uses Customary to a Church or Other Place of Worship (meeting facilities, administrative office, parsonage, class-rooms/schools, cemeteries and mausole-ums, day care)
S
S
S
S
S
A
A
?
6242
Community Food Bank and Housing, and Emergency and Other Relief Services (acces-sory to a Church or Other Place of Worship)
S
Accessory Uses Customary to Commercial and Industrial Uses, except automated car wash accessory to gasoline stations and con-venience stores with fuel pumps
A
A
A
A
A
Automated car wash accessory to gasoline stations and convenience stores with fuel pumps
S
S
S
S
S
Sec. 312
6244
Accessory Day Care Centers (above 15 chil-dren in care)
S
S
S
Sec. 319
6244
Accessory Group Day Care Center (7-15 chil-dren)
S
S
S
Sec. 319
Accessory Retail Uses within an Office, Hos-pital, Hotel or Multi-Family Building
A
A
Section 207 Uses Allowed in Each Zoning District. City of Duluth UDC
2-46
Table 2-D: Accessory and Temporary Uses Allowed by Zoning District
A
Use is allowed by right in the zoning district indicated.
S
Use is allowed in the district if approved as a Special Use. NAICS 2012 USES RA-200 R-100 R-75 RM MH HRD C-1 C-2 HC-Retail HC-Auto O-I O-N CBD M-1 M-2 RD See Also Article 3:
Clinics, Cafeterias and Employee Credit Un-ions within an Office Building (for employ-ees only)
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
Accessory Uses Customary to a Golf Course
A
A
Dumpster/Waste Container
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
Sec. 306.07
481219
Helicopter Landing Pad
S
S
S
S
Manufacturing of Products for Sale On-Site
Outdoor Display Area
A
A
A
A
A
Sec. 347
Outdoor Storage Area, except Equipment
S
S
S
S
Sec. 348
Outdoor Storage Yard, Equipment
S
S
S
S
A
A
Sec. 348
Temporary Office for a Development
A
A
A
A
A
A
Night Watchman Residence
A
A
Unattended Donation Box
A
A
A
A
A
Sec. 349 TEMPORARY USES
8131
Charitable or non-profit events
A
A
A
A
Sec. 341
Temporary Sales Events:
45439
Retail Sales of Seasonal Items
A
A
A
A
Sec. 341
45439
Tent Sale
A
A
A
A
Sec. 341
45439
Outdoor Markets and Swap Meets
A
A
A
A
Sec. 341
45439
Yard or Garage Sale
A
A
A
A
A
Sec. 341
Temporary Entertainment Events:
71119
Carnival Rides
A
A
A
Sec. 341
71119
Community Festival
A
Sec. 341
City of Duluth UDC Section 207 Uses Allowed in Each Zoning District.
2-47
BLANK PAGE
3-i
Article 3. Restrictions on Particular Uses
Article 3 provides land use and development regulations for spe-cific uses that are applicable to sites throughout the City of Du-luth. Unless otherwise noted, these standards are intended to be applied within all zoning districts where the particular uses are allowed, whether by right or through special use approval.
Table of Contents Page
DIVISION I. RESTRICTIONS THAT APPLY GENERALLY. ..............................................................................3-1
Section 301. City and County Approvals That Are Required. .....................................................................3-1
Section 302. Additional Code and Licensing Requirements. ......................................................................3-1
Section 303. Outdoor Lighting Standards. ................................................................................................3-1
303.01 Applicability. ................................................................................................................................................. 3-1
303.02 Use of Cutoff Luminaires Required. ............................................................................................................. 3-1
303.03 Maximum Maintained Illuminance Level. .................................................................................................... 3-3
Table 3-A: Maximum Allowed Maintained Illuminance Levels Produced by ............................................... 3-4
Outdoor Area Lighting at Property Lines ...................................................................................................... 3-4
303.04 Requirements for Outdoor Sports and Recreational Lighting. ..................................................................... 3-4
303.05 Control of Nuisance and Disabling Glare. .................................................................................................... 3-4
303.06 Installation. .................................................................................................................................................. 3-5
303.07 Maintenance. ............................................................................................................................................... 3-5
303.08 Plan Submission. .......................................................................................................................................... 3-5
303.09 Post Installation Inspection. ......................................................................................................................... 3-5
303.10 Nonconforming Lighting. ............................................................................................................................. 3-6
303.11 Compliance Monitoring. .............................................................................................................................. 3-6
Section 304. Standards for Single-Family Detached and Single-Family Attached Dwellings. .......................3-6
304.01 Overhangs. ................................................................................................................................................... 3-6
304.02 Fences and Freestanding Walls. ................................................................................................................... 3-7
304.03 Single-Family Attached (Townhomes). ........................................................................................................ 3-7
Section 305. Standards for Multi-Family Dwellings. .................................................................................3-8
305.01 Apartments. ................................................................................................................................................. 3-8
Section 306. Standards for Nonresidential Uses. ......................................................................................3-8
306.01 Intent. ........................................................................................................................................................... 3-8
306.02 Alternate Standards. .................................................................................................................................... 3-9
306.03 Allowed Building Materials. ....................................................................................................................... 3-10
Table 3-B: Allowed Building Materials ...................................................................................................... 3-11
306.04 Architectural Treatment. ........................................................................................................................... 3-11
306.05 Roof Forms and Materials. ......................................................................................................................... 3-12
306.06 Placement of Exterior Equipment. ............................................................................................................. 3-13
306.07 Dumpster Enclosures. ................................................................................................................................ 3-13
306.08 Fencing. ...................................................................................................................................................... 3-14
Table of Contents Continued City of Duluth UDC
3-ii
DIVISION II. RESTRICTIONS THAT APPLY TO SPECIFIC USES. ................................................................... 3-14
Section 307. Administrative, Financial and Professional Offices. ............................................................ 3-14
Section 308. Adult Entertainment. ........................................................................................................ 3-14
Section 309. Alcoholic Beverage Sales. .................................................................................................. 3-14
Section 310. Animal Production. ........................................................................................................... 3-14
Section 311. Arts, Entertainment and Recreation. ................................................................................. 3-15
Section 312. Automotive Car Washes. ................................................................................................... 3-15
Section 313. Automotive Repair and Maintenance. ............................................................................... 3-15
Section 314. Barber Shops and Beauty Salons. ....................................................................................... 3-15
Section 315. Bulk Storage Tanks. ........................................................................................................... 3-15
Section 316. Cemeteries. ...................................................................................................................... 3-15
Section 317. Commercial Services. ........................................................................................................ 3-15
Section 318. Continuing Care Retirement Community. ........................................................................... 3-15
Section 319. Day Care Facility. .............................................................................................................. 3-16
319.01 Child and Group Day Care Centers. ........................................................................................................... 3-16
319.02 Family Day Care Homes. ............................................................................................................................ 3-16
Section 320. Dry Cleaning Services. ....................................................................................................... 3-16
Section 321. Electric Power Transmission Substations (Transformer Stations). ....................................... 3-16
Section 322. Florist. .............................................................................................................................. 3-16
Section 323. Forestry and Logging. ........................................................................................................ 3-16
323.01 Notice Requirement for Tree Harvesting; Bond Requirement. ................................................................. 3-17
Section 324. Gasoline Stations, Full Service. .......................................................................................... 3-18
Section 325. Gasoline Stations, No Repairs. ........................................................................................... 3-18
Section 326. Horse Riding Stables. ........................................................................................................ 3-18
Section 327. Hotels. .............................................................................................................................. 3-18
Section 328. Junk Yards. ....................................................................................................................... 3-19
Section 329. Kennel. ............................................................................................................................. 3-19
Section 330. Manufactured Homes. ...................................................................................................... 3-20
330.01 Manufactured Home Standards. ............................................................................................................... 3-20
330.02 Manufactured Home Park Standards. ....................................................................................................... 3-20
Section 331. Manufacturing, Wholesaling and Warehousing. ................................................................. 3-21
Section 332. Massage Therapy Establishments. ..................................................................................... 3-21
Section 333. Mini-Warehouses and Self-Storage Units. .......................................................................... 3-21
Section 334. Motor Vehicle and Parts Dealers. ...................................................................................... 3-21
Section 335. Pawnshop. ........................................................................................................................ 3-22
City of Duluth UDC Table of Contents Continued
3-iii
Section 336. Personal Care Home. ......................................................................................................... 3-22
Section 337. Radio and Television Broadcasting Stations. ...................................................................... 3-22
Section 338. Retail Trade. ..................................................................................................................... 3-22
Section 339. Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishments. ......................................................................... 3-22
Section 340. Temporary Buildings. ........................................................................................................ 3-23
Section 341. Temporary Events. ............................................................................................................ 3-23
341.01 General Requirements for Temporary Events, not Including Yard Sales. .................................................. 3-23
341.01 Carnival Rides. ............................................................................................................................................ 3-24
341.02 Charitable or Non-Profit Event. .................................................................................................................. 3-24
341.01 Outdoor Markets and Swap Meets. ........................................................................................................... 3-24
341.02 Retail Sales of Seasonal Items. ................................................................................................................... 3-24
341.03 Temporary Event: Yard Sale. ...................................................................................................................... 3-24
Section 342. Veterinary Clinics, including Animal Hospitals. ................................................................... 3-25
Section 343. Wireless Telecommunications. .......................................................................................... 3-25
343.01 Intent. ......................................................................................................................................................... 3-25
343.02 Purposes. .................................................................................................................................................... 3-26
343.03 Exemptions................................................................................................................................................. 3-26
343.04 Collocation; Availability of Suitable Existing Structures. ............................................................................ 3-27
343.05 Allowed Zoning Districts. ........................................................................................................................... 3-27
343.06 Principal, Accessory and Joint Uses............................................................................................................ 3-27
343.07 General Requirements. .............................................................................................................................. 3-28
343.08 Special Use Approval. ................................................................................................................................. 3-30
343.09 Administrative Review. .............................................................................................................................. 3-32
343.10 Maintenance Impacts. ............................................................................................................................... 3-33
343.11 Nuisances. .................................................................................................................................................. 3-33
343.12 Removal of Antennae and Towers. ............................................................................................................ 3-33
343.13 Abandoned Towers. ................................................................................................................................... 3-34
343.14 Small Cell Wireless Facility ......................................................................................................................... 3-34
DIVISION III. ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. ................................................................................. 3-41
Section 344. Detached Structures. ........................................................................................................ 3-41
Section 345. Home Occupations. ........................................................................................................... 3-41
Section 346. Farm Tenant Dwellings. ..................................................................................................... 3-42
Section 347. Outdoor Display Areas. ..................................................................................................... 3-43
347.01 Outdoor Display Areas; Permanent. .......................................................................................................... 3-43
347.02 Temporary Sales Promotions. .................................................................................................................... 3-43
347.03 Outdoor Display Areas; Restrictions. ......................................................................................................... 3-43
Section 348. Outdoor Storage. .............................................................................................................. 3-43
348.01 Outdoor Storage in Commercial Zoning Districts....................................................................................... 3-43
348.02 Outdoor Storage in the Industrial Zoning Districts. ................................................................................... 3-44
Section 349. Unattended Donation Boxes. ............................................................................................ 3-44
Table of Contents Continued City of Duluth UDC
3-iv
Section 350. Mobile Kitchens ................................................................................................................ 3-46
3-1
Article 3. Restrictions on Particular Uses
DIVISION I. RESTRICTIONS THAT APPLY GENERALLY.
Section 301. City and County Approvals That Are Required.
All city and county approvals that are required for the use of land and structures and for the location and operation of businesses and industries shall be obtained by the applicant and transmitted with the request for a building permit, an occupancy permit, a zoning amendment, a planned unit development, a conditional use, or a variance. Except as otherwise require by state law, no local action shall be taken and no public hearings shall be held until the above-required approvals have been obtain by the appli-cant.
Section 302. Additional Code and Licensing Requirements.
All land uses, buildings and businesses must comply with all applicable provisions of the Code of Ordi-nances of the City of Duluth, Georgia.
Section 303. Outdoor Lighting Standards.
303.01 Applicability.
(a) Outdoor lighting installations which are employed for nighttime area illumination of parking lots, car sales lots, yards, roadways, streets, driveways, walkways, bikeways, cartways, entryways, and similar areas or lots; and
(b) Outdoor lighting installations which are located on any property in any zoning district within the City of Duluth except for the following:
(1) A lot which is comprised of one single family dwelling.
(2) Public buildings, City of Duluth public parks, including during community events/gatherings, sports, recreational or special occasion activities and related activities.
(3) CBD and HRD Districts.
(4) Temporary lighting installations include, but are not limited to, seasonal or holiday displays, carnivals, community fairs, sales/promotional display with approved temporary use permits.
(5) Street lights along public road rights-of-way and approved private streets.
303.02 Use of Cutoff Luminaires Required.
(a) All luminaires employed in outdoor area lighting installations shall be the cutoff luminaire type.
(b) The candlepower distribution classification of the luminaire as a cutoff type shall be in accordance with ANSI/IES Lighting Definitions and The IES Lighting Handbook. The manufacturer of the lumi-naire shall provide certification of the cutoff classification based on photometric testing per-formed in accordance with the IES Lighting Handbook and the applicable testing procedures ref-erenced herein. The requirement for the use of cutoff luminaire types shall include, but not lim-ited to, the following outdoor area and roadway lighting configurations:
(1) Pole mounted luminaires.
(2) Luminaires mounted on the exterior of the buildings and structures.
Section 303 Outdoor Lighting Standards. City of Duluth UDC
3-2
(3) Pedestal or bollard mounted luminaires.
Illustrative Examples of Full Cutoff Pole Mounted Luminaires:
Illustrative Examples of Mounted Full Cutoff Luminaires and Bollard Mounted Luminaires:
City of Duluth UDC Section 303 Outdoor Lighting Standards.
3-3
(c) Cutoff luminaires shall be mounted plumb and level with accordance with the intended applica-tion of their design. For the purposes of this Code Section, the photometric nadir of the luminaire (zero degree vertical angle of the candlepower distribution) shall be oriented plumb and the ver-tical angle of 90 degrees above nadir (horizontal) shall be oriented level. Cutoff luminaires shall not be installed in a canted or tilted position, which permits candlepower distribution above the horizontal.
(d) Exceptions.
(1) Luminaires which do not meet the strict definition for cutoff luminaires, yet employ ad-vanced or alternated technology which caused the photometric performance to approach that of cutoff luminaires, shall be approved by the Planning and Development Director on a case by case basis.
(2) Luminaires with a total initial output of 10,000 lumens or less shall be permitted for decora-tive, accent, or supplementary lighting applications provided that glare shields are incorpo-rated which cut off the candlepower distribution at and above the horizontal level.
(e) Use of Glare Shields Required for Non Cutoff Luminaire Types.
Where non-cutoff luminaires such as floodlights are used to meet the lighting objectives for outdoor sports and recreational lighting, the luminaires shall be equipped with glare shields, vi-sors, protectors and similar shielding accessories as required to meet the criteria in this Section 303.
303.03 Maximum Maintained Illuminance Level.
The maximum maintained illuminance levels permitted at the prop-erty line(s) during the nighttime, produced by the sum of all outdoor area lighting installations on said property, shall be at grade in Horizontal Footcandles or Horizontal Lux according to Table 3-A.
(a) Exceptions.
(1) By written agreement between the respective property owners, an outdoor lighting installa-tion on one property may illuminate area or roadways on adjacent properties beyond the property line.
(2) This requirement does not apply to outdoor roadway lighting installations intended for the nighttime illumination of public roadways, streets, highways, alleys, cartways, and the like.
(3) At designated vehicular, cyclist, and pedestrian entries/exits between properties and public roadways, streets, highways, alleys, cartways, and the like; provided that the excepted area of illumination (maintained illuminance levels at grade higher than permitted in Table 3-A is limited to the said property and the adjoining pavement and right-of-way of public roadways, streets, highways, alleys, cartways and the like. The excepted area of illumination shall not extend beyond 50 feet from the centerline of the designated entry/exit in any direction along the property lines of said property.
Illustrative Example of
Glare Shield
Section 303 Outdoor Lighting Standards. City of Duluth UDC
3-4
Table 3-A: Maximum Allowed Maintained Illuminance Levels Produced by
Outdoor Area Lighting at Property Lines
Outdoor Area Lighting Installation Maximum Maintained Illuminance Level Allowed at Property Line (At Grade) Measured in Horizontal Footcandles Measured in Horizontal Lux
Located on property and property line adjoins a public roadway or public right of way
0.5
5.4
Located on property and property line adjoins a non-residential property
0.2
2.2
Located on property and property line adjoins a residential property
0.1
1.1
303.04 Requirements for Outdoor Sports and Recreational Lighting.
(a) Outdoor lighting installations which are employed for nighttime area illumination of sports and recreational facilities, but not limited to, ballfields, ballparks, stadiums, tennis courts, water slides, paintball facilities, drive-in theaters, soccer fields, golf courses, driving ranges, and recreation fields, and the like shall meet the following requirements.
(1) The candlepower distribution from all lighting in-stallations shall be cut off at and above the hori-zontal level.
(2) To the extent practicable, the candlepower distri-bution from all lighting installations shall be fur-ther cut off at angles below the horizontal level to restrict direct illumination to within the functional area being illuminated for sports and recreation purposes.
(b) The maximum maintained illuminance levels permitted at the property line(s) during the nighttime, produced by the sum of all outdoor sports and recreation lighting installations on said property, shall be as measured at grade in horizontal footcandles or horizontal lux ac-
cording to Table 3-A.
303.05 Control of Nuisance and Disabling Glare.
(a) All outdoor lighting, whether or not required by this Code Section; on private, residential, com-mercial, industrial, recreational, or institutional property; shall be aimed, located, designated, fit-ted, and maintained so as not to present a disabling glare hazard to neighboring owners/resi-dents, drivers or pedestrians or a nuisance glare concerns to neighboring properties.
Illustrative example of lighting that cuts
Illustrative example of lighting that cuts off candlepower above the horizontal off candlepower above the horizontal level by using full cutoff luminaires.level by using full cutoff luminaires.
City of Duluth UDC Section 303 Outdoor Lighting Standards.
3-5
(b) Directional fixtures such as flood lights, spot lights, and night lights shall be installed or aimed so that they do not shine directly into the window of a neighboring residence, directly into a road-way, or skyward.
(c) Unless otherwise permitted by the Planning and Development Director, lighting shall be con-trolled by automatic switching devices such as, timers, motion detectors and/or photocells, to extinguish offending sources between nighttime and morning, to mitigate glare and sky-lighting consequences.
(d) Vegetation screens shall be not be employed to serve as the primarily means for controlling glare. Rather, such control shall be achieved primary through the use of cut off fixtures, the appropriate application of mounting height, wattage, aiming, angle, fixture placement and fixture design, etc. and the additions of shields and baffles as necessary.
(e) The amount of illumination projected onto a residential use from another property shall not to exceed 0.1 vertical foot candle at the property line.
303.06 Installation.
(a) Electrical feeds for lighting standards shall be run underground, not overhead.
(b) Lighting standards in parking areas shall be placed a minimum of 5 feet outside paved area, or on concrete pedestals at least 30 inches high above the pavement, or suitably protected by other approved means.
303.07 Maintenance.
Lighting fixtures and ancillary equipment shall be maintained so as to always meet the requirements of this Development Code.
303.08 Plan Submission.
(a) Lighting plans shall be submitted to the Planning and Development Department for review and approval and shall include:
(1) Layout of the proposed fixture locations.
(2) Iso-footcandle plots of individual installations and 10x10 illuminance grid plots for multifix-ture installations, that demonstrate compliance with the intensities and uniformity set forth in this Code Section.
(3) Description of the equipment, including fixture catalog cuts, photometrics, glare reduction devices and mounting methods proposed.
(b) When requested by the Planning and Development Department, applicant shall submit a visual impact plan that demonstrates appropriate steps have been taken to mitigate on-site and off-site glare.
(c) Post-approval alterations to lighting plans or intended substitutions for approved lighting equip-ment shall be submitted to the Planning and Development Department for review and approval.
(d) This Code Section does not supersede established development regulations any way.
303.09 Post Installation Inspection.
The City of Duluth reserves the right to conduct a post-installation nighttime inspection to verify com-pliance with the requirements of this Code Section, and if appropriate, to require remedial action at no expense to the City.
Section 304 Standards for Single-Family Detached and Single-Family Attached Dwellings. City of Duluth UDC
3-6
303.10 Nonconforming Lighting.
Any lighting fixture existing on the effective date of this Development Code which does not conform with the requirements of this Code Section shall be considered a lawful, nonconforming lighting fix-ture, subject to the following:
(a) A nonconforming lighting fixture shall be made to comply with the requirements of this Code Section when such fixture is replaced, relocated or repaired.
303.11 Compliance Monitoring.
(a) Safety Hazard.
If determined by the Planning and Development Director that a lighting installation creates a safety or personal security hazard, the person(s) responsible for the lighting shall be notified and requested to take timely remedial action.
(b) Nuisance Glare and Inadequate Illumination Levels.
When the Planning and Development Director determines that installation produces unaccepta-ble levels of nuisance glare or skyward light or that illumination levels are insufficient or not being maintained in accordance with this Code Section, the Code Enforcement Officer shall cause noti-fication of the person(s) responsible for the lighting and request remedial action.
Section 304. Standards for Single-Family Detached and Single-Family Attached Dwellings.
All single-family detached dwellings and single-family attached dwellings shall meet or exceed the fol-lowing requirements in order to be constructed or assembled within the City of Duluth with the excep-tion of dwellings constructed in the Central Business District (CBD) which shall be governed by Section 205.14.
304.01 Overhangs.
Overhangs may project into a required setback a maximum of 4 feet, but in no case into a road right-of-way or closer than 10 feet roof line to roofline to another building. Examples of overhangs include; balconies, decks, stoops, cantilever walls, bay windows or other appurtenances as determined by the Planning and Development Director.
City of Duluth UDC Section 304 Standards for Single-Family Detached and Single-Family Attached Dwellings.
3-7
304.02 Fences and Freestanding Walls.
(a) Building Permit Required.
All commercial and residential fences and freestanding walls exceeding 7 feet in height are re-quired to obtain a building permit from the City of Duluth.
(b) Maximum Height Limitations.
No wall or fence shall exceed 8 feet in height within a side yard or rear yard and shall not extend into a required front yard with the exception of decorative fences, as described in Subsection (c) below. A wall or fence may extend into the required exterior side yard.
(c) Design Standards for Decorative Fences.
Fences within the required front yard must meet the following specifications and conditions:
(1) The maximum height shall be 3 feet.
(2) Fence shall be constructed with natural wood, simulated wood, brick columns or decorative ornamental iron only.
(3) The distance between the pickets must be a minimum of 2 inches.
(4) The color of the fence must be natural wood colors, neutral colors such as white, beige, ivory, cream off-white, or black, dark green wrought iron or the same color as the facade of the primary structure on the property.
(5) The fence shall be maintained at all times by the property owner and/or occupant of the property.
(6) Electric fencing is prohibited, with the exception that invisible fencing used to contain do-mestic animals on the property is allowed.
304.03 Single-Family Attached (Townhomes).
(a) There shall be a minimum of three units and a maximum of eight units per building of attached townhome units.
(b) No dwelling shall be situated as to face the rear of another dwelling structure within the development or on adjoin-ing properties, unless differences in terrain and elevation would provide effective visual separation.
(c) No more than two contiguous dwellings that form a part of a single building shall have the same setback or roof line. Said setback and roof line shall be varied by a mini-mum of two feet.
(d) Required building materials are brick, stone, and/or natu-ral wood or Cement-based Artificial Wood Siding (Hardi-Plank/Board) siding.
(e) Material or color changes should occur at a change of plane.
Illustrative Examples of
Illustrative Examples of
3
3--Feet High Decorative FencesFeet High Decorative Fences
Illustrative examples of private, usa-
Illustrative examples of private, usa-ble space per townhome unit and cov-ble space per townhome unit and cov-ered parking (see also the Parking and ered parking (see also the Parking and Loading Requirements Article).Loading Requirements Article).
Covered Parking
Covered Parking
Private Space
Private Space
Section 305 Standards for Multi-Family Dwellings. City of Duluth UDC
3-8
(f) Private, usable open space, such as balconies, sundecks, patios, etc., shall be provided contiguous to each dwelling unit. The area of such open space provided for each unit shall not be less than 10 percent of the floor area of the unit served. The location and number of square feet shall be clearly indicated on the site plan.
Illustrative Examples of the Standards in Section 3.04.03, subsections (a), (c), (d) and (e):
Section 305. Standards for Multi-Family Dwellings.
All multi-family dwellings located in any zoning district must comply with the requirements of this Section.
305.01 Apartments.
(a) Required building materials are brick, stone, high quality stucco and/or natural wood or Cement-based Artificial Wood Siding (Hardi-Plank/Board) siding.
(b) Apartment buildings shall be constructed to condominium standards per applicable building codes and state standards. Requirements include, but are not limited to:
(1) Installing an individual water meter for each unit;
(2) Installing independent electrical power metering and internal cabling (internet, TV, phone) for each unit; and
(3) Soundproofing common walls by means of construction techniques or air gaps.
Section 306. Standards for Nonresidential Uses.
All new construction and alterations of buildings within commercial and industrial zoning districts, other than the CBD zoning district, shall meet the requirements of this Section.
306.01 Intent.
The intent of these standards is to achieve high quality non-residential development that utilizes a common palette of attractive, durable building materials and, as such, enhances the visual appeal of the community as a whole. The following design standards are intended to, over time, establish a streetscape and image that makes the City of Duluth unique to other surrounding jurisdictions, estab-lishes a unifying theme, presents the traveling public with a sense of arrival, is harmonious with its surroundings, is aesthetically pleasing and enhances the character of the community.
Material and Color Changes
Stone
Brick
Hardi-Plank
Variation in Roof Lines and Building Setbacks
Two-story (min.) and Minimum of 3 Units per Row of Townhomes
Material and Color Changes
Stone
City of Duluth UDC Section 306 Standards for Nonresidential Uses.
3-9
306.02 Alternate Standards.
(a) These standards are intended to be followed as outlined below. In the event the intent of these standards can be achieved with minor deviations that do not substantially affect the purpose and intent of this Section, the Planning and Development Director has the authority to modify the specific provisions on a case-by-case basis.
(b) If substantial modifications or changes are desired for a particular property or project, the prop-erty owner may present proposed modifications to the Planning Commission for review. Any ap-plication for alternate architectural design standards shall be accompanied with proposed eleva-tions, building material descriptions and renderings necessary for the Planning Commission to make a determination whether the alternate proposal meets the intent of these standards. The Planning Commission, as part of the approval process, may include conditions, modifications or requirements deemed necessary to maintain the high level of development quality intended by this Code Section.
Section 306 Standards for Nonresidential Uses. City of Duluth UDC
3-10
306.03 Allowed Building Materials.
(a) The following building materials may be used and combined in accordance with this Code Section, including Table 3-B:
(1) Brick  Brick (standard sized) is allowed, however thin brick veneers or artificial brick panels (e.g. cementious or fiberboard) which are intended to simulate brick exteriors are not al-lowed;
(2) Stone  Natural stone such as, but not limited to, granite, limestone, and marble are allowed building materials;
(3) Split-Face Block/Concrete Masonry Unit (CMU);
(4) Tilt/Architectural Pre-Cast Concrete;
(5) High Grade Stucco;
(6) Exterior Insulating Finish System (EIFS) that is installed in accordance with the EIFS manufac-turers specifications and by a contractor that is authorized by the EIFS manufacturer to in-stall their product;
(7) Siding  Natural Wood and/or Cement-based Artificial Wood Siding (Hardi-Plank/Board);
(8) Glass Panels; and
(9) Painted Concrete Block.
Left: An Illustrative Ex-ample of Standard-Size Fired Clay Brick (Allowed)
Right: An Illustrative Ex-ample of Panel Brick (Pro-hibited)
Illustrative Examples of Primary Building Materials Allowed in Some
Commercial and Industrial Applications (see Table 3-B):
Precast Concrete
Split-Face Block
Glass Panels
City of Duluth UDC Section 306 Standards for Nonresidential Uses.
3-11
Table 3-B: Allowed Building Materials Building Materials Zoning District O-N, C-1 C-2, HC-Retail, HC-Auto, and O-I M-1, M-2 Institutional Uses* Where Allowed
Brick
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Stone
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Glass Panels
No
Yes
Yes
No
Tilt/Precast Concrete
No
No
Yes
No
CMU/Split-Face Block
Front/Side
Rear
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Concrete Block
Front/Side
Rear
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Stucco
Front/Side
Rear
Max. 25%
Max. 50%
Max. 25%
Max. 50%
No
No
Max. 25%
Max. 50%
EIFS
Front/Side
Rear
Max. 25%
Max. 50%
Max. 25%
Max. 50%
No
No
Max. 25%
Max. 50%
Siding
Front/Side
Rear
Max. 25%
Max. 50%
Max. 25%
Max. 50%
No
No
Max. 25%
Max. 50%
*A property occupied by a nonprofit religious, recreational or philanthropic organization, club or private school
(b) Accent/Trim Exterior Building Material.
Small amounts of building materials such as wood, tile, etc., may be used to enhance the elevation of the building or for decorative elements but should not exceed 10% of total wall area per facade. Trim colors should have contrasting lighter or darker shade than the primary building color.
(c) Facade Calculations.
(1) With the exception of accent/trim materials, there shall be no more than two primary build-ing materials used. When a material is restricted as a percentage in Table 3-B, such as stucco, siding, etc., the building material may not be combined with another restricted building ma-terial. The allowed facade materials shall not apply to windows, glass-front windows, entry doors and/or roll-up doors.
(2) The amount of permitted material shall be calculated using the gross square footage of wall area per facade. A building material that is allowed (such as brick) may be used in any per-centage throughout the structure. A material that is restricted (such as siding) is allowed as a maximum.
306.04 Architectural Treatment.
Illustrative example of an Arcade
Section 306 Standards for Nonresidential Uses. City of Duluth UDC
3-12
(a) Public entrances must be distinguished from the principal plane of the facade and provide shelter from wind and sun. This may be accomplished by recessing the entranceway, placing in an arcade, under a projecting canopy, or within a mass or tower projecting from the primary facade.
(b) Blank walls that can be seen from any public or private street are prohibited. Front facades shall have at least 25% of the wall facing the street in window or door areas.
(c) Pedestrian Oriented Facades: Facades with non-residential active uses must be fenestrated with transparent windows and doorways for no less than 60% of the street frontage at the ground level and allow visibility to the inside of the building. Any fenestration of frontages with active uses must have visibility to the inside of the building with at least 75 percent open to perpendicular view within a 4-foot by 4-foot visibility zone at pedestrian eye level. This visibility zone is located between 4 feet and 8 feet in height above sidewalk level and extends 4 feet from the surface of the window glass inside the building.
(1) Pedestrian Eye Level includes the space that is between 4 feet and 8 feet in height above the adjacent sidewalk level, following the slope if applicable.
(2) Visibility to the Inside of the Building means that the area inside the building within 4 feet from the surface of the window glass at pedestrian eye level is at least 75 percent open to perpendicular view.
(d) Walls shall have offsets, jogs, changes in allowable building materials, or other distinctive change in the building facade. Any development consisting of a building longer than 100 feet must have off-sets in the horizontal plane that are at least 18 inches in depth and at least 5 feet in length for every 100 foot of frontage. Horizontal off-sets utilized to accommodate exterior outdoor caf type settings must have off-sets in the horizontal plane that are at least 6 feet in depth and 10 feet in length for every 100 feet of frontage.
306.05 Roof Forms and Materials.
(a) Pitched roofs shall have a minimum slope of 4:12 and a maximum slope of 12:12.
(b) Pitched roof materials shall be architectural grade shin-gles, natural slate, natural terra cotta, natural wood shake, copper, or factory finished sheet metal.
(c) Roof pitches that create overly prominent or uncom-mon buildings (e.g. A-frames or geodesic domes) are
prohibited.
(d) Flat roofs shall have parapets or cornice features.
(a) Flat roof materials shall be any material that meets local codes. Exposed metal flashing shall be copper or factory finished sheet metal; if used as a standing seam, the color must blend with adjacent materials or be a color to simulate weathered copper or bronze.
Min.
Max.
City of Duluth UDC Section 306 Standards for Nonresidential Uses.
3-13
(b) Rooftop equipment shall be screened by building elements (such as a parapet wall) rather than through add-on screening (such as wood or metal slats).
306.06 Placement of Exterior Equipment.
(a) Ground mounted mechanical, HVAC and similar equipment shall be screened on all sides by dense landscaping or walls constructed of the principal material of the building and located so as not to be visible from the public right-of-way and adjacent properties.
(b) Roof mounted mechanical units or utility equipment shall be screened from the public right-of-way and adjacent property. The method of screening shall be integrated with the structure in terms of its architectural form, materials, color, shape and size. See also Section 306.05(b).
306.07 Dumpster Enclosures.
(a) Dumpsters shall be screened on all sides with a minimum 6-feet high opaque wall in materials substantially similar in appearance to the building on site, with the exception of the access opening. Pedestrian and vehicle access shall be screened by an opaque op-erable gate of the same height as the wall.
(b) Dumpsters shall not be located in the front or side yards and shall be screened from sight of adjacent lots and streets.
Dumpsters shall be placed on a concrete pad with sufficient strength to support service vehicles.
Illustrative example of a
Illustrative example of a dumpster enclosure utilizing dumpster enclosure utilizing approved building materials approved building materials and providing an and providing an opaque ac-opaque ac-cess gate.cess gate.
Section 307 Administrative, Financial and Professional Offices. City of Duluth UDC
3-14
306.08 Fencing.
(a) Fencing shall be allowed in the side or rear yard in all zoning districts.
(b) No fence shall exceed 8 feet in height.
(c) Fencing may be constructed of natural wood, simulated wood, brick, stone, iron, aluminum or vinyl coated chain link.
(d) Solid metal sheathing, electric fencing, and barbed wire or similar material shall be prohibited.
(e) Fencing shall be allowed in the front yard in M-1 and M-2 industrial zoning districts subject to the following additional standards:
1) All front yard fences shall be setback a minimum of five feet (5) from the property lines.
2) Fences shall be decorative in nature and constructed of iron or aluminum panels with brick or stone columns every thirty feet (30) minimum.
3) All points of vehicular ingress and egress must maintain adequate sight distance for each driveway that approaches a street. The minimum corner sight distance from the approaching street shall be equal to or exceed 10 times the regulated speed of the intersecting street, as measured from the center of the approaching street in both directions along the right-of-way line of the intersected street.
4) A five foot (5) landscape strip, planted in accordance with Article 7 of this code, shall be re-quired directly outside of the fence.
DIVISION II. RESTRICTIONS THAT APPLY TO SPECIFIC USES.
Section 307. Administrative, Financial and Professional Offices.
Special use approval is required to locate on the ground floor of a building in the CBD zoning district.
Section 308. Adult Entertainment.
An adult entertainment establishment shall be subject to the location requirements and all other rules and requirements of the City of Duluth Code of Ordinances, Adult Entertainment Ordinance as well as all other current and future pertinent local, state, and federal ordinances.
Section 309. Alcoholic Beverage Sales.
An establishment that sells alcoholic beverages shall be subject to the location requirements and all other rules and requirements of the City of Duluth Code of Ordinances, Alcoholic Beverage Consump-tion, Licensing and Regulations, as well as all other current and future pertinent local, state, and federal ordinances.
Section 310. Animal Production.
No structure housing poultry or other livestock shall be located closer than 200 feet to any property line.
City of Duluth UDC Section 311 Arts, Entertainment and Recreation.
3-15
Section 311. Arts, Entertainment and Recreation.
Special use approval is required for arts, entertainment and recreation uses that exceed 3,500 square feet in the CBD zoning district.
Section 312. Automotive Car Washes.
Approval by Gwinnett County is required for an automotive car wash as either a principal or accessory use. All new commercial conveyor car washes must install operational recycled water systems. A min-imum of 50% of water utilized will be recycled.
Section 313. Automotive Repair and Maintenance.
(a) Outdoor storage, including inoperable vehicles, shall not be allowed.
(b) Automotive repairs shall be conducted inside the principal building.
(c) Automotive bays shall not face street frontage.
(d) All parking and loading areas shall be screened from the road with a 3 foot high landscaped berm (maximum 2:1 slope) and a 10 foot landscape strip in accordance with the standards of the Land-scaping, Buffers and Tree Protection Article of this Development Code. See also the Parking Lot Design, Screening, and Location Section in the Parking and Loading Requirements Article of this Development Code.
Section 314. Barber Shops and Beauty Salons.
In the O-N District, there shall be no more than 2 barber/salon chairs.
Section 315. Bulk Storage Tanks.
Any above ground storage area shall be no closer than 500 feet to a residential district and is subject to approval by the Gwinnett County Fire Department.
Section 316. Cemeteries.
Any new cemetery shall meet the following requirements:
(a) A cemetery may front only a major thoroughfare, collector street or state highway. The entrance and exits to it shall be only from the street on which it fronts.
(b) A cemetery shall be bordered by a 10 foot wide buffer strip along all of its exterior property lines not bordering the front yard. The buffer strip shall be planted with evergreen trees or shrubs that grow at least 8 feet tall and provide an effective visual screen.
(c) A cemetery shall be included in a preliminary subdivision plat that has been approved by the Plan-ning and Development Director.
Section 317. Commercial Services.
Special use approval is required for commercial services businesses that exceed 3,500 square feet in the CBD zoning district.
Section 318. Continuing Care Retirement Community.
(a) The residential portions of the development provide for a density no greater than eight units per acre, said calculation to include the total acreage of the project.
Section 319 Day Care Facility. City of Duluth UDC
3-16
(b) Before development permits are issued for any residential portion of the development which pro-poses to sell units in fee simple, the declaration of covenants for the development shall be pro-vided to and reviewed by the City prior to said declaration of covenants being recorded in the public records and prior to any building permit being issued. Said covenants shall as a minimum establish provisions for maintenance of all streets, recreational areas, yards and other common facilities, any requirements for a mandatory homeowners association, buy back provisions or other similar restrictions or obligations placed on owner.
(c) Approval of the development may be conditioned to a specific site plan and any substantial change or variation in said site plan shall be treated as an amendment of the zoning and must be considered in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Procedures and Permits Article of this Development Code.
(d) All future development on the property shall conform to the standards adopted for the district, regardless of any change in ownership.
(e) If one of the services provided takes the form of independent living facilities, the percentage of units devoted to such independent living facilities shall not exceed 60 percent.
Section 319. Day Care Facility.
319.01 Child and Group Day Care Centers.
Playground equipment visible from a public road must be screened from view using a solid wood fence a minimum of 6 feet in height or a combination of chain link fence and landscaping, or berm, or shall otherwise conform to state requirements.
319.02 Family Day Care Homes.
(a) The outdoor play area shall be enclosed on all sides to a height of at least 4 feet by a fence.
(b) The principal building of such use shall meet the lot size and setback requirements of the district in which it is located.
Section 320. Dry Cleaning Services.
Pick-up and delivery areas shall not exceed 2,500 square feet of total floor area.
Section 321. Electric Power Transmission Substations (Transformer Stations).
(a) The site shall be a minimum size of 2 acres.
(b) Structures are placed not less than 50 feet from any property line.
(c) The structures are enclosed by a woven fence of wire at least 8 feet high or enclosed as approved by the City of Duluth.
(d) The lots are suitably landscaped, including a buffer strip at least 10 feet wide along the side and rear property lines but, not extending into the required front yard, planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that grow at least 8 feet tall and prove an effective visual screen.
(e) No vehicles or equipment are to be stored on the premises.
Section 322. Florist.
In the O-N District, there shall be no more than 25 percent business space of the gross floor area.
Section 323. Forestry and Logging.
City of Duluth UDC Section 323 Forestry and Logging.
3-17
323.01 Notice Requirement for Tree Harvesting; Bond Requirement.
(a) All persons or firms harvesting standing timber in any area within the corporate limits of the city for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, or wood chips to any wood yard or processing plant located inside or outside the state shall provide notice of such harvesting operations to the Planning and Development Director prior to cutting any such timber;
(b) Prior written notice shall be required of any person or firm harvesting such timber for each sepa-rate tract to be harvested thereby, and shall be in such form as prescribed by rule or regulation of the director of the state forestry commission, and shall consist of:
(1) A map of the area which identifies the location of the tract to be harvested and, as to those trucks which will be traveling to and from such tract for purposes of picking up and hauling loads of cut forest products, the main point of ingress to such tract from a public road and, if different, the main point of egress from such tract to a public road;
(2) A statement as to whether the timber will be removed pursuant to a lump sum sale, per unit sale, or owner harvest for purposes of ad valorem taxation under the O.C.G.A.  48-5-7.5;
(3) The name, address, and daytime telephone number of the timber seller if the harvest is pur-suant to a lump sum or per unit sale or of the timber owner if the harvest is an owner harvest; and
(4) The name, business address, business telephone number, and nighttime or emergency tele-phone number of the person or firm harvesting such timber;
(c) Written notice may be submitted in person, by transmission of an electronic record via facsimile, or by mail;
(d) Any persons or firms subject to such notice requirement specified within this Section shall deliver a valid surety bond to the city in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), executed by a surety corporation authorized to transact business in this state, protecting the city, as applicable, against any damage caused by such person or firm as a result of such harvesting. A valid irrevoca-ble letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan association, as defined in O.C.G.A.  7-1-4 in the amount of the required bond may be provided in lieu of the bond. For purposes of this subsection, any such surety bond shall be valid only for the calendar year in which delivered;
(e) Notice shall be effective for such harvesting operation on such tract within the city upon receipt of the same by the Planning and Development Director and compliance with the requirements of subsection (d) of this Section and until such time as the person or firm giving such notice has completed the harvesting operation for such tract; provided, however, that any subsequent change in the facts required to be provided for purposes of such notice shall be reported to the Planning and Development Director within three business days after such change;
(f) Upon receipt by the Planning and Development Director of the notice required by this Section regarding timber-harvesting operations to be conducted in whole or in part within the corporate limits of the city, the Planning and Development Director shall transmit a copy of such notice to the governing authority of Gwinnett County;
(g) Violation of the notice requirements of this Section shall be punishable by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Such violation shall be cited by the Planning and Development Director or other authorized agent of the city and shall be under the jurisdiction of the city municipal court;
Section 324 Gasoline Stations, Full Service. City of Duluth UDC
3-18
(h) Any person or firm harvesting standing timber therein for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any wood yard or processing plant located inside or outside this state shall not be required to obtain any permit for such harvesting or hauling of forest products as described in this Section, including without limitation any permit for any new driveway in connection with timber harvesting operations; provided, however, that this subsection shall not otherwise limit the authority this city to regulate roads or streets under its jurisdiction in accordance with O.C.G.A. tit. 32. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to waive compliance with any other applicable zoning or development regulations governing the use or development of the property on which the timber harvesting is being conducted.
Section 324. Gasoline Stations, Full Service.
In addition to meeting the requirements of Section 323, a full service gas station shall be limited to four or fewer bays excluding no more than one attached or detached bay for washing cars.
Section 325. Gasoline Stations, No Repairs.
Gasoline station pumps and canopy supports may be located within a front yard setback provided they are located no closer than 15 feet to the highway right-of-way, or not less than the existing setback of any residential structure on abutting lots either the frontage or a side street. In no case shall the canopy extend into the road right-of-way.
Section 326. Horse Riding Stables.
No structure or corral housing horses shall be located closer than 200 feet to any property line.
Section 327. Hotels.
The following standards apply to hotels outside of the CBD District:
(a) Minimum acreage is two acres.
(b) All extended stay facilities shall have a minimum density of 75 guests per gross acre of develop-ment.
(c) Guestrooms shall be accessed internally to the building with no direct room access to the outside. The lobby shall be a minimum of 500 square feet in size.
(d) No room shall be accessed from the exterior of the building unless required by fire/safety regulations.
(e) All guest rooms, which have facilities for both the stor-age and preparation of food and have less than 300 square feet of floor area are limited to a maximum of two persons per such room. However, for all such guest rooms greater than 300 square feet, one addi-tional person shall be allowable per each additional 75 square feet of floor area up to and including a maxi-
mum of four persons.
(f) No more than 10 percent of individual guests shall register, reside or occupy any room or rooms within the same licensed facility for a period of more than 180 days.
(g) No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business from any guestroom of the facility.
Illustrative
Illustrative eexample of a xample of a hhotel with otel with gguestrooms that are uestrooms that are aaccessed ccessed iinter-nter-nally to the nally to the bbuildinguilding. .
City of Duluth UDC Section 328 Junk Yards.
3-19
(h) Each hotel must provide management on duty 24 hours a day.
(i) No hotel or motel existing at the time of adoption of this Development Code is to be converted to or used as apartment or condominium without approval of the City Council with special use approval. Any hotel or motel converted to such use must meet all applicable state and local codes including zoning standards.
(j) Each guest room having a stove-top unit or other type burner shall be required to also include a maximum 60 minute automatic power off timer for each such unit.
(k) A hard-wired smoke detector with battery backup and automatic sprinkler system shall be pro-vided and installed in each guestroom.
(l) No outside storage or permanent parking of equipment or vehicles shall be allowed.
(m) All such facilities shall provide a 50-foot opaque undisturbed buffer from any property zoned for multi-family residential and/or 70-foot opaque undisturbed buffer from any property zoned for single family residential purposes.
(n) All buildings shall have a minimum roof pitch of a four in twelve as defined by applicable building code.
(o) A single meeting or conference space of 1,000 square feet or greater, or a business center, shall be provided on the premises.
(p) A swimming pool or a fitness center shall be provided on the premises.
(q) At a minimum, provisions for weekly cleaning for each suite must be provided.
(r) A landscaping plan is to be approved by the Planning and Development Director.
Section 328. Junk Yards.
(a) The junk yard shall be located no closer than 300 feet to a residential or commercial district boundary line.
(b) The junk yard shall be completely enclosed with a solid fence not projecting into the required front yard, not less than 6 feet high, and in no case shall said fence be less than sufficient to screen such operation from view.
Section 329. Kennel.
(a) No portion of a building, structure, outdoor run or pen used to house or exercise such animals shall be located within 200 feet to any property line.
(b) No portion of the facility functioning as a sleep, play or exercise area for any animal shall be within 250 feet of any residentially zoned property.
(c) The applicant shall submit for approval a detailed Sanitation and Maintenance Manual detailing tasks such as animal waste cleanup and sanitization to be used in the day-to-day operation of the facility.
(d) Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) for all cleaning agents outlined in the required Sanitation and Maintenance Manual should be submitted to and approved by the City of Duluth Planning and Development Department.
(e) All outdoor animal facilities shall be surrounded by a continuous opaque fence at least 8 feet in height.
Section 330 Manufactured Homes. City of Duluth UDC
3-20
(f) No open-air animal areas shall be visible from any public roadway.
(g) On-site veterinary care of the resident animals may occur only as an emergency or ancillary use. Examples of acceptable on-site veterinary care include emergency diagnosis and/or treatment performed by an on-call veterinarian or ancillary veterinary services such as on-site vaccina-tions. At no time shall the scope of the ancillary veterinary services use exceed the scope of the primary kennel use.
(h) Retail and grooming are allowed as ancillary uses as long as the scope of said uses does not exceed the scope of the primary use of a kennel.
(i) An additional setback of 25 feet on either side and 25 feet in the rear is required for all kennels with outdoor animal facilities.
Section 330. Manufactured Homes.
330.01 Manufactured Home Standards.
(a) All manufactured homes must be constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. Mobile homes, as defined in this Devel-opment Code, are considered to be constructed to pre-HUD standards and are not allowed to be installed in the City of Duluth. Any existing mobile home that is removed with the intent of re-placing with another shall comply with this Development Code.
(b) Each manufactured home shall be attached to a permanent foundation.
330.02 Manufactured Home Park Standards.
(a) A manufactured housing district development shall front for a sufficient distance to provide safe access upon a state highway, a major thorough-fare, a collector street or a local access road par-alleling an expressway and shall have access and egress only on such road.
(b) The entrance road to a manufactured housing district development shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 60 feet with a minimum pavement width of 28 feet. The entrance road shall have a turning radius from the highway of at least 300 feet and the entrance road shall extend at least 100 feet into the manufactured housing district development.
(c) Sidewalks shall be constructed within the development, and shall extend the entire frontage of the property on which the entrance is constructed. These shall provide access to recreation facil-ities within and outside the development.
(d) Each manufactured home shall be located on a separate lot. Each home and lot shall be owned by the same person, and shall be taxed as real property and the owner shall qualify for the home-stead exemption. Each lot shall be a minimum of 5,000 square feet and shall contain only one living dwelling.
(e) Not less than 10% of the gross area of manufactured housing district development shall be de-voted to recreation on any other community use facilities. Each recreation space shall have a minimum area of 10,000 square feet. Recreation area(s) may not be located within un-developa-ble land (i.e., floodplain, wetlands, etc.)
(f) A buffer strip at least 25 feet wide shall be provided along the side and rear property lines but not extending into the required front yard of the development. The buffer strip shall be planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that grow at least 8feet tall and provide and effective visual screen. Said buffer strip is to provide a softening between the land uses.
City of Duluth UDC Section 331 Manufacturing, Wholesaling and Warehousing.
3-21
(g) Manufactured homes shall be installed in accordance with the State of Georgias Rules and Regu-lations of the Office of Commissioner of Insurance Safety Fire Division, Chapter 120-3-7 Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes.
(h) No site construction shall be undertaken and no permits shall be issued until a Preliminary Subdi-vision Plat that meets the requirements of the Permits and Procedures Article of this Development Code and the requirements of this Section 330 have been given tentative approval.
Section 331. Manufacturing, Wholesaling and Warehousing.
Special use approval is required for manufacturing, wholesaling and warehousing businesses that ex-ceed 3,500 square feet in the CBD zoning district.
Section 332. Massage Therapy Establishments.
(a) A 150-foot buffer shall be required between any massage therapy business to any residentially zoned property from the front door of the structure where the massage business occurs to the nearest parcel boundary line of any residentially zoned property as measured by a straight line on the ground. Should this buffer requirement differ from what is contained in the City of Duluth Massage Therapy Ordinance in the City of Duluth Code of Ordinances, the requirement in the Massage Therapy Ordinance shall apply.
(b) A message therapy business shall be subject to all other rules and requirements of the City of Duluth Massage Therapy Ordinance in the City of Duluth Code of Ordinances and all current and future pertinent local, state, and federal ordinances.
Section 333. Mini-Warehouses and Self-Storage Units.
(a) Units shall be directly accessed from enclosed corridors.
(b) Individual storage bays within a self-service storage facility shall not be considered a premise for the purpose of assigning a legal address in order to obtain an occupational license or any other governmental permit or licenses to do business.
(c) All property stored on site shall be entirely within enclosed buildings. Storage of flammable liquids, highly combustible or explosive materials, or haz-ardous chemicals is prohibited.
(d) Uses not related to the temporary storage of per-sonal property are prohibited, including use as a residence, office, workshop (including vehicle, appliance or equipment repair), studio, band re-hearsal area or place of business.
(e) No commercial transactions shall be permitted (including auctions; commercial, retail or whole-sale sales; or miscellaneous or garage sales) other than the rental of the storage units.
(f) The operation of power tools, spray-painting equipment, table saws, lathes, compressors, welding equipment, kilns, or similar equipment is prohibited.
Section 334. Motor Vehicle and Parts Dealers.
(a) Paved surfaces shall be provided to avoid the health hazards of dust and standing water.
Illustrative
Illustrative eexample of xample of selfself--storage units that storage units that are directly accessed from enclosed corridors. are directly accessed from enclosed corridors.
Section 335 Pawnshop. City of Duluth UDC
3-22
(b) All vehicles on the rental/sales lots shall be in operating condition at all times.
(c) All parking and loading areas, including rental/sales lots that store and display motor vehicles, shall be screened from the road with a 3 foot high landscaped berm (maximum 2:1 slope) and a 10 foot landscape strip in accordance with the standards of the Landscaping, Buffers and Tree Protection Article of this Development Code. See also the Parking Lot Design, Screening, and Lo-cation Section in the Parking and Loading Requirements Article of this Development Code.
Section 335. Pawnshop.
A property containing a pawn shop shall be a minimum of 500 feet away from any other properties containing a pawn shop.
Section 336. Personal Care Home.
(a) Each personal care home shall be at least 500 feet, in all directions, from any other personal care home.
(b) When dealing with adults, all personal care homes shall obtain a permit from the State of Georgia and shall abide by the State of Georgia rules and regulations for personal care homes. When deal-ing with adolescents, said facilities shall be reviewed by and obtain a permit from the Department of Human Resources Youth Services Division.
(c) In addition to the standards above, the following requirement shall apply to group personal care homes in the O-N zoning district:
(1) One parking space per four beds shall be provided; and
(2) The facility shall be 1,000 feet from any daycare facility, school or place of worship as meas-ured from property line to property line.
Section 337. Radio and Television Broadcasting Stations.
Special use approval is required for stations that exceed 3,500 square feet in the CBD zoning district.
Section 338. Retail Trade.
Special use approval is required for retail trade businesses that exceed 3,500 square feet in the CBD zoning district.
Section 339. Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishments.
(a) A tattoo and body piercing establishment shall be located no closer than 600 feet from any tract or parcel of land which is zoned RA-200, R-100, or located within 600 feet of any residential por-tion of any tract of land which is zoned PUD. In addition, no tattoo and body piercing establish-ment shall be located within 600 feet of any property located within the Historic Residential Dis-trict or the Central Business District.
(b) A tattoo and body piercing establishment shall be located no closer than 100 feet from any tract or parcel of land upon which is located an establishment which is licensed and authorized to sell alcoholic beverages within the City of Duluth.
(c) A tattoo and body piercing establishment shall be subject to the rules and requirements of the City of Duluth Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishment Ordinance in the City of Duluth Code of Ordinances and all other current and future pertinent local, state, and federal ordinances.
City of Duluth UDC Section 340 Temporary Buildings.
3-23
(d) Where the setback requirements of this Section and the Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishment Ordinance conflict, the setback requirements of the Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishment Or-dinance shall apply.
Section 340. Temporary Buildings.
(a) A temporary building or buildings for use in connection with a construction project or land subdi-vision development shall be permitted on the land of the project during the construction period.
(b) A Temporary Use Permit may be granted for the use of manufactured homes/recreational vehi-cles for emergency housing in any zoning district where a conforming structure is rendered unin-habitable by fire, tornado, hurricane, flood or other natural disaster by the Planning and Devel-opment Director for a period not to exceed 60 days.
(1) Said permit may be extended for one year from the date of approval or for a shorter period as specified by the City Council. The City Council may impose reasonable conditions, re-strictions, and safeguards as considered necessary. Violations of these conditions shall be considered a violation of this Development Code.
(2) The Temporary Use Permit may be extended upon proper application when a hardship or unusual circumstances warranting the original permit remains and is verified. A change in the original circumstance shall require re-application for a Temporary Use Permit.
(3) The Temporary Use Permit may be granted to the property owner and it shall not remain in effect in the event of a change of ownership of any land, structure, use or other item covered by the Temporary Use Permit. A Temporary Use Permit may be granted upon application and public hearing requirements as stated in the Procedures and Permits Article of this De-velopment Code.
Section 341. Temporary Events.
341.01 General Requirements for Temporary Events, not Including Yard Sales.
(a) Permit Required.
(1) A temporary use permit shall be applied for and approved by the Department of Planning and Development. Written permission of the property owner shall be provided with the ap-plication.
(2) The temporary use may be permitted for a period not to exceed 20 days unless specifically provided for with the use, and with the exception that one, 10-day extension may be granted by the Planning and Development Director for uses in the C-1 and HC Districts.
(3) A permit for any temporary use on the same property may not be applied for or renewed for a period of not less than six 6 months from the date of any prior approval of a temporary use.
(b) Location.
The temporary use shall not be located within 20 feet of the public right-of-way or within 30 feet of any intersection of two or more public rights-of-way.
(c) Parking.
Adequate parking ingress and egress shall be provided onsite, or on an adjacent site with written permission of the property owner.
Section 341 Temporary Events. City of Duluth UDC
3-24
(d) Signs.
See the Sign Regulations Article of this Development Code.
341.01 Carnival Rides.
(a) Carnival rides may not operate for more than 15 consecutive days.
(b) No structure or equipment may be located within 500 feet of any residential property line.
341.02 Charitable or Non-Profit Event.
Charitable or non-profit events, including religious assembles, shall not exceed four consecutive days in duration.
341.01 Outdoor Markets and Swap Meets.
(a) Outdoor markets, flea markets and craft shows may be permitted on a property for the retail sale or exchange of new, handcrafted, or second-hand merchandise for a maximum period of 48 hours, conducted by a single sponsor no more often than twice in any year.
(b) Outdoor farmers markets (includes roadside stands) may be permitted for the retail sale of pro-duce, breads, meat and poultry, specialty foods and small cooking items and crafts for a maximum period of 48 hours, conducted no more than once a week.
(c) Indoor swap meets and farmers markets are allowed within a fully enclosed building where oth-erwise allowed as a commercial use, without restriction as to hours or frequency.
341.02 Retail Sales of Seasonal Items.
(a) Retail sales of seasonal items (e.g. pumpkins, gourds and other Halloween or fall items; Christmas Trees) are allowed in commercial zoning districts on the same lot between October 1 and Decem-ber 31.
(b) Retail sales of summer refreshments (summer refreshment stands) are allowed in commercial zoning districts between May 15 and September 14.
341.03 Temporary Event: Yard Sale.
(a) Permit Required.
(1) Any person desiring to hold a yard sale shall obtain a complimentary permit from the Plan-ning and Development Director. The application for the permit shall set forth the name and address of the person who will be conducting the yard sale, the address where the same is to be located, and the date upon which the yard sale will be conducted. The Planning and Development Director shall furnish such person with a copy of this Section 341.03 at the time of obtaining the yard sale permit.
(2) In the case of a neighborhood yard sale, one of the persons who will participate in the neigh-borhood yard sale shall make application for the complimentary permit and shall set forth the name and address of the applicant; the address where the sale is to be held; the date or dates on which the neighborhood yard sale is to be held and the names and addresses of all other persons who plan to participate in the sale.
(3) The permit shall be obtained at least five days prior to the commencement date of the yard sale. Applicant shall specify an alternate date (rain date) for such yard sale in the event the proposed sale cannot be held on the first selected date because of inclement weather.
City of Duluth UDC Section 342 Veterinary Clinics, including Animal Hospitals.
3-25
(b) Frequency and Duration.
No person may hold a yard sale at the same location more frequently than once each 90 days and such sale shall not be for a period of time greater than 48 hours.
(c) Duties of Planning and Development Director.
The Planning and Development Director shall:
(1) Maintain application forms and complimentary permits to be issued for yard sales.
(2) Furnish to the City of Duluth Police Department a copy of all yard sale permits as and when the permits are issued.
(3) Maintain a record of all permits issued which record of permits issued for yard sale shall be maintained for the space of at least 18 months.
(4) Before issuing any yard sale permit, check the listing record of previous permits issued to be certain that a requested permit is not being requested more frequently than permitted under the terms of this Section 341.03 and if such requested permit is for a date or time by the same applicant or at an address where a previous yard sale has been held less than 90 days prior to the date of the proposed sale, the Planning and Development Director shall have the authority to refuse to issue the permit.
(d) Display of Permit.
The permit issued to any applicant for a yard sale shall be publicly displayed by the applicant during the time that the yard sale is being held or shall be available for inspection by a City of Duluth police officer upon demand.
(e) Temporary Signs.
See the Sign Regulations Article of this Development Code.
(f) Termination of Sales without Permit.
City Council hereby grants authority to the Chief of Police and police officers to order the imme-diate termination of any yard sale being conducted without a valid permit being issued pursuant to the terms of this Section 341.03. Any person who refuses to obey the order of the chief of police or other lawful officer of the City and immediately cease and terminate said yard sale and remove the public display of goods from their yard shall be subject to arrest for the charge of failing to obey a lawful order of a police officer and be subject to all the penalties for the violation of the City of Duluth Code of Ordinances. The charge provided for in this Section is in addition to any other charges that may be brought against such individual conducting a yard sale in violation of the terms of Section 341.03.
Section 342. Veterinary Clinics, including Animal Hospitals.
(a) All activities associated with animal hospital/veterinary clinic operations shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
(b) Non-medically necessary boarding/kennel operations may occur as an ancillary use only. Any out-door facilities (e.g. outdoor runs) shall be subject to those in Section 329.
Section 343. Wireless Telecommunications.
343.01 Intent.
Section 343 Wireless Telecommunications. City of Duluth UDC
3-26
This Code Section is designed and intended to balance the interests of the residents of the City of Duluth, tele-communications providers, and telecommunications customers in the siting of wireless facilities and support structures within the City of Duluth so as to protect the health, safety and integrity of residential neighborhoods and foster, through appropriate zoning and land use controls, a competitive environment for telecommunications carriers that does not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services and shall not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, and so as to promote the City of Duluth as a proactive city in the availability of wireless telecommunications service.
343.02 Purposes.
(a) Provide for the appropriate location and development of wireless facilities and support structures to serve the residents and businesses of the City of Duluth
(b) Protect the City of Duluths built and natural environment by promoting compatible design stand-ards for wireless facilities and support structures.
(c) Minimize adverse visual impacts of wireless facilities and support structures through careful de-sign, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques.
(d) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from wireless facility and support structure failure through engineering and careful siting of wireless facilities and support structures.
(e) Maximize use of any new and existing wireless support structures (towers) so as to minimize the need to construct new towers and minimize the total number of towers throughout the City.
(f) Maximize and encourage use of alternative telecommunication tower structures as a primary op-tion rather than construction of additional single-use towers.
(g) Encourage and promote the location of new wireless facilities and support structures in areas which are not zoned for residential use.
343.03 Exemptions.
The following shall be exempt from this Code Section:
(a) Any wireless facilities and support structures under 70 feet in total height and owned and oper-ated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission.
(b) Any wireless facilities or support structures located on property owned, leased or otherwise con-trolled by the City of Duluth, provided a license or lease authorizing a wireless telecommunica-tions facility has been approved by the governing body.
City of Duluth UDC Section 343 Wireless Telecommunications.
3-27
(c) Any wireless facilities and support structures for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this Code (and is cur-rent and not expired), with the exception that any modifications or col-location proposed after issuance of the initial permit shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with this Code Section.
343.04 Collocation; Availability of Suitable Existing Structures.
No new wireless support structure (tower) shall be allowed unless the appli-cant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Planning and Development De-partment and the City Council that no existing tower or existing alternative tower structure (clock towers, bell towers, church steeples, light/power poles, electric transmission towers, manmade trees, and similar natural or manmade alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the pres-ence of antennas or towers) can accommodate the applicant's proposed wire-less facilities. All evidence submitted shall be signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals or qualified industry experts. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the pro-posed antenna shall consist of the following:
(a) That no existing towers or suitable alternative tower structures are lo-cated within the geographic antennas placement area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements.
(b) That existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements.
(c) That existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's antenna and related equipment.
(d) That the applicant's proposed antenna(s) would cause electromagnetic interference with the an-tenna(s) on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna.
(e) That the cost or contractual provisions required by the tower owner to share an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable.
(f) That the applicant adequately demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render ex-isting towers and structures unsuitable.
343.05 Allowed Zoning Districts.
(a) If it is adequately demonstrated that antenna collocation, as required in Sec. 343.03(c), is not possible for a given geographic antenna placement area, constructing a new tower, including placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or antenna, may be allowed in the following zoning districts upon Special Use approval by City Council: M-1, M-2, C-1, C-2, HC-Retail, HC-Auto, PUD, O-I and RA-200.
(b) Collocation, as described in Section Sec. 343.03(c), shall be allowed in the following zoning dis-tricts: M-1, M-2, C-1, C-2, HC-Retail, HC-Auto, PUD, O-I and RA-200.
343.06 Principal, Accessory and Joint Uses.
Illustrative example of multiple wireless facilities on a single tower (co-location).
Section 343 Wireless Telecommunications. City of Duluth UDC
3-28
(a) Accessory structures used in direct support of a tower shall be allowed but not be used for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct sup-port of a tower facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the tower.
(b) Towers may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same buildable area. Joint use of a site is prohibited when a proposed or existing principal use includes the storage, distri-bution or sale of volatile, flammable, explosive or hazardous materials such as propane, gasoline, natural gas and dangerous chemicals.
(c) Placement of more than one tower on a lot shall be permitted, provided requirement Sec. 343.07(h)(5) is met along with all setback, design and landscape requirements as to each tower. Structures may be located as close to each other as technically feasible, provided tower failure characteristics of the towers on the site will not lead to multiple failures in the event that one fails.
343.07 General Requirements.
The requirements set forth in this Code Section shall govern the location and construction of all wire-less facilities and support structures governed by this Code.
(a) Building Codes and Safety Standards. To ensure the structural integrity of wireless facilities and support structures, the owner of such a facility and structure shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable stand-ards for such wireless facilities and support structures are published by the FCC as amended from time to time. The owner shall also conduct periodic inspections of such facilities at least once every three years to ensure structural integrity. Inspections shall be conducted by a Georgia li-censed structural engineer. The results of such inspection shall be provided to the Planning and Development Director.
(b) Regulatory Compliance. All wireless facilities and support structures must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the state or federal gov-ernment with the authority to regulate wireless facilities and structures. If such standards and regulations are changed then the owners of the facilities and structures governed by this Code Section shall bring such communications facilities and structures into compliance with such re-vised standards and regulations within the date established by the agency promulgating the standards or regulations.
(c) Security. All wireless support structures shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing not less than 6 feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. This requirement may be waived by the Planning and Development Director it is deemed that this would produce negative visual clutter or obstruct a view corridor.
(d) Lighting. No illumination is permitted on wireless facilities or support structures unless part of an approved public lighting program or required by the FCC, FAA or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction in which case the Planning and Development Director may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views.
(e) Advertising. No advertising is permitted on wireless facilities or support structures.
(f) Visual Impact.
(1) Site location and development shall preserve the pre-existing character of the surrounding buildings and land uses and the zone district as much as possible. Towers shall be integrated
City of Duluth UDC Section 343 Wireless Telecommunications.
3-29
through location and design to blend in with existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical (i.e. camouflaging through integration with structures or appearance such as artifi-cial trees, etc.).
(2) Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing to-pography shall be minimized, unless such dis-turbance would result in less visual impact of the site to the surrounding area.
(3) At a tower site the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment (i.e. artificial tree appearance, steeples, decorative fencing, etc.).
(4) Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or other applicable federal or state agency, be painted a neutral color, so as to re-
duce visual obtrusiveness.
(5) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower and is generally visible to the public, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to or closely compatible with the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. Roof mounted antennas shall be made visually unobtrusive by screening to match existing air con-ditioning units, stairs, elevator towers or other background.
(6) Antennas mounted on architecturally significant structures or significant architectural details of the building shall be covered by appropriate casings that are manufactured to match ex-isting architectural features found on the building.
(7) Where feasible, antennas can be placed directly above, below or incorporated with vertical design elements of a building to help in camouflaging.
(8) Towers or roof mounted antennas shall not be placed in direct line with significant view cor-ridors, as designated by the City of Duluth or by any state or federal law or agency. For purposes of this Code Section a significant view corridor shall be defined as an area to be kept free of obstructions or structures that interfere with the view of any scenic area, historic building or area. A view corridor shall be established by ordinance of the City of Duluth by zoning restrictions adopted in accordance with the ordinances of the City of Duluth, or by any state or federal law or agency in accordance with provisions of federal laws or duly adopted regulations.
(9) Any equipment shelter or cabinet must be concealed from public view or made compatible with the architecture of the surrounding structures or placed underground. Equipment com-pounds shall be screened from public view and may use landscaping or materials and colors consistent with the surrounding structures. The shelter or cabinet must be regularly main-tained.
Illustrative example of wireless
Illustrative example of wireless tower camouflaged as a treetower camouflaged as a tree
Section 343 Wireless Telecommunications. City of Duluth UDC
3-30
(g) Landscaping.
(1) Landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the equipment compound from adjacent public ways, public property and residential property.
(2) Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent. The appli-cant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed and veg-etation to be replanted.
(3) The Planning and Development Director may waive or modify the landscaping requirement where lesser requirements are desirable for adequate visibility for security purposes or for continued operation of existing bona fide agricultural or forest uses such as farms, nurseries and tree farms. In certain locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, such as remote agricultural or rural locations or developed heavy industrial areas, the land-scaping requirement may be modified or waived by the Planning and Development Director.
(h) Lot Size and Setbacks.
The site shall be of a size and shape sufficient to provide an adequate setback from the base of the tower to any property line abutting a residential district, public property, or public street. Such setback shall be sufficient to:
(1) Provide for an adequate vegetative, topographic or other buffer as required in Section 343.07(g).
(2) Preserve the privacy of surrounding residential property.
(3) Protect adjoining property from the potential impact of tower failure by being large enough to accommodate such failure on the site, based on the required engineers analysis.
(4) When a tower is adjacent to a residential use, it must be set back from the nearest residential lot line a distance at least equal to its total height.
(5) Towers greater than 70 feet in height shall not be located any closer than 1,500 feet from an existing tower unless technologically required or visually preferable as determined by the City Council through a Special Use approval request.
(6) Setbacks for towers 70 feet and less shall not be closer to a residential structure than the height of the tower or closer to a residential property line than 40 feet.
343.08 Special Use Approval.
(a) Special use approval shall be required to:
(1) Construct a new tower in an allowed district identified in Sec. 343.05; or
(2) Modify or accept a collocation to a previously approved wireless facility or support structure (tower) when the proposed modification of collocation:
a. Increases the overall height or width of the support structure to which the wireless fa-cilities are to be attached; or
b. Increases the dimensions of the equipment compound that was initially approved by the City.
(b) Application. In addition to the special use review and approval requirements found in the Proce-dures and Permits Article of this Development Code, the following process shall apply:
City of Duluth UDC Section 343 Wireless Telecommunications.
3-31
(1) An application shall be submitted that includes the following information:
a. Site plan(s) to scale specifying the location of telecommunications facilities, transmis-sion building and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas and adjacent land uses.
b. Landscape plan to scale indicating size, spacing and type of plantings required in this Code Section.
c. An impact statement fully describing the effects that the proposed telecommunications facility will have on the environment and surrounding area including the impacts on ad-jacent residential structures and districts, impacts on structures and sites of historic sig-nificance and impacts on streetscapes and significant view corridors. The Impact State-ment shall include a description of anticipated maintenance needs for the telecommu-nications facility, including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs and traffic noise or safety impacts of such maintenance.
d. Report from a professional structural engineer licensed in the State of Georgia, docu-menting the following:
1. Telecommunications facility height and design, including technical, engineering, economic and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design.
2. Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility, including number and types of antennae which can be accommodated. Evidence shall be provided that indicates capacity is sufficient to allow future wireless facilities (collocation).
3. Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure (i.e. engineers statement that structure is built to meet or exceed Standard Building Code).
4. Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunications tower(s) over 70 feet and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris.
5. A definition of the area of service to be served by the antenna or tower and whether such antenna or tower is needed for coverage or capacity.
e. The identity of a community liaison officer to resolve issues of concern to neighbors and residents relating to the construction and operation of the facility. Include name, ad-dress, telephone number, facsimile number and electronic mail address, if applicable.
f. The existing towers and tall structures located within the geographic service area should be identified on a map along with written justification at to the need for a new tower in place of an existing structures
g. A map indicating all existing tower and antennae sites located within Duluth and within 2 miles of the city boundaries.
(c) Review Period.
(1) Within 150 calendar days of the date an application for special use approval is filed with the Planning and Development Department, unless another date is specified in a written agree-ment between the Department and the applicant, the City shall:
a. Make its final decision to approve or disapprove the application; and
b. Advise the applicant in writing of its final decision.
Section 343 Wireless Telecommunications. City of Duluth UDC
3-32
(2) Within 30 calendar days of the date an application for special use approval is filed with the Planning and Development Department, the Planning and Development Director shall deter-mine if it is a complete application and, if he or she determines the application is not a com-plete application, notify the applicant in writing of any information required to complete such application.
(3) To the extent additional information is required to complete the application, the time re-quired by the applicant to provide such information shall not be counted toward the calendar day review period set forth in Sec. 343.08(c)(1) above.
343.09 Administrative Review.
(a) Uses Allowed by Administrative Approval.
(1) Modification or Collocation, Wireless Facility or Support Structure.
A proposed modification or collocation to a previously approved wireless facility or support structure, with the exception of proposals meeting the criteria of Sec. 343.09(a)(2) below, may be approved by the Planning and Development Department after conducting an admin-istrative review if the proposed modification or collocation does not increase the overall height or width of the support structure to which the wireless facilities are to be attached or increase the dimensions of the equipment compound that was initially approved by the City.
a. Review Period.
1. Within 90 calendar days of the date an application for a modification or collocation meeting the criteria of Sec. 343.09(a) is filed with the Planning and Development Department, unless another date is specified in a written agreement between the Department and the applicant, the City shall make its final decision to approve or disapprove the application and advise the applicant in writing of its final decision.
2. Within 30 calendar days of the date an application for modification or collocation meeting the criteria of Sec. 343.09(a) is filed with the Planning and Development Department, the Planning and Development Director shall determine if it is a com-plete application and, if he or she determines the application is not a complete application, notify the applicant in writing of any information required to complete such application.
3. To the extent additional information is required to complete the application, the time required by the applicant to provide such information shall not be counted toward the 90-calendar day review period set forth above.
(2) Modification, Base Station or Tower.
For a proposed modification of an existing base station or tower that does not substantially change, as defined in the Interpretation and Definitions Article of this Development Code, the physical dimensions of such tower or base station, the process outlined below shall apply.
a. Within 60 days of the date on which an applicant submits a request seeking approval under this Section, the Planning and Development Director shall approve the application unless it determines that the application is not covered by this subsection.
City of Duluth UDC Section 343 Wireless Telecommunications.
3-33
b. The 60-day period begins to run when the application is filed, and may be tolled only by mutual agreement or in cases where the Planning and Development Department deter-mines that the application is incomplete. The timeframe for review is not tolled by a moratorium on the review of applications.
c. To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the Planning and Development Department must provide written notice to the applicant within 30 days of receipt of the application, clearly and specifically delineating all missing documents or information. Such deline-ated information does not require documentation intended to illustrate the need for such wireless facilities or to justify the business decision to modify such wireless facili-ties.
d. The timeframe for review begins running again when the applicant makes a supple-mental submission in response to the Planning and Development Departments notice of incompleteness.
e. Following a supplemental submission, Planning and Development Department will have 10 days to notify the applicant that the supplemental submission did not provide the information identified in the original notice delineating missing information. The timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant to the proce-dures identified in Subsection (2) above. Second or subsequent notices of incomplete-ness may not specify missing documents or information that were not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.
343.10 Maintenance Impacts.
Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts or has access to a collector and to a local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector street. Access drives and maintenance vehicle parking shall be paved unless the requirement is waived by the Planning and Development Director.
343.11 Nuisances.
Telecommunications facilities, including; (without limitation), power source, ventilation and cooling, shall be operated at all times within the limits of the City of Duluth Noise Ordinance, shall not be op-erated so as to cause the generation of heat that adversely affects a building occupant and shall not be maintained or operated in such a manner as to be a nuisance.
343.12 Removal of Antennae and Towers.
All telecommunications facilities shall be maintained in compliance with standards contained in appli-cable building and technical codes so as to ensure the structural integrity of such facilities. If upon inspection by the Planning and Development Director or his designee any such telecommunications facility is determined not to comply with the minimum Standard Building Code or to constitute a dan-ger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the facility and the owner of the property if such owner is different, such owners shall have 30 days to bring such facility into compliance. In the event such telecommunications facility is not brought into compliance within 30 days, the City may provide notice to the owners requiring the telecommunications facility to be re-moved. In the event such telecommunications facility is not removed within 30 days of receipt of such notice, the City may remove such facility and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal or seek costs incurred through court action. Delay by the City in taking action shall not in any way waive the Citys right to take action. The City may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that
Section 343 Wireless Telecommunications. City of Duluth UDC
3-34
telecommunications facilities not in compliance with the minimum Standard Building Code standards or which constitute a danger to persons or property are brought into compliance or removed. The City may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owners or operators in-tent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted.
343.13 Abandoned Towers.
(a) Any telecommunications facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of it or any part of it. The owner of a telecommunications facility and the owner of the property where the facility is located shall be under a duty to remove the abandoned telecommunications facility. If such antenna and/or tower is not removed within 60 days of receipt of notice from the City noti-fying the owner(s) of such abandonment, the City may remove such tower and/or antenna and place a lien upon the property for any removal cost(s) incurred or seek costs incurred through court action. The City may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that abandoned tel-ecommunications facilities are removed. Delay by the City in taking action shall not in any way waive the Citys right to take action. The City may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owners or operators intent to operate the tower or antenna and re-gardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted.
(b) If the owner of an abandoned tower or antenna wishes to use such abandoned tower or antenna, the owner first must apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this Article as if such tower or antenna were a new tower or antenna.
343.14 Small Cell Wireless Facility
(a) Intent
(1) This Code Section is designed to implement the Georgia Streamlining Wireless Facilities and Antennas Act., O.C.G.A. Title 36, Chapter 66C. The provisions address placement of small cell facilities and associated poles in the public rights of way. The GMAs Model Right of Way Ordinance, available to local governments in the GMA Telecommunications and Right of Way Management program, addresses other conditions regarding the access and use of the right of way that are not specific to small cell facilities and associated poles.
(b) Purpose and Compliance
(1) O.C.G.A.  32-4-92(a)(10) authorizes the City of Duluth, Georgia (the City) to establish reasonable regulations for the installation, construction, maintenance, renewal, removal, and relocation of pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other sig-nals, and other equipment, facilities, or appliances in, on, along, over, or under the public roads of the City. Further, 47 U.S.C.  253(c) provides that the City has authority to manage its public rights of way. Finally, the Georgia Streamlining Wireless Facilities and Antennas Act., O.C.G.A. Title 36, Chapter 66C (the SWFAA), addresses the placement of small wireless facilities in the public rights of way of the City.
(2) The City finds it is in the best interest of the City and its residents and businesses to establish requirements, specifications reasonable conditions regarding placement of small wireless fa-cilities, poles in the public rights of way. These requirements, specifications and conditions are adopted in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the residents and businesses of the City and to reasonably manage and protect the public rights of way and its uses in the City.
City of Duluth UDC Section 343 Wireless Telecommunications.
3-35
(3) The objective of Section 343.14 is to (i) implement the SWFAA and (ii) ensure use of the public rights of way is consistent with the design, appearance and other features of nearby land uses, protects the integrity of historic, cultural and scenic resources and does not harm resi-dents quality of life.
(c) Definitions
(1) Unless defined within this Ordinance, terms used in Section 343.14 shall have the meanings given them in O.C.G.A.  36-66C-2.
(2) In the event that any federal or state law containing definitions used in Section 343.14 is amended, the definition in the referenced section, as amended, shall control.
(3) Definitions in Section 343.14 include references and citations to applicable federal and state laws. In the event that any referenced section is amended, the definition in the referenced section, as amended, shall control.
(d) Permits
(1) A permit is required to collocate a small wireless facility in the public right of way or to install, modify, or replace a pole or a decorative pole in the public right of way. A permit is not re-quired to perform the activities described in O.C.G.A.  36-66C-6(e) or (f).
(2) Any person seeking to collocate a small wireless facility in the public right of way or to install, modify, or replace a pole or a decorative pole in the public right of way shall submit an ap-plication to the Department of Planning and Development for a permit. Applications are available from the Department of Planning and Development. Any material change to infor-mation contained in an application shall be submitted in writing to the Department of Plan-ning and Development within 30 days after the events necessitating the change.
(3) Each application for a permit shall include the maximum application fees permitted under O.C.G.A.  36-66C-5(a)(1), (a)(2) and (a)(3). Such maximum application fees shall automati-cally increase on January 1 of each year beginning January 1, 2021, as provided under O.C.G.A.  36-66C-5(b).
(4) The Department of Planning and Development shall review applications for permits accord-ing to the timelines and using the procedures identified in O.C.G.A.  36-66C-7 and 36-66C-13.
(5) Applications for permits shall be approved except as follows:
a. In order to receive a permit to install a pole or replace a decorative pole, the applicant must have determined after diligent investigation that it cannot meet the service objec-tives of the permit by collocating on an existing pole or support structure on which:
1. The applicant has the right to collocate subject to reasonable terms and conditions; and
2. Such collocation would not impose technical limitations or significant additional costs. The applicant shall certify that it has made such a determination in good faith, based on the assessment of a licensed engineer, and shall provide a written summary of the basis for such determination.
The Department of Planning and Development may deny an application for a permit upon any of the conditions identified in O.C.G.A.  36-66C-7(j).
Section 343 Wireless Telecommunications. City of Duluth UDC
3-36
For applications for new poles in the public right of way in areas zoned for residential use, the Department of Planning and Development may propose an alternate location in the public right of way within 100 feet of the location set forth in the application, and the wireless provider shall use the Department of Planning and Development proposed alternate location unless the location imposes technical limits or significant additional costs. The wireless provider shall certify that it has made such a determination in good faith, based on the assessment of a licensed engineer, and it shall provide a written summary of the basis for such determination.
(6) A permit issued under Section 343.14(d) shall authorize such person to occupy the public rights of way to: (i) collocate a small wireless facility on or adjacent to a pole or a support structure that does not exceed the limitations set forth in O.C.G.A.  36-66C-7(h)(3) or on or adjacent to a decorative pole in compliance with O.C.G.A.  36-66C-12; and (ii) install, modify, or replace a pole or decorative pole for collocation of a small wireless facility that does not exceed the limitations set forth in O.C.G.A.  36-66C-7(h)(1) and (h)(2).
(7) Upon the issuance of a permit under this Code, and on each anniversary of such issuance, every person issued a permit shall submit to the City the maximum annual payments permit-ted under O.C.G.A.  36-66C-5(a)(4) and (a)(5); provided, however, that if such person re-moves its small wireless facilities form the public rights of way pursuant to O.C.G.A.  36-66C-5(e), then such person shall be responsible for the pro rata portion of the annual pay-ment based on the number of days of occupation since the last annual payment. Upon mak-ing such pro rata payment and removal of the small wireless facilities, the persons annual payment obligations under this section shall cease as of the date of the actual removal. The maximum annual payments shall automatically increase on January 1 of each year beginning January 1, 2021, as provided under O.C.G.A.  36-66C-5(b).
(8) Any person issued a permit shall pay the fees identified in O.C.G.A.  36- 66C-5(a)(6) and (a)(7), as applicable.
(9) The City may revoke a permit issued pursuant to Section 343.14(d) if the wireless provider or its equipment placed in the public right of way under that permit subsequently is not in com-pliance with any provision of this Code or the Georgia Streamlining Wireless Facilities and Antennas Act. Upon revocation, the City may proceed according to Section 343.14(d)(10).
(10) If a wireless provider occupies the public rights of way without obtaining a permit required by Section 343.14(d) or without complying with the SWFAA, then the City may, at the sole discretion of the City, restore the right of way, to the extent practicable in the reasonable judgment of the City, to its condition prior to the unpermitted collocation or installation and to charge the responsible wireless provider the reasonable, documented cost of the City in doing so, plus a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00. The City may suspend the ability of the wireless provider to receive any new permits from the City under Section 343.14(d) until the wireless provider has paid the amount assessed for such restoration costs and the penalty assessed, if any; provided, however, that the City may not suspend such ability of any appli-cant that has deposited the amount in controversy in escrow pending an adjudication of the merits of the dispute by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(11) All accepted applications for permits shall be publically available subject to the limitations identified in O.C.G.A.  36-66C-6(c).
City of Duluth UDC Section 343 Wireless Telecommunications.
3-37
(12) An applicant may file a consolidated application related to multiple small wireless facilities, poles or decorative poles so long as such consolidated application meets the requirements of O.C.G.A.  36-66C-13.
(13) Activities authorized under a permit shall be completed within the timelines provided in O.C.G.A.  36-66C-7(k)(2).
(14) Issuance of a permit authorizes the applicant to: (i) undertake the collocation, installation, modification or replacement approved by the permit and (ii) operate and maintain the small wireless facilities and any associated pole covered by the permit for a period of 10 years.
(15) Permits shall be renewed following the expiration of the term identified in Section 343.14(d)(14) upon the terms and conditions identified in O.C.G.A.  36-66C-7(k)(2)(B).
(16) If an application for a permit seeks to collocate small wireless facilities on authority poles in the public rights of way, then the City shall, within 60-days of receipt of the completed appli-cation: (i) provide a good faith estimate for any make-ready work necessary to enable the authority pole to support the proposed facility; or (ii) notify the wireless provider that the wireless provider will be required to perform the make-ready work. Any make-ready work performed by the City shall be completed pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A.  36-66C-7(n).
(e) Removal; Relocation; Reconditioning; Replacement; Abandonment
(1) A person may remove its small wireless facilities from the public rights of according to the procedures of O.C.G.A.  36-66C-5(e).
(2) In the event of a removal under Section 343.14(e)(1), the right of way shall be, to the extent practicable in the reasonable judgment of the City, restored to its condition prior to the re-moval. If a person fails to return the right of way, to the extent practicable in the reasonable judgment of the City, to its condition prior to the removal within 90 days of the removal, the City may, at the sole discretion of the City, restore the right of way to such condition and charge the person the Citys reasonable, documented cost of removal and restoration, plus a penalty not to exceed $500.00. The City may suspend the ability of the person to receive any new permits under Section 343.14(d) until the person has paid the amount assessed for such restoration costs and the penalty assessed, if any; provided, however, that the City will not suspend such ability of any person that has deposited the amount in controversy in es-crow pending an adjudication of the merits of the dispute by a court of competent jurisdic-tion.
(3) If, in the reasonable exercise of police powers, the City determines: (i) a pole or support structure unreasonably interferes with the widening, repair, reconstruction, or relocation of a public road or highway, or (ii) relocation of poles, support structures, or small wireless fa-cilities is required as a result of a public project, the wireless provider shall relocate such poles, support structures, or small wireless facilities pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A.  36-66C-7(l). If the wireless provider fails to relocate a pole, support structure or small wireless facility or fails to provide a written good faith estimate of the time needed to relocate the pole, support structure or small wireless within the time period pre-scribed in O.C.G.A.  36-66C-7(l), the City make take the actions authorized by O.C.G.A.  36-66C-7(o), in addition to any other powers under applicable law.
Section 343 Wireless Telecommunications. City of Duluth UDC
3-38
(4) The City shall recondition and replace authority poles consistent with the provisions of O.C.G.A.  36-66C-7(m). Wireless providers shall accommodate and cooperate with recondi-tioning and replacement consistent with the provisions of O.C.G.A.  36- 66C-7(m).
(5) A wireless provider must notify the City of its decision to abandon any small wireless facility, support structure or pole pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A.  36-66C-7(p)(1). The wireless provider shall perform all acts and duties identified in O.C.G.A.  36-66C-7(p) regarding abandonment. The City may take all actions and exercise all powers authorized under O.C.G.A.  36-66C-7(p) upon abandonment, in addition to any other pow-ers under applicable law.
(f) Standards
(1) Small wireless facilities and new, modified, or replacement poles to be used for collocation of small wireless facilities may be placed in the public right of way as a permitted use: (i) upon a receipt of a permit under Section 343.14(d); (ii) subject to applicable codes; and (iii) so long as such small wireless facilities and new, modified, or replacement poles to be used for collocation of small wireless facilities comply with the appropriate provisions of O.C.G.A.  36- 66C-7(h).
a. New, modified, or replacement poles installed in the right of way in a historic district and in an area zoned primarily for residential use shall not exceed 50 feet above ground level.
b. Each new, modified, or replacement pole installed in the right of way that is not in a historic district or in an area zoned primarily for residential use shall not exceed the greater of:
1. Fifty feet above ground level; or
2. Ten feet greater in height above ground level than the tallest existing pole in the same public right of way in place as of January 1, 2019, and located within 500 feet of the new proposed pole;
c. New small wireless facilities in the public right of way and collocated on an existing pole or support structure shall not exceed more than ten feet above the existing pole or sup-port structure.
d. New small wireless facilities in the public right of way collocated on a new or replace-ment pole under Section 343.14(f)(1)a or Section 343.14(f)(1)b may not extend above the top of such poles.
(2) A decorative pole should only be located where an existing pole can be removed and re-placed, or at a new location where the City has identified that a streetlight is necessary.
(3) Unless it is determined that another design is less intrusive, or placement is required under applicable law, small wireless facilities shall be concealed as follows:
a. Antennas located at the top of poles and support structures shall be incorporated into the pole or support structure, or placed within shrouds of a size such that the antenna appears to be part of the pole or support structure;
b. Antennas placed elsewhere on a pole or support structure shall be integrated into the pole or support structure, or be designed and placed to minimize visual impacts.
City of Duluth UDC Section 343 Wireless Telecommunications.
3-39
c. Radio units or equipment cabinets holding radio units and mounted on a pole shall be placed as high as possible, located to avoid interfering with, or creating any hazard to, any other use of the public rights of way, and located on one side of the pole. Unless the radio units or equipment cabinets can be concealed by appropriate traffic signage, radio units or equipment cabinets mounted below the communications space on poles shall be designed so that the largest dimension is vertical, and the width is such that the radio units or equipment cabinets are minimally visible from the opposite side of the pole on which they are placed.
d. Wiring and cabling shall be neat and concealed within or flush to the pole or support structure, ensuring concealment of these components to the greatest extent possible.
(4) Notwithstanding any provision of this Code Section to the contrary, an applicant may collo-cate a small wireless facility within a historic district, and may place or replace a pole within a historic district, only upon satisfaction of the following: (i) issuance of a permit under Sec-tion 343.14(d) and (ii) compliance with applicable codes.
(5) Notwithstanding any provision of this Code Section to the contrary, an applicant may collo-cate a small wireless facility on a decorative pole, or may replace a decorative pole with a new decorative pole, in the event the existing decorative pole will not structurally support the attachment, only upon satisfaction of the following: (i) issuance of a permit under Section 343.14(d) and (ii) compliance with applicable codes.
(g) Aesthetic Standards
(1) Authority and Scope
a. O.C.G.A.  32-4-92(a)(10) authorizes the City to establish reasonable regulations for the installation, construction, maintenance, renewal, removal, and relocation of pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equip-ment, facilities, or appliances in, on, along, over, or under the public roads of the City. Further, 47 U.S.C.  253(c) provides that the City has authority to manage its public rights of way.
b. The City finds it is in the best interest of the City and its residents and businesses to establish aesthetic requirements and other specifications and reasonable conditions re-garding placement of facilities in the public rights of way. These requirements, specifi-cations and conditions are adopted in order to protect the public health, safety and wel-fare of the residents and businesses of the City and to reasonably manage and protect the public rights of way and its uses in the City.
c. The objective of Section 343.14(g) is to ensure use of the public rights of way:
1. Is consistent with the design, appearance and other features of nearby land uses;
2. Protects the integrity of historic, cultural and scenic resources; and
3. Does not harm residents quality of life.
d. Section 343.14(g) applies to all requests to locate facilities in the public rights of way and ongoing use of the public rights of way for such facilities. Section 343.14(g) is estab-lished pursuant to City Charter and applicable law. Section 343.14(g) is administered by the Department of Planning and Development.
Section 343 Wireless Telecommunications. City of Duluth UDC
3-40
e. Placement or modification of facilities in the public right of way shall comply with this Section at the time the permit for installation or modification is approved and as amended from time to time. Permittees are required to comply with City Code and ap-plicable law and regulations.
(2) Facilities Standards
a. Facilities must be compatible in size, mass, and color to similar facilities in the same zoning area, with a goal of minimizing the physical and visual impact on the area.
b. Facilities in the residential, historical, architecturally significant areas shall be visually and architecturally integrated with the residential, historical, architecturally significant areas and shall not interfere with prominent vistas or significant public view corridors.
c. Facilities must be located in alignment with existing trees and/or facilities.
d. Facilities must maintain the integrity and character of the neighborhoods and corridors in which the facilities are located.
(3) Undergrounding
Except as provided in Section 343.14(g)(3)a and Section 343.14(g)(3)b, facilities shall be in-stalled underground so long as placement underground will not materially impact the provi-sion of service. Any individual requesting to locate facilities above ground has the burden to demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that undergrounding will effectively prohibit the provision of the service in question.
a. Light poles and small wireless facilities collocated thereon may be located above ground in areas of the City where facilities are primarily located underground.
b. The City may:
1. Allow collocated small wireless facilities placed aboveground prior to the effective date of this Code and subject to any applicable pole attachment agreement to re-main above ground; or
2. Allow the wireless provider to replace the pole associated with previously collo-cated small wireless facilities at the same location or propose an alternate location within 50 feet of the prior location, which the wireless provider shall use unless such alternate location imposes technical limits or significant additional costs.
(4) Camouflaging
Facilities must be designed using camouflaging techniques that make them as unobtrusive as possible if:
a. It is not possible or desirable to match the design and color of facilities with the similar facilities in the same zoning area, as required under Section 343.14(g)(2)a; or
b. Existing facilities in the area are out of character with a streetscape plan or other aes-thetic plan that has been adopted by the City.
(5) Installation and Modification Standards
Installation of new facilities in, on, along, over, or under the public rights of way or modifica-tion of existing facilities in, on, along, over, or under the public rights of way shall:
a. Minimize risks to public safety;
City of Duluth UDC Section 344 Detached Structures.
3-41
b. Ensure that placement of facilities on existing structures is within the tolerance of those structures;
c. Ensure that installations and modifications are subject to periodic review to minimize the intrusion on the right of way;
d. Ensure that the City bears no risk or liability as a result of the installations or modifica-tions; and
e. Ensure that use of the public rights of way does not inconvenience the public, interfere with the primary uses of the public rights of way, or hinder the ability of the City or other government entities to improve, modify, relocate, abandon, or vacate the right of way or any portion thereof, or to cause the improvement, modification, relocation, vacation, or abandonment of facilities in the right of way.
(6) Plans for Use
No facilities shall be placed in, on, along, over, or under the public rights of way unless:
a. There are immediate plans to use the proposed facility; or
b. There is a contract with another party that has immediate plans to use the proposed facility.
(7) Contact Information
Every facility placed in the public rights of way shall at all times display signage that accurately identifies the facility owner and provides the facility owners unique site number, and also provides a local or toll-free telephone number to contact the facility owners operations cen-ter.
DIVISION III. ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
Section 344. Detached Structures.
Detached accessory structures and/or uses, with the exception of a detached automobile parking gar-age in a residentially zoned district, shall be limited in size to a total or combined gross square footage not to exceed 20 percent of the heated square footage of the principal structure, or 20 percent of square footage of the primary land use area, as shown on an "as built" survey.
Section 345. Home Occupations.
(a) The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling unit and only by occupants of the dwelling unit.
(b) No outdoor storage is allowed.
(c) One sign, no greater than 1 square foot in size, is allowed per dwelling unit.
Section 346 Farm Tenant Dwellings. City of Duluth UDC
3-42
(d) No clients, patrons or employees (other than the resident) shall be allowed on the property.
(e) Home occupation(s) shall be limited to no more than 25 per-cent of the total heated floor area of the residence or 500 square feet, whichever is less. An affidavit shall be signed by the practitioner at the time of application and shall include the proposed size of the home occupation in terms of square feet of proposed business area and square feet of total heated floor area.
(f) The dwelling must be the legal residence of the principal prac-titioner at the time of the application and the home occupa-
tion shall be valid only as long as the original principal practitioner resides in the dwelling, is con-ducting business and has a current occupational tax certificate.
(g) One business vehicle used exclusively by the resident is permitted. Panel trucks shall not be per-mitted. The business vehicle shall be no larger in size than a pick-up truck or van and not have a carrying capacity over one and one-half tons. The business vehicle shall not have business identi-fication (signs) on it when it is parked at the premises and will not have any equipment used in the business left on the business vehicle in a manner that can be seen from the surrounding prop-erty. The business vehicle must be parked in a driveway, garage or carport. No trailers are allowed.
(h) The conduct of the home occupation shall neither increase the normal flow of traffic nor shall it increase normal on-street or off-street parking.
(i) No equipment may be utilized or stored in the conduct of the home occupation except that which is normally used for purely domestic or household purposes. Said items may only be those used on the premises or incidental supplies necessary for and consumed in the conduct of the home occupation. Samples, however, may be kept on the premises but neither sold nor distributed from the residence.
(j) Any additions or alterations that will be used for the home occupation must be of an architectural style in keeping with the surrounding residential development. Any and all work must be ap-proved and permitted by the City of Duluth.
(k) Offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, odorous matter, heat, humid-ity, glare or other objectionable effects shall not be permitted.
Section 346. Farm Tenant Dwellings.
(a) A farm tenant dwelling may be either a single-family detached or two-family site-built or modular building.
(b) The dwelling shall meet the yard requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
(c) No more than one dwelling unit for each five acres of land devoted to active agricultural use is allowed.
(d) The principal residence on the property, to which the farm tenant dwelling is accessory, must be occupied by the owner or the operator of the farm.
(e) At least one adult occupant of each dwelling unit must be employed to work on the farm where the dwelling is located. Such employment must be for compensation or profit, or such employee
Illustrative
Illustrative eexample of xample of signage signage that exceeds the maximum al-that exceeds the maximum al-lowed size.lowed size.
City of Duluth UDC Section 347 Outdoor Display Areas.
3-43
must be a relative of the owner or a co-owner of the farm; in any case, one occupant must devote at least 20 hours a week on average in the farming operation.
Section 347. Outdoor Display Areas.
Merchandise or goods may be on display outdoors for the purpose of customer selection or direct sale or lease to customers only as follows in this Code Section.
347.01 Outdoor Display Areas; Permanent.
The following merchandise or goods may be located in outdoor display areas on a permanent basis (where the use is otherwise permitted) subject to the requirements of Section 347.03 below:
(a) Motorized vehicles that are in good running condition free from exterior damage or substantial wear.
(b) Manufactured homes.
(c) Utility sheds, gazebos and play equipment.
(d) Plant nursery items.
(e) Vending machines, boxes or similar containers used to distribute food or beverage, newspapers, propane tanks, ice, videos or similar consumer products.
347.02 Temporary Sales Promotions.
All other outdoor display of merchandise or goods shall be conducted on a temporary basis associated with special business promotions. See Section 341 for restrictions on temporary events.
347.03 Outdoor Display Areas; Restrictions.
(a) Merchandise or goods on display outdoors must be located at least 20 feet from any property line, with the exception that vending machines, boxes or similar containers described under 347.01 above shall be located against and parallel to the building facade.
(b) The proposed display of propane cylinders is subject to review and approval by the Gwinnett County Fire Department.
(c) Any area outside of a building where merchandise or goods are displayed for customer selection or direct sale but which is permanently screened by an opaque imitation-wood vinyl fence or free-standing wall at least 6 feet in height or a landscape buffer meeting the standards of the Land-scaping, Buffers and Tree Protection Article of this Development Code shall not be considered an outdoor display area.
Section 348. Outdoor Storage.
The outdoor storage of goods, material or merchandise not otherwise on display for customer selec-tion or direct sale or lease to customers, where the use is otherwise permitted, is limited as follows:
348.01 Outdoor Storage in Commercial Zoning Districts.
(a) Outdoor storage is permitted in the C-2, HC-Auto, HC-Retail, and O-I Districts with special use approval only. All outdoor storage must be located in a side or rear yard and must be screened from public streets and residential districts by an opaque imitation-wood vinyl fence or free-standing wall no less than 8 feet in height or a landscape buffer meeting the standards of the Landscaping, Buffers and Tree Protection Article of this Development Code.
Section 349 Unattended Donation Boxes. City of Duluth UDC
3-44
(b) No required parking spaces, required landscaped area, or any other required site element shall be used for outdoor storage.
348.02 Outdoor Storage in the Industrial Zoning Districts.
Building material or other outdoor storage yards, except junk yards, are allowed in the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts if they meet the following requirements:
(a) They shall not be located within a required front yard.
(b) They shall be setback at least 25 feet from any side or rear property lines and shall be screened by a solid fence at least 6 feet high which is setback a similar distance from any side or rear prop-erty lines, appropriately landscaped and maintained per an approved site plan.
(c) They shall be established in connection with a permitted building.
(d) Additional restrictions apply to junk yards (see Section 328).
Section 349. Unattended Donation Boxes.
(a) Size and Location.
(1) Unattended donation boxes shall only be allowed as an accessory use on a parcel where the primary use is a retail establishment involved in the resale of used, and second-hand goods.
(2) Unattended donation boxes shall not exceed 7 feet in height and 4 feet in width or depth.
(3) An unattended donation box shall not be placed:
a. Within 400 feet of another unattended donation box;
b. On the same parcel as another unattended donation box; or
c. On unoccupied or vacant property.
d. On sidewalks.
e. In a manner that impedes vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow and circulation.
f. In the right-or-way.
g. In the principal use setback for the site where they are placed.
h. In designated parking spaces or reduce the number of parking spaces below the mini-mum number required by zoning codes.
i. Within any landscape strip, landscaped parking lot island or any type of buffer.
j. Within the Visibility Clearance Area, as defined in Section 604.08 of this Code
(b) Permit Requirements.
(1) Unless otherwise exempted, it shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any property owner or operator to place, operate, maintain or allow unattended donation boxes on real property unless the unattended donation box owner first obtains a permit pursuant to this Code Section and the unattended donation box is placed, operated and maintained in ac-cordance with all provisions in this Code Section.
(2) The permit application shall be made on a form provided by the City and shall include:
City of Duluth UDC Section 349 Unattended Donation Boxes.
3-45
a. The name, address, e-mail, website (if available) and phone number of contact person of the applicant who will agree in writing to be available between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. each day of the week to receive and respond to complaints or other inquir-ies regarding the permitted collection bin;
b. The Name, address, and telephone number of an individual who is authorized by the owner of the collection bin to accept service of process and to accept citations issued by the city on behalf of the applicant for violations of this section.
c. Collection bins owned and/or operated by one person or entity for the benefit of an-other person or entity require the contact information for both entities on the permit application;
d. If the applicant claims to be a qualified nonprofit organization:
1. A copy of the determination letter issued by the Internal Revenue Service stating that the applicant is an organization exempt from taxation under Internal Revenue Code, 26 USC  501(c)(3); and
2. A certificate of good standing issued by the office of the secretary of state. If the applicant is a business organization not exempt from taxation, a certificate of good standing issued by the office of the secretary of state. A certificate of good standing must not be older than three months at the time of application for a permit.
e. Written and signed consent from the site host and the lawful occupant, if applicable, to place the collection bin on the property, including name, address and telephone number of the site host and the name, address, and telephone number of the person authorized by the site host to accept service of process and to accept citations issued by the city on behalf of the site host. The name, address, and telephone number of the lawful occu-pant and the name, address, and telephone number of the person authorized by the lawful occupant to accept service of process and to accept citations issued by the city on behalf of the lawful occupant shall also be included.
f. The physical address of the property owners real property and a drawing sufficient to indicate the proposed location of the unattended donation box on the property owners real property, as well as the size of the proposed unattended donation box.
g. Permittee must provide proof to the city of a certificate of liability insurance of at least $1,000,000.00 covering the liability of the permittee, site host, and lawful occupant, if applicable, arising out of the placement and maintenance of a collection bin.
(3) Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee not to exceed $50. The fee shall be waived when evidence is submitted that the applicant has 501(c)3 status.
(4) Applications shall be filed with the Planning and Development Department.
(5) Action shall be taken on the permit within 30 days.
(6) Applications not meeting all standards of this Development Code or any other City of Duluth ordinance shall be denied. Denied applications may be resubmitted for review after 30 days.
(7) The permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance.
(8) Permits shall not be transferrable.
(c) Requirements and Maintenance.
Section 350 Mobile Kitchens City of Duluth UDC
3-46
(1) Unattended donation boxes shall:
a. Be maintained in good condition and appearance with no structural damage, holes, or visible rust and shall be free of graffiti;
b. Be locked or otherwise secured;
c. Be clear at all times of junk, garbage, trash, debris and other refuse material in the area surrounding the box. Any such materials shall be removed within 24 hours of verbal notice from the City at the expense of the property owner;
d. Shall display the following information in boldface letters at least two inches high lo-cated on the front of the box and directly underneath the deposit door:
1. The name, address, telephone number, and the internet web address of the per-mittee, site host, and lawful occupant;
2. Meet the requirements set forth by the State as found in O.C.G.A. 43-17, as amended, if applicable;
e. Have posted on them a copy of the permit in a prominent and visible location on the front of the box in plain view for inspection by the public and City officials; and
f. Be serviced and emptied as needed, but in no case less frequently than once per month or within five days of a request by the Planning and Development Department.
(2) Permittee must provide to the site host or lawful occupant a telephone number for requests to respond to collection bin maintenance complaints.
(3) Permittee and site host or lawful occupant must respond to collection bin maintenance com-plaints within ten days of receiving written notice of a violation of this article. Written notice of the violation shall be provided to the permittee, site host or lawful occupant and any char-itable organization identified as being associated with the collection bin.
(4) If a collection bin becomes damaged or vandalized, it shall be repaired, replaced or removed within five days of receipt of notice of such condition.
(d) Exemption.
Unattended donation boxes located entirely within the interior of a building are exempt from the requirements of this Code Section.
Section 350. Mobile Kitchens
The following standards shall apply to Mobile Kitchens:
(a) Mobile Kitchens shall be allowed by Special Use approval in areas zoned CBD, C-1, C-2, HC-Retail and HC-Auto.
(b) Mobile Kitchens must be integrated with a bar, brewpub, and/or restaurant that is legally in ex-istence and meets all City, County, and State requirements.
(c) Mobile Kitchens must be kept in an area that is enclosed on a minimum of three (3) sides by a minimum six (6) foot high structure attached to the primary building. Materials and design shall be approved by the Planning and Development Director.
(d) All Mobile Kitchens must use utilities provided by the primary building that they are associated with. Portable generators are prohibited.
4-i
Article 4. Parking and Loading
Article 4 sets out the requirements and restrictions on the provi-sion of automobile parking spaces for each development to ac-commodate its residents, employees, customers, and visitors, and for adequate truck parking to serve businesses and industry. The provisions of this Article apply equally to each designated use without regard to the zoning district in which it is located.
Table of Contents Page
Section 401. Definitions. .........................................................................................................................4-1
Section 402. Off-Street Automobile Parking and Loading and Unloading Spaces Required. .......................4-1
Section 403. Plan and Design Standards for Off-Street Parking. ................................................................4-1
403.01 Required Area for Each Parking Space. ........................................................................................................ 4-1
403.02 Interior Driveways. ....................................................................................................................................... 4-1
403.03 Surfacing, Drainage, and Maintenance. ....................................................................................................... 4-1
403.04 Lighting of Parking Areas. ............................................................................................................................. 4-2
403.05 Stacking Spaces for Drive-Through Facilities................................................................................................ 4-2
403.06 Location of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces on Other Property. ........................................................... 4-2
403.07 Shared Parking. ............................................................................................................................................ 4-3
Table 4-A: Percentage of Required Parking Spaces by Time Period ............................................................ 4-3
403.08 Parking Lot Design, Screening, and Location. .............................................................................................. 4-4
403.09 Parking Lot Landscaping. .............................................................................................................................. 4-5
403.10 Standards for Large Parking Lots.................................................................................................................. 4-6
403.11 Interparcel Access. ....................................................................................................................................... 4-6
Section 404. Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required. ...................................................................4-7
404.01 Off-Street Parking, General Requirements. ................................................................................................. 4-7
Table 4-B: Minimum Parking Spaces by Use ................................................................................................ 4-8
404.02 Handicap Accessible Parking Spaces. ......................................................................................................... 4-10
Table 4-C: Handicap Accessible Spaces Required ....................................................................................... 4-11
404.03 Electric Vehicle Charging Stations. ............................................................................................................. 4-12
Section 405. Prohibited Off-Street Parking. ........................................................................................... 4-12
405.01 Parking in a Residential District. ................................................................................................................. 4-12
405.02 Prohibition on Travel in Residential Subdivisions. ..................................................................................... 4-12
405.03 Overnight Stay. ........................................................................................................................................... 4-12
Section 406. Off-Street Truck Loading. .................................................................................................. 4-13
406.01 Off-Street Truck Loading; Where Required................................................................................................ 4-13
406.02 Setback Requirements; Loading Areas. ...................................................................................................... 4-13
Section 401 Definitions. City of Duluth UDC
4-ii
BLANK PAGE
4-1
Article 4. Parking and Loading
Section 401. Definitions.
See the Interpretations and Definitions Article of this Development Code for definitions related to parking and loading.
Section 402. Off-Street Automobile Parking and Loading and Unloading Spaces Required.
(a) Parking Required. Off-street automobile parking, loading and unloading spaces shall be provided, as specified in this Article, for uses and structures hereafter established.
(b) Applicability. This Article shall apply to any new building constructed; for new uses or conversions of existing, conforming buildings; and for enlargements of existing structures. This Article shall not be construed so as to require additional parking spaces to be furnished for an existing building which is repaired, altered, maintained, or modernized, where the size of the building is not in-creased; provided, however that when occupancy of any building is changed to another use, park-ing shall be provided to meet the requirements of this Article for the new use.
(c) Exemptions. This Article shall not apply to restaurant and retail uses located in the Central Busi-ness District (CBD) zoning district.
Section 403. Plan and Design Standards for Off-Street Parking.
The following are required plan and design standards for off-street parking.
403.01 Required Area for Each Parking Space.
Each space shall be not less than 19 feet long and 9 feet wide, compact spaces shall not be less than 17 feet long and 8 feet wide. Adequate interior driveways shall connect each parking space with a public right-of-way. No more than 20% of the spaces shall be compact spaces.
403.02 Interior Driveways.
When used with 90 degree angle parking, shall be at least 24 feet wide. When used with 60 degree angle parking, shall be at least 12 feet wide with one-way traffic. When used with parallel parking or where there is no parking, shall be at least 10 feet wide for one-way traffic and at least 20 feet wide for two-way traffic. A minimum 10-foot driveway and stacking lane is required for any type drive-up window (this is in addition to regular driveways).
403.03 Surfacing, Drainage, and Maintenance.
(a) All permanent required off-street parking and vehicle sales space shall be properly drained and surfaced. A proper surface shall consist of concrete, asphalt, or similar smooth material.
Section 403 Plan and Design Standards for Off-Street Parking. City of Duluth UDC
4-2
(b) Off-street parking areas shall be maintained in proper repair, free of potholes, pavement separa-tion or other surface or curbing deterioration, indistinguishable striping or directional arrows where required, and missing but required signage and indistinguishable handicapped space des-ignations.
403.04 Lighting of Parking Areas.
See the Outdoor Lighting Section in the Restrictions on Particular Uses Article of this Development Code.
403.05 Stacking Spaces for Drive-Through Facilities.
(a) Stacking spaces shall be provided for any use having a drive-through facility or areas having drop-off and pickup areas, including the following uses:
(1) Financial institutions with drive-through windows;
(2) Restaurants with drive-through facilities;
(3) Carwashes (automated or staffed facilities);
(4) Drive-through coffee sales facilities; and
(5) Any other uses with drive-through facilities.
(b) The following general standards shall apply to all stacking spaces and drive-through facilities:
(1) A minimum of three stacking spaces for each window or drive-through service facility shall be provided.
(2) Stacking spaces shall begin at the win-dow or at the communication/mechan-ical device (e.g., order board) first en-countered by the vehicle user.
(3) Stacking spaces and lanes for drive-through stations shall not impede on- and off-site traffic movements, shall not cross or pass through off street parking areas, and shall not create a potentially unsafe condition where crossed by pe-destrian access to a public entrance of a building.
(4) Drive-through lanes shall be separated from off-street parking areas. Individual lanes shall be striped, marked, or other-wise distinctly delineated.
(5) All drive-through facilities shall be provided with a bypass lane with a minimum width of 10 feet.
403.06 Location of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces on Other Property.
If the required automobile off-street parking spaces cannot reasonably be provided on the same lot on which the principal use is located, such spaces may be provided on other off-street property lying not more than 400 feet from the main entrance to the principal use. In this situation, the applicant
Illustrative example of drive
Illustrative example of drive--through lanes that are through lanes that are separated from parking areas and have an adjacent separated from parking areas and have an adjacent bypass lane.bypass lane.
City of Duluth UDC Section 403 Plan and Design Standards for Off-Street Parking.
4-3
shall submit with his application for a building permit or a certificate of occupancy an instrument duly executed and acknowledged, that accepts as a condition for the issuance of a building permit or a certificate of occupancy the permanent availability of such off-street parking spaces to serve the prin-cipal use.
403.07 Shared Parking.
The parking spaces provided for separate uses may be combined in one parking lot, but the required spaces as-signed to each use may not be assigned to another use, except as follows:
(a) Shared Parking Between Day and Night Users.
One-half of the off-street parking spaces required by a use whose peak attendance will be at night may be shared with a use that will be closed at night or on Sunday.
(b) Mixed Use Developments.
Parking spaces may be shared by more than one use if the Planning and Development Director finds that the total number of spaces will be adequate at the peak hours of the uses they serve. The ratios on Table 4-A may be used in determining the time of day and the day of the week at which the maximum number of spaces will be needed by the uses served by the shared parking facility.
Table 4-A: Percentage of Required Parking Spaces by Time Period Weekdays Weekends Nighttime Type of Use 6 am to 5 pm 5pm to 1 am 6 am to 5 pm 5pm to 1 am 1am to 6 am
Office
100%
10%
10%
5%
5%
Retail
60%
90%
100%
70%
5%
Hotel
75%
100%
75%
100%
75%
Restaurant
50%
100%
100%
100%
10%
Entertainment/Recreation
40%
100%
80%
100%
10%
Religious Facility
10%
25%
100%
100%
10%
By way of example, the following illustrates shared parking calculations for a particular mixed-use development:
Section 403 Plan and Design Standards for Off-Street Parking. City of Duluth UDC
4-4
(c) Availability of Shared Spaces.
Parking spaces that are proposed to be shared among two or more uses must be clearly available to each use and not appear in any way to be serving a particular use, either through signage ded-icating the spaces or through design techniques that would tend to orient use of the spaces to a particular business or building.
(d) Recordation of Shared Parking Agreement.
Shared parking arrangements must be committed to writing in an instrument acceptable to the Planning and Development Director, and approved by the owners of each of the affected proper-ties or uses. The instrument must be approved by the Planning and Development Director and shall be recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court, and a copy of the recorded document must be supplied to the Planning and Development Director. The document must be written to survive future changes in ownership in perpetuity, unless the agreement is dissolved with approval by the Duluth City Council.
403.08 Parking Lot Design, Screening, and Location.
The requirements of this Section shall apply to all off-street parking lots, including areas dedicated to customer and employee parking and for storing or displaying vehicles (such as a car sales lot).
(a) In all zoning districts, there are options for placement and screening of parking lots on the prop-erty. Those options include:
(1) Push the building closer to the road and allow no parking between the building and the road with the required 10-foot landscape strip as required in the Buffers, Landscaping and Tree Protection Article of this Development Code.
a. The Planning and Development Director has the discretion to reduce the front building setback accordingly to achieve this goal.
FactorforSpacesOffice3.5/1,000100,000 sf350Retail 5/1,000100,000 sf500Hotel w/Restaurant1.5/room100 rooms150Family Restaurant9.5/1,00020,000 sf190Theater1/4 seats200 seats50Church1/4 seats400 seats100TOTAL if figured separately1,340Nighttime6 am--5pm5pm--1am6 am--5pm5pm--1am1am--6amOffice35035351818Retail30045050035025Hotel w/Restaurant113150113150113Family Restaurant9519019019019Theater205040505Church505010010010TOTAL928925978858189WeekdaysWeekends
City of Duluth UDC Section 403 Plan and Design Standards for Off-Street Parking.
4-5
b. Changes in topography or other unusual circumstances may be reviewed by the Plan-ning and Development Director, and at his discretion, may modify requirements of this Section, provided the intent of this Article is maintained.
(2) Place any portion of the parking between the road and the building with a minimum 3 foot high landscaped berm (maximum 2:1 slope) and a 10 foot landscape strip in accordance with the standards of the Buffers, Landscaping and Tree Protection Article.
a. If parking is located below road grade, that vertical footage may be counted toward the required berm height.
b. Changes in topography or other unu-sual circumstances may be reviewed by the Planning and Development Di-
rector, who, at his discretion, may modify requirements of this Code Section, provided the intent of this Article is maintained.
(b) In all areas, pedestrian access via sidewalks shall be provided from the front of the building(s) to the rear parking areas and to the road. Adequate signage directing vehicular traffic to the rear of the building shall also be provided. Parking area(s) shall be lined with large maturing canopy trees a minimum of 15 foot on center, based on species and size at maturity.
403.09 Parking Lot Landscaping.
In addition to any landscaping required in the Buffers, Landscaping and Tree Protection Article, there shall be a minimum amount of landscaping within the interior of a parking lot over 10 spaces for a non-residential use shall be designed as follows:
(a) Planter islands shall be a minimum of 250 square feet and shall be located at the terminus of each parking row and no further apart than every 10 spaces.
(b) All planter islands must be designed with at least 60% coverage in shrubs and no more than 40% coverage in ground cover and landscaping materials. The planter island area shall include at a minimum one shade tree. No plant mate-rials, with the exception of trees, shall exceed 3 feet in height. Turfgrass shall not be permit-ted in the planter islands.
(c) Planter islands and landscape strips are usually defined by a barrier curb to prevent vehicular encroachment. Wheel stops or breaks in the barrier curb shall be provided in order to allow for drainage into areas designed to accommo-date the stormwater discharge directed to
them.
Illustrative example of a landscaped berm used
Illustrative example of a landscaped berm used to screen a parking lot.to screen a parking lot.
Illustrative e
Illustrative example of a continuous planting xample of a continuous planting strip between planter islands and breaks in the strip between planter islands and breaks in the curb to allow stormwater to entercurb to allow stormwater to enter..
Section 403 Plan and Design Standards for Off-Street Parking. City of Duluth UDC
4-6
(d) Planter islands and strips shall be designed to prevent compaction. This may be accomplished by planting a dense shrub cover or by elevating the planting area a minimum of 1 foot above the curb.
(e) Parking lots with more than 100 spaces but less than 375 spaces shall provide planting strips with a minimum width of 5 feet and shall run continuously between all planter islands. These strips shall be planted with 1 tree for every 15 feet of the planter strip, taking into consideration the species and height at maturity.
(f) Landscaping shall meet the requirements in the Buffers, Landscaping and Tree Protection Article of this Development Code pertaining to use of native plantings and water-efficient design.
403.10 Standards for Large Parking Lots.
Parking lots having a minimum of 375 spaces shall be subdivided into distinct zones of interconnected parking areas that contain no more than 250 parking spaces each.
(a) Each zone shall be separated by occupied buildings or by perimeter landscape strips that are at least 10 feet in width and are landscaped as provided in the Buffers, Landscaping and Tree Protection Article.
(b) Each parking area shall include sidewalks that are a min-imum of 5 feet wide with prominently marked cross-walks, providing a continuous route to the entrances of adjoining buildings and streets.
(c) Bicycle racks equal to one bicycle parking space for each 75 required off-street parking spaces, up to a maximum of 10 bicycle spaces, shall be provided. Bicycle parking areas shall be located in a lighted public area within 200 feet of a principal building entrance.
403.11 Interparcel Access.
Interparcel access shall be required as follows:
(a) Internal Access Easements Required.
For any office or retail sales or services use, the property owner shall grant a cross or internal access easement as described in this subsection to each adjoining property that is zoned or used for an office or retail sales or services use. The purpose of the easement is to facilitate movement of cus-tomers from business to business without generating additional turning movements on the public street, thus increasing public safety.
Illustrative example
Illustrative example of continuous of continuous sidewalks and landscape strips in large sidewalks and landscape strips in large parking lots.parking lots.
Business A
Business A
Business B
Business B
Illustrative Example of Interparcel Access
Illustrative Example of Interparcel Access
City of Duluth UDC Section 404 Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required.
4-7
(b) Access Easement Provisions.
The internal access easement shall permit automobile access from the adjoining property to driveways and parking areas intended for employee, customer, or visitor use on each property; but parking spaces may be restricted to use by each owners employees, customers, and visitors only.
(1) Interparcel vehicle access shall be required between contiguous properties only when the parking areas are or will be in reasonable proximity to one another.
(2) All internal access easements shall be no less than 28 feet in width and shall be improved to a minimum paved width of 24 feet in order to accommodate two-way vehicular traffic to and from the adjoining properties.
(3) The granting of an internal access easement on a property shall be effective only upon the granting of a reciprocal easement by the adjoining property owner.
(4) Upon the availability of access to driveways and parking areas of the adjoining lot, the pave-ment or other surfacing of each owners driveways and parking areas shall be extended by each owner to the point of access on the property line.
(c) Relief.
Where the proposed land use is such that adverse impact of the required easement on use of the property would outweigh the reduced impact on the public street provided by the reciprocal ease-ments, the Planning and Development Director may waive the requirement for the access ease-ments, in whole or in part, in accordance with the Administrative Approval provisions in the Ap-peals Article of this UDC.
Section 404. Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required.
404.01 Off-Street Parking, General Requirements.
This section shall provide for the minimum and maximum number of off-street parking spaces based on use.
(a) See Table 4-B for the required minimum number of off-street parking spaces.
(b) For each use, the total number of spaces provided shall not exceed 120% of the minimum spaces required.
(c) Parking for Company-Owned Vehicles Not Included.
Every business that stores vehicles owned by the business on site overnight (such as a company fleet), or maintains a stock of vehicles as part of its business activities (such as a car sales lot, car rental agency, etc.), shall provide for adequate parking or storage for the vehicles such that no parking occurs in a public right-of-way or in an area that has not been improved as a parking lot or storage yard. Such parking spaces shall be in addition to those required for residents, employ-ees, customers, and visitors.
(d) Maneuvering Lanes Not Considered Parking.
Areas designated for temporary occupancy of vehicles while maneuvering on a site, such as queu-ing lanes for a drive-in window, are not considered parking spaces.
(e) See the Use of Land and Structures Article of this Development Code for off-street parking re-quirements in the CBD District and DOD Overlay District.
Section 404 Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required. City of Duluth UDC
4-8
Table 4-B: Minimum Parking Spaces by Use Use Number of Parking Spaces: Required for Each:
a. RESIDENTIAL
1. Single-Family Residence
2 enclosed
Dwelling Unit
2. Two-Family Residence
2
Dwelling Unit
3. Townhome or Condominium
2 enclosed
Dwelling Unit, plus
1 outdoor space per 5 units, minimum
(Maximum is 1 outdoor space per unit )
4. Multi-Family Residence
2 covered
Dwelling Unit, plus
1 outdoor space per 5 units, minimum
(Maximum is 1 outdoor space per unit )
5. Retirement Community
1
Dwelling Unit
6. Membership Dwellings, Personal Care Homes, Nursing Homes
1
2 residents or beds
7. Bed & Breakfast, Rooming House, Board-ing House
1
Room to be rented
8. Hotel or Motel:
(a) Convention hotel, or a motel with a res-taurant or lounge
(b) Non-convention hotel or a motel with no restaurant
1
1
Room
Room
b. COMMERCIAL
1. Offices: general and professional offices, insurance, and real estate offices
3
1,000 sf1 of GFA2
2. Banks
4
1,000 sf of GFA
3. Offices - Medical & Dental
4
1,000 sf of GFA
4. Funeral Home
35
Viewing Room
5. Daycare Center
4
1000 sf of GFA
6. Movie Theater
1
3 Seats
7. Service Station, Gas Station, Auto Repair Shop, or Garage
3
5
Service bay, plus
1,000 sf of retail space
8. Automobile, Truck, Recreation Vehicle, Manufactured Home or Utility Structure Sales
2
1
3
1,000 sf of indoor sales area, plus
2,500 sf of outdoor display, plus
Service bay
1 Square feet.
2 Gross floor areathe total area of all floors, measured between the exterior walls of a building.
City of Duluth UDC Section 404 Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required.
4-9
Table 4-B: Minimum Parking Spaces by Use Use Number of Parking Spaces: Required for Each:
9. Custom Service Restaurant:
(a) Quality restaurant
(b) Family Restaurant
20
18
1,000 sf of GFA
1,000 sf of GFA
10. Fast Food Restaurant
15
1,000 sf of GFA
11. Bowling Center
4
Lane
12. Amusement Parlor, Recreational At-traction, Roller Skating, or Ice Skating Rink
6
1,000 sf of GFA
13. Health Club or Fitness Center
8
1,000 sf of GFA
14. Shopping Centers:
(a) Less than 100,000 sf of GLA3
4
3
10
1,000 sf of total GLA, plus
100 movie theater seats, plus
1,000 sf of food service area
(b) 100,000-199,999 sf of GLA
4
3
6
1,000 sf of total GLA, plus
100 theater seats over 450, plus
1,000 sf of food service area
(c) 200,000-399,999 sf of GLA
4
3
1,000 sf of total GLA, plus
100 theater seats over 750
(d) 400,000-599,000 sf of GLA
4
3
1,000 sf of total GLA, plus
100 theater seats over 750
(e) 600,000 or more sf of GLA
5
3
1,000 sf of total GLA, plus
100 theater seats over 750
15. Supermarket
5
1,000 sf of GFA
16. Drug Store
2
1,000 sf of GFA
17. Dry Cleaners
2
1,000 sf of GFA
18. Furniture or Carpet Store
2
1,000 sf of GFA
19. Hardware or Paint Store
2
1,000 sf of GFA
20. Home Improvement Superstore
4
1,000 sf of GFA
21. Office Supply or Electronics Superstore
2
1,000 sf of GFA
22. Building Supplies, Brick, or Lumber Yard
2
1
1,000 sf of indoor sales area, plus
2,500 sf of outdoor display
23. Retail Sales or Service establishments not listed above
5
1,000 sf of GFA
c. INDUSTRIAL AND MANUFACTURING
3 Gross leasable areathe total area of all floors intended for occupancy and the exclusive use of tenants, specifically excluding public or common areas such as utility rooms, stairwells, enclosed malls, and interior hallways.
Section 404 Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required. City of Duluth UDC
4-10
Table 4-B: Minimum Parking Spaces by Use Use Number of Parking Spaces: Required for Each:
1. Wholesale, Office-Warehouse
1
1
200 sf of office space, plus
1,000 sf of storage area
2. Open storage of sand, gravel, petroleum, etc.
1
2,500 sf of outdoor sales area, if any
3. Warehouse, Transfer, and Storage
1
600 sf of GFA
4. Warehouse including commercial sales to the public
1
1
200 sf of sales or office, plus
1,000 sf of storage area
5. Manufacturing
2
1,000 sf of GFA
d. INSTITUTIONAL AND OTHER
1. Hospital
1.8
Bed
2. Church or other Place of Worship
1
5 seats, 10 feet of pew or per 5 people of occupancy
3. Auditoriums, live theatres, stadiums, and other places of assembly
1
3 seats
4. College (instructional space)
10
Classroom
5. Technical College, Trade School
10
Classroom
6. Senior High Schools
10
Classroom
7. Elementary & Jr. High Schools
2
Classroom
8. Civic Clubs, Community Centers, Frater-nal Lodges, etc.
1
200 sf of GFA
404.02 Handicap Accessible Parking Spaces.
(a) Handicapped spaces are to be provided as required by the federal Americans with Disabilities Act for all multi-family and nonresidential uses. Handicap accessible spaces shall be provided in each parking lot in relation to the total number of spaces otherwise provided for the use as shown on Table 4-C.
(b) Handicap accessible parking spaces shall be counted as part of the total number of parking spaces required under this Article.
(c) Handicap accessible parking spaces shall have an adjacent aisle 5 feet wide, and one in every eight handicapped spaces shall be adjacent to an aisle 8 feet wide and the space shall be signed van accessible. Handicapped parking space aisles shall be clearly demarcated by lines painted on or otherwise applied to the parking lot surface.
City of Duluth UDC Section 404 Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required.
4-11
(d) Handicap accessible parking spaces shall be located on a surface with a slope not exceeding 1 vertical foot in 50 horizontal feet (1:50).
(e) Wheelchair ramps shall be provided at locations appropriate to normal travel routes from the parking lot to the principal use.
(f) In addition to the requirements of this subsection, all handicapped parking shall comply with the requirements of the federal Americans with Disabilities Act and the Georgia Accessibility Code.
Table 4-C: Handicap Accessible Spaces Required Total Spaces Provided for Use Minimum Number of Handicap Spaces
1 to 25
1
26 to 50
2
51 to 75
3
76 to 100
4
101 to 150
5
151 to 200
6
201 to 300
7
301 to 400
8
401 to 500
9
501 to 1,000
2% of total
1,001 and over
20, plus 1 for each
100 over 1,000
Source: Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines.
City of Duluth UDC Section 405 Prohibited Off-Street Parking. Prohibited Off-Street Parking.
4-12
404.03 Electric Vehicle Charging Stations.
(a) Electric vehicle charging stations may be counted toward satisfy-ing minimum off-street parking space requirements for non-sin-gle-family uses.
(b) Electric vehicle charging stations must be reserved for charging electric vehicles. For purposes of this provision, "charging" means that an electric vehicle is parked at an electric vehicle charging station and is connected to the battery charging station equip-ment.
(c) Vehicle charging equipment must be designed and located so as not to impede pedestrian, bicycle or wheelchair movement or create safety hazards on sidewalks.
(d) Information must be posted identifying voltage and amperage levels and any type of use, fees, or safety information related to the electric vehicle charging station. The information shall be posted on a miscellaneous freestanding sign, as defined and regulated by the Sign Regulations Article of this Development Code.
(e) Electric vehicle charging stations must be maintained in all respects, including the functioning of the equipment. A phone number or other contact information must be provided on the equip-ment for reporting when it is not functioning or other problems are encountered.
Section 405. Prohibited Off-Street Parking.
405.01 Parking in a Residential District.
In any residential district the following requirements shall apply:
(a) The parking of any vehicle in the front yard or in front of the principal building line is prohibited except on a hard-surfaced driveway or in a carport or garage.
(b) Parking or storing any motor vehicle, boat, RV, trailer, camper, camper top, machinery, mobile equipment or automobile shall not be allowed in the front yard, side yard or rear yard of a dwell-ing unless said motor vehicle, boat, RV, trailer, camper, camper top, machinery, mobile equip-ment or automobile is parked on a concrete or gravel driveway. Therefore, it shall be unlawful to park or store any such named item or similar item on the grass, lawn, or dirt areas in the yard of any dwelling located within the corporate boundaries of the city.
(c) No more than 35% of a combination of the front, side and rear yards may consist of a concrete or gravel driveway or parking area and the remaining percentage shall be grass or landscaped areas.
405.02 Prohibition on Travel in Residential Subdivisions.
No heavy truck shall enter, travel, or park on a street in a residential subdivision in the City of Duluth, except for the purpose of delivering goods to houses or points within such residential subdivision for short periods of time during daylight hours.
405.03 Overnight Stay.
No heavy truck or tractor trailer shall enter, travel, or park on a street in a residential subdivision, or park on a right-of-way in the City of Duluth or park on any property within the City of Duluth for the purpose of an overnight stay by the driver or operator.
City of Duluth UDC Section 406 Off-Street Truck Loading.
4-13
Section 406. Off-Street Truck Loading.
406.01 Off-Street Truck Loading; Where Required.
Areas proposed for loading and unloading motor vehicles in off-street locations shall be provided at the time of the initial construction of any building or structure used or arranged to be used for com-mercial, industrial, hospital, institutional, hotel/motel or multi-family residential purposes in any zon-ing district. Such off-street loading areas shall have access to a public alley or street and shall be pro-vided and maintained in accordance with the following requirements, the computation of which shall not be included in the off-street parking requirements.
(a) Loading Spaces Provided.
Any such business or use shall provide adequate off-street facilities for the loading and unloading of merchandise, supplies, goods, freight, provisions or furnishings within or adjacent to the build-ing as deemed appropriate by the owner or occupants of the property. Such loading facilities, if provided, shall not obstruct freedom of vehicular traffic or pedestrian movement on the public streets and sidewalks.
(b) Location of Off-Street Loading Areas.
Off-street loading and unloading areas shall in all cases be located on the same lot or parcel of land as the structure they are intended to serve. In no case shall the off-street loading space be considered as part of the area provided to satisfy off-street parking requirements as listed herein.
(c) Adequacy of Loading Area.
All such uses shall provide off-street loading areas sufficient for their requirements. Such space shall be adequate if no vehicle being loaded or unloaded in connection with normal operations shall stand in or project into a public street, walk, alley, or way.
406.02 Setback Requirements; Loading Areas.
(a) Off-street truck loading areas shall be set back from the front property line by at least 10 feet. An additional 10 foot setback from any buffer required along a side or rear property line shall also be maintained.
(b) The required setback area between the front property line and the truck loading area shall be used for landscaping and/or screening as required by the applicable provisions of the Buffers, Landscaping and Tree Protection Article of this Development Code.
Section 406 Off-Street Truck Loading. City of Duluth UDC
4-14
BLANK PAGE
5-i
Article 5. Subdivisions and Planned Developments
Article 5 presents the different ways that land can be subdivid-ed and developed, ranging from conventional subdivisions, to conservation subdivisions where green space and natural fea-tures are preserved by reducing lot sizes, to master planned de-velopments that allow a wider variety of housing and nonresi-dential uses in a well-planned mixed-use environment while al-so preserving green space and natural features.
Table of Contents Page
Section 501. Minor and Major Subdivisions, Defined. ..............................................................................5-1
501.01 Minor Subdivisions, General Standards. ...................................................................................................... 5-1
501.02 Minor Subdivisions, Defined. ....................................................................................................................... 5-1
501.03 Major Subdivision. ....................................................................................................................................... 5-3
Table 5-A: Summary Comparison of Subdivisions and Developments ......................................................... 5-5
Section 502. Conventional Subdivisions. ..................................................................................................5-5
502.01 Maximum Number of Lots. .......................................................................................................................... 5-5
502.02 Minimum Lot Size. ....................................................................................................................................... 5-5
502.03 Minimum Lot Width, Setbacks. .................................................................................................................... 5-6
Section 503. Conservation Subdivisions. ..................................................................................................5-6
503.01 Purpose. ....................................................................................................................................................... 5-6
503.02 General Standards. ....................................................................................................................................... 5-6
503.03 Application Requirements............................................................................................................................ 5-8
503.04 Conservation Area Requirements. ............................................................................................................... 5-9
See Section 505. .............................................................................................................................................................. 5-9
Section 504. Planned Unit Development (PUD)........................................................................................5-9
504.01 Intent and Purpose. ..................................................................................................................................... 5-9
504.02 Requirements for PUD Development. ....................................................................................................... 5-10
504.03 Applications for PUD Approval. .................................................................................................................. 5-10
504.04 Master Concept Plan Required. ................................................................................................................. 5-12
504.05 Master Concept Plan Requirements. ......................................................................................................... 5-12
504.06 Review Standards for PUD Rezoning.......................................................................................................... 5-13
504.07 Report and Concept Plan Establish PUD Requirements. ............................................................................ 5-13
504.08 Revisions to Approved PUD. ...................................................................................................................... 5-13
Section 505. Conservation Areas. .......................................................................................................... 5-13
505.01 Purpose. ..................................................................................................................................................... 5-13
505.02 Designation of Conservation Areas. ........................................................................................................... 5-14
505.03 Allowed Uses in Conservation Areas. ......................................................................................................... 5-14
505.04 Prohibited Uses. ......................................................................................................................................... 5-15
Table of Contents Continued City of Duluth UDC
5-ii
505.05 Natural Resource or Conservation Easement Required. ........................................................................... 5-15
505.06 Ownership of Land in Conservation and Natural Resource Easements. ................................................... 5-15
Section 506. Natural Resource Easements. ............................................................................................ 5-15
506.01 Natural Resource Easements; Creation. .................................................................................................... 5-15
506.02 Natural Resource Easements; Guidelines. ................................................................................................ 5-15
Section 507. Conservation Easements. .................................................................................................. 5-16
507.01 Conservation Easements; Creation. .......................................................................................................... 5-16
507.02 Conservation Easements; Guidelines. ....................................................................................................... 5-16
Section 508. Owners Association. ........................................................................................................ 5-17
508.01 Homeowners Association; When Required.............................................................................................. 5-17
508.02 Nonresidential Owners Association. ........................................................................................................ 5-18
5-1
Article 5. Subdivisions and Planned Developments
Section 501. Minor and Major Subdivisions, Defined.
501.01 Minor Subdivisions, General Standards.
(a) A minor subdivision by its very nature is one in which no public improvements (such as new streets, stormwater drainage facilities or public utilities) are to be made.
(b) A minor subdivision as defined in this Development Code shall be exempt from the "procedures" and "required public improvements" portions of this Code, except as noted.
(c) Each minor subdivision, with the exception of those described in Section 501.02(b)(2)b and Sec-tion 501.02(b)(4) shall be drawn as an exemption plat in accordance with final plat standards pursuant to the requirements of the Procedures and Permits Article of this Development Code. Upon approval, the Planning and Development Director shall authorize the recording of the ex-emption plat with the Clerk of Superior Court of Gwinnett County and grant the issuance of building permits pursuant to the codes and ordinances of the City of Duluth.
501.02 Minor Subdivisions, Defined.
A minor subdivision shall be defined as any of the following:
(a) Recombination.
The combination or recombination of all of two or more buildable lots of record, where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots or parcels are in compliance with this De-velopment Code. An exemption plat shall not be required for aggregations of properties for land assembly purposes where no building permit will be requested prior to issuance of a develop-ment permit.
(b) Lot Splits.
(1) Five-Lot Split.
The division of a buildable lot of record into five or fewer lots, provided:
a. Each proposed lot complies with all requirements of this Development Code and is lim-ited to single family detached residential use;
b. Each proposed lot abuts upon an existing public street;
c. All related slope and utility easements as well as necessary street rights-of-way as de-termined by the Duluth Planning and Development Department based on the Com-prehensive Plan are provided at no cost to the City;
d. Each lot thus created may not be resubdivided pursuant to the provisions of this sub-paragraph. Such resubdivision shall be accomplished only through the procedures con-tained in the Subdivision Review Procedures section of the Procedures and Permits Ar-ticle of this Development Code;
e. Each proposed lot shall comply with the requirements of the Gwinnett County Public Utilities Department and the Gwinnett County Environmental Health Department, as appropriate, whose certification of approval shall be required prior to approval of the exemption plat by the Duluth Planning and Development Department; and
Section 501 Minor and Major Subdivisions, Defined. City of Duluth UDC
5-2
f. The Director is authorized to grant a modification from the five lot maximum exemp-tion; provided, however, modifications shall not be granted to exceed a total of seven exempt lots. The Planning and Development Director may impose conditions of ap-proval upon any modification thus granted as may be necessary to ensure the general public welfare.
(2) Large Lot Splits.
a. The division of land in any single family detached residential zoning district into lots having a minimum lot area of at least 5 acres, provided:
1. Each proposed lot fronts on an existing public street which contains or shall con-tain the necessary right-of-way width required by this Development Code as de-termined by the Comprehensive Plan;
2. Each proposed lot shall provide at least 100 feet of frontage upon the street, shall provide at least 200 feet of lot width measured in accordance with the require-ments of this Development Code, and shall meet or exceed all other minimum re-quirements of the applicable single family detached residential zoning district;
3. All related slope and utility easements as well as necessary street right-of way shall be provided at no cost to the City as determined by the Planning and Devel-opment Department based upon the Comprehensive Plan;
4. No lot thus created may be re-subdivided to less than 5 acres as an exemption to this Development Code; and
5. Each proposed lot shall comply with the requirements of the Gwinnett County Public Utilities Department and the Gwinnett County Environmental Health De-partment, as appropriate, whose certification of approval shall be required prior to approval of the exemption plat by the Duluth Planning and Development De-partment.
b. The division of land in any single-family detached residential zoning district into lots having a minimum lot area of at least 10 acres, provided:
1. Each proposed lot abuts upon an existing public street;
2. Each proposed lot shall provide at least 100 feet on frontage upon the street, shall provide at least 200 feet of lot width measured in accordance with the re-quirements of this Development Code, and shall meet or exceed all other re-quirements of the applicable single family detached residential zoning district;
3. No lot thus created may be re-subdivided to less than 5 acres as an exemption to this Development Code; and
4. A record survey certified by a land surveyor currently registered in the State of Georgia shall be submitted to and approved by the Planning and Development Di-rector showing all lots.
(3) Nonresidential Project Management.
The creation of a lot for recording within an overall nonresidential development, provided:
a. The overall nonresidential development is being undertaken as a single multi-phase or multi-use project under the unified control of a single developer, is zoned for such use
City of Duluth UDC Section 501 Minor and Major Subdivisions, Defined.
5-3
or development, and an overall sketch plan for the entire project has been approved by the Planning and Development Director;
b. The proposed subdivision is clearly intended to transfer title for financing or building management purposes and not for the sale of the property for future development to the satisfaction of the Planning and Development Director;
c. The proposed lot has been approved by the Duluth Planning and Development De-partment to be provided permanent vehicular access by private drive. Said access shall be established by easement or acceptable covenant prior to or concurrently with re-cording of the exemption plat;
d. The proposed lot must encompass a principal structure which has been granted a building permit and which is under construction or has been completed; and
e. The exemption plat shall be drawn to include the entirety of the overall development and shall clearly identify those lots to be recorded, those lots previously recorded and the remainder of the development which shall be labeled "not included." All ease-ments, dedications, etc., shall be shown as appropriate or as required. Each lot shall be consistent with the zoning approved for the overall development and the applicable requirements of the Zoning Resolution.
(4) Amnesty Lots.
The designation of a lot as a buildable lot of record if the lot was recorded between 1970 and the effective date of these Regulations but not reviewed and approved under the pro-vision of the Subdivision Regulations in effect at that time, provided:
a. The exemption plat is limited to one individual lot and no property which adjoins the lot is or has been owned by the applicant in whole or in part;
b. The lot meets all requirements of the Use of Land and Structures Article of this Devel-opment Code, and the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Planning and Development Director that approval of the lot will not create non-conformity to the requirements of the Use of Land and Structures Article on any portion of the original property from which the lot was subdivided;
c. The lot abuts upon an existing public street;
d. All project related slope and utility easements as well as necessary street right-of-way as determined by the Planning and Development Director based on the Comprehen-sive Plan is provided at no costs to the City;
e. The lot shall comply with the requirements of the Gwinnett County Department of Public Utilities and Gwinnett County Environmental Health Department, as appropri-ate, whose certification of approval shall be required prior to approval of the exemp-tion plat by the Planning and Development Director; and
f. A record survey certified by a land surveyor currently registered in the State of Georgia shall be submitted to and approved by the Planning and Development Director show-ing the lot.
501.03 Major Subdivision.
(a) A major subdivision is any subdivision that does not qualify as a minor subdivision. A major subdivision commonly involves the construction of a new street or widening or other improve-
Section 501 Minor and Major Subdivisions, Defined. City of Duluth UDC
5-4
ment of an existing roadway, the provision of stormwater drainage facilities, or the construction or improvement of public utilities, or which has six or more lots (not in a large lot minor subdivi-sion), building sites or other divisions.
(b) Major subdivisions fall into the following categories for the purpose of development regulation:
(1) Conventional subdivisions, in which the minimum lot size allowed for the zoning district determines the maximum number of lots in the subdivision, and all of the lots meet the minimum lot size for the zoning district as shown in the Use of Land and Structures Article of this Development Code. Common open space outside of the lots may be created, but is not required, with the exception that conservation areas as defined by this Article are re-quired to be protected (see Section 505).
(2) Conservation subdivisions, in which the maximum number of lots that would be allowed in a traditional subdivision under the propertys zoning determines the maximum number of lots in the subdivision, but the minimum lot size may be reduced in response to a higher level of development standards and in order to create more conservation areas and recrea-tional amenities for the residents.
(3) Planned unit developments (PUDs), in which a mixture and/or increased density of land uses is allowed in response to a higher level of development standards and in order to effi-ciently use the land and organize uses.
(4) Other planned developments, which include manufactured home parks, apartment build-ings and complexes, condominiums, and commercial developments consisting of three or more businesses. For the purposes of this Article, planned developments other than PUDs are controlled by the provisions of their respective zoning districts.
(c) Permanent Protection Required.
All conservation areas in a conventional subdivision, conservation subdivision or PUD that are required to be protected by the provisions of this Article, shall be permanently protected from further subdivision, development, and unauthorized use, by the method described in Section 505 of this Article.
(d) Summary Table.
Table 5-A presents a summary of the requirements of this Article as they apply to each of the types of major subdivisions and developments. Refer to the text of this Article for specific provi-sions.
City of Duluth UDC Section 502 Conventional Subdivisions.
5-5
Table 5-A: Summary Comparison of Subdivisions and Developments Conventional Subdivision 1 Conservation Subdivision Planned Unit Development Other Planned Developments
Approval
By right in all zoning districts
By right in RA-200, R-100 and R-75 Districts
PUD zoning required
By right in applicable zoning districts
Max. Number of Lots
All lots must meet minimum standards for the zoning district
Per maximum density calculation or Yield Plan
Per PUD zoning approval
Not applicable
Minimum Lot Size: Public Water + Septic2
RA-200 District
R-100 District
R-75 District
40,000 sf
25,000 sf
25,000 sf
Per Health Department requirements3
25,000 sf
Per Health Department requirements
Minimum Lot Size: Public Water & Sewer
RA-200 District
R-100 District
R-75 District
40,000 sf
18,000 sf
12,000 sf
No minimum lot size3
Per PUD zoning approval
Per applicable zoning district requirements
Conservation Areas to be Permanently Protected
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1 All requirements of the applicable zoning district apply to Conventional Subdivisions.
2 Larger lot sizes may be required by the Gwinnett County Environmental Health Department.
3 No portion of the lot area may be located within the 100-year floodplain elevation
Section 502. Conventional Subdivisions.
502.01 Maximum Number of Lots.
The maximum number of lots in a conventional subdivision shall be determined by the minimum lot size requirements of the zoning district in which the subdivision is located, with the exception of lots served by on-site sewer (septic tank) which shall be subject to the approval and lot size standards of the Gwinnett County Environmental Health Department.
502.02 Minimum Lot Size.
In a conventional subdivision, the minimum total lot area and the minimum lot area per dwelling unit required by the Use of Land and Structures Article establishes the minimum lot sizes for each lot.
Section 503 Conservation Subdivisions. City of Duluth UDC
5-6
502.03 Minimum Lot Width, Setbacks.
The lot width and setback requirements of Use of Land and Structures Article apply to each lot in a conventional subdivision.
Section 503. Conservation Subdivisions.
Conservation subdivisions, as defined herein, are allowed in the RA-200, R-100 and R-75 zoning districts provided that a conservation subdivision concept plan has been approved by City Coun-cil at the time of the rezoning of the property or by staff as part of the development review pro-cess for properties zoned RA-200, R-100 or R-75 as of the effective date of this Development Code.
503.01 Purpose.
The purposes of a conservation subdivision include:
(a) To provide residential subdivisions which permit flexibility of subdivision design in order to pro-mote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land.
(b) To allow clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils, which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development.
(c) To encourage the development of residential communities that are density neutral based on standard zoning and development standards, but designed to preserve and protect environmen-tal resources, scenic vistas, and natural and cultivated landscapes.
(d) To enhance land, water, air, and tree resources by minimizing the area of land disturbance, re-ducing impervious surface, optimizing stream buffers, preserving tree cover and encouraging the conservation of environmentally sensitive areas and the provision of open space.
(e) To reduce infrastructure maintenance costs due to efficient community design.
(f) To provide open space and pedestrian linkages among residential communities and to encour-age recreation opportunities.
(g) To preserve and protect contiguous undeveloped areas within the development.
(h) To preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, flood-plains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat.
503.02 General Standards.
(a) Density Determination.
The maximum number of lots in the conservation subdivision shall be determined by yield plan or calculation, at the developers option. The yield plan or calculation shall be prepared by a Georgia registered engineer or landscape architect.
(1) Yield Plan.
A yield plan that shows the maximum number of lots a tract can support based on the propertys underlying zoning and development standards of this Development Code. The plan does not have to meet all of the formal requirements for a site design plan, but the design must be capable of being constructed given the site features and all applicable regu-lations. All standard zoning or development regulations must be met (including lot sizes, right-of-way widths, etc.) At a minimum, the plan must account for and depict standard
City of Duluth UDC Section 503 Conservation Subdivisions.
5-7
rights-of-ways, lot information (sizes, widths, and setbacks), drainage and detention areas, easements, floodplain, lakes, wetlands, streams, and stream buffers.
(2) Calculation.
The maximum number of lots is determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in the underlying zoning district. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel:
a. Slopes over 25% of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area;
b. The 100-year floodplain;
c. Bodies of open water over 5,000 square feet contiguous area;
d. Wetlands that meet the definition of the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; and,
e. Anticipated right-of-way needs for roads and utilities.
(b) Minimum Conservation Area.
(1) A minimum of 40% of a tracts gross land area must be set aside and protected as a conser-vation area as defined herein.
(2) At least 75% of the conservation area shall be in a contiguous tract. The conservation area should adjoin any other protected area, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future conservation area.
(3) See also Section 503.04.
(c) Development Requirements.
Conservation subdivisions shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Minimum Subdivision Size.
Each tract proposed to be developed as a conservation subdivision must be a minimum of 10 contiguous acres. The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibil-ity.
(2) Lot Area.
No minimum is established, except that no portion of the lot area may be located within the 100-year floodplain elevation.
(3) Average Lot Width.
The average width of all building lots, as defined by this Development Code, shall be at least 60 feet. Exception: Lots that abut properties not located within the conservation sub-division shall meet the standard width requirement of the underlying district; or, open space at least 50 feet wide shall be provided.
(4) Minimum Road Frontage per Lot.
Section 503 Conservation Subdivisions. City of Duluth UDC
5-8
The minimum required road frontage per lot shall be 40 feet. Exception: Road frontage may be reduced to 20 feet for lots with frontage upon cul-de-sac or eyebrow cul-de-sac turna-rounds.
(5) Minimum Yard Areas (Setbacks).
a. The minimum required front yard shall be 20 feet. Exception: The front yard setback may be reduced to 5 feet if dwellings are provided side or rear entry garages. To quali-fy for the reduced setback on a corner lot, side entry garages must be located to the side adjacent to an abutting lot.
b. The minimum required rear yard shall be 20 feet.
c. The minimum required side yard shall be 5 feet.
(6) Exterior Project Street Frontage Landscape Buffer.
A landscape buffer that is a minimum of 50 feet in width (not part of any building lot) shall be provided along the tract and any external roadways. Landscape entry features such as fences and walls may be allowed in the portion of the landscape buffer that is provided along any external roadways.
(7) Maximum Building Height. The maximum building height shall be 35 feet.
(8) Sodded Yards. All yards of dwelling lots shall be sodded.
(9) Garages. Dwellings shall have a minimum of two-car garages.
(10) Street Trees.
A minimum of one non-ornamental shade tree with a minimum 3.5-inch caliper shall be provided prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for each lot along all roadways.
(11) Underground Utilities. All utilities shall be located underground.
503.03 Application Requirements.
(a) Existing Features Site Analysis.
At time of development review, or if a zoning action is proposed, an existing features site analy-sis, sealed by a registered engineer or landscape architect, must be provided to identify areas that are most significant for designation as conservation areas. The existing features site analysis shall include the following information:
(1) Property boundaries.
(2) Delineation of streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features to include the source of this information.
(3) All conservation areas labeled, as described in Section 505.
(4) Topographic contours at intervals no greater than 2 feet.
(5) Identification of tree lines, woodlands, open fields or meadows.
(6) General soil type.
(7) Delineation of steep slope areas (i.e. greater than 25% and at least 5,000 square feet con-tiguous area).
City of Duluth UDC Section 504 Planned Unit Development (PUD).
5-9
(8) Identification of existing roads, structures and easements.
(9) Identification of open space in adjacent developments including potential connection to ex-isting trails and greenspace.
(b) Concept Plan.
Based on the density determination (yield plan or calculation) and the existing features site analysis, an overall concept plan showing development of the entire tract shall be submitted by the developer for review and approval in accordance with the requirements and procedures of the Procedures and Permits Article of this Development Code (see the Concept Plan Specifica-tions Section). If a zoning action is proposed, the rezoning site plan shall include the following in-formation:
(1) Delineation and specifications of conservation areas including calculations and exclusions, and any pocket parks, greens, play areas, or trail system to be constructed.
(2) A typical detail on the plan indicating dwelling size, lot width, building setback lines, off-street parking, street trees, sidewalks, and street pavement and right-of-way width.
(3) Lot width average, area and percent of floodplain specifications in tabular form; and densi-ty calculations (gross and net).
(c) Conservation Area Management Plan. A conservation area management plan, meeting the re-quirements described herein, shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit.
503.04 Conservation Area Requirements.
See Section 505.
Section 504. Planned Unit Development (PUD).
504.01 Intent and Purpose.
(a) The Planned Unit Development District is intended to:
(1) Encourage larger scale planned development which will produce a logically organized and compatible set of land uses resulting in a higher overall quality of Planning and Develop-ment than if accomplished in incremental unplanned stages.
(2) Allow a mixture and/or density of land uses not otherwise allowed in an established zoning district; by careful site planning the appropriate site improvements are incorporated into the plan that establish compatible relationships between the uses within the site and uses adjacent to the site.
(3) Encourage creative site design which seeks to preserve the open space and unique envi-ronmental features, conserve energy through efficient building design and clustering, effi-ciently use the land, and increase the efficiency of public service delivery.
(4) Provide flexibility in the application of area, height, bulk, placement and other zoning con-trols.
(5) Promote land development in proper relation to the surrounding neighborhood.
(6) Ensure that the design of the building forms are interrelated and architecturally harmoni-ous.
Section 504 Planned Unit Development (PUD). City of Duluth UDC
5-10
(7) To be applied in a manner consistent with the Land Use Plan for the City of Duluth.
(b) Planned Unit Development Districts are separate zoning districts and shall follow the same amendment procedures as other zoning districts. Unless otherwise stated in this Article, the de-velopment standards and the land uses that are presented with the application for amendment, shall, if approved, become the standards for the subject property and shall become a part of the zoning approval.
(c) Any PUD that was approved prior to the adoption of this Development Code or amendments to the Code shall continue to be developed under the provisions and conditions of zoning approval that applied at the time of rezoning.
504.02 Requirements for PUD Development.
A planned unit development shall meet the following minimum requirements:
(a) A minimum of 10% of the gross area of the site shall be retained in common open space that is required to be deeded as a separate tract to an Owners Association and shall forever remain as open space. The required common open space shall include any conservation areas within a conservation easement established in accordance with Section 505.
(b) Additional common open space may be provided and may include active recreation areas for the proposed development, such as swimming pools, tennis courts, community facilities, etc.
(c) PUDs comprised solely of multi-family dwellings (townhouses, condominiums and/or apart-ments) shall dedicate a minimum of 10% of the gross floor area to non-residential uses that benefit on-site residents. Example of acceptable non-residential uses include a gym, community room, concierge, etc.
(d) A PUD that does not have access to a publicly-approved sewer system must meet all application requirements for wastewater disposal of the Gwinnett County Environmental Health Depart-ment. If sanitary sewer is proposed or required, it must be connected to a state-approved wastewater treatment facility, either privately or publicly owned.
(e) Sidewalks shall be required along both sides of all streets within a PUD, with the exception that sidewalks on one side of the street can provide pedestrian connectivity throughout the site. The construction standards of the required sidewalks are given in the Project Design and Construc-tion Standards Article of this Development Code.
(f) Where PUD abuts an RA-200, R-100, R-75 district or other residential land use, said PUD shall contain a 50-foot wide buffer strip along the abutting property lines. The 50 feet shall be added to the side or rear yard requirements of the PUD; at least 15 feet of the 50-foot buffer strip shall be planted area.
(g) All utilities must be located underground, including private utilities such as electric power, cable and telephone.
504.03 Applications for PUD Approval.
In addition to the procedural and other requirements for a rezoning in the Procedures and Permits Article of this Development Code, approval of a planned unit development rezoning shall be request-ed and considered in accordance with the provisions of this Section 504.03.
(a) Development Summary Report Required.
City of Duluth UDC Section 504 Planned Unit Development (PUD).
5-11
Applications for rezoning to or development within a Planned Unit Development District shall require a written report that establishes the type, nature, size, intent and characteristics of the proposed development. At a minimum, the report shall including the following:
(1) A complete listing and general description of every land use category proposed within the development, including total acreage of the PUD, and the total amount of acreage devoted to each use category, as well as the total number of residential units by type and density, and gross floor area of nonresidential uses. Common open space and conservation ease-ment acreages are to be listed separately.
a. Land use categories may be general and may be unique to a particular PUD, but must identify the principal nature of the category, as illustrated by such names and descrip-tions as single-family living, neighborhood center, workplace center, mixed-use com-munity, etc., of the applicants choosing.
b. All uses not specifically included in the report, either in a general land use category or detailed for individual areas, and approved by City Council are prohibited unless the application is subsequently amended in accordance with applicable procedures.
(2) Individual areas of a planned unit development are to be described as to their specific use and development standards, and keyed to the master concept plan map. Each area descrip-tion must include the following subject matter, as relevant to the proposed character of development.
a. Allowed principal and accessory uses.
b. Gross acreage of the individual area and approximate acreages of separate land use or development areas, including common open space and conservation easements.
c. Intensity of development, such as:
1. For residential uses: Density controls (units/acre) or minimum lot size, minimum lot area per dwelling unit, minimum lot width, minimum lot frontage, minimum floor area or residential dwelling unit sizes, and maximum total number of dwell-ing units by type, as applicable to the character of the development proposed.
2. For mixed-use and nonresidential uses: Gross floor area per acre or total gross floor area, dwelling unit sizes and total dwelling units, as applicable to the charac-ter of the development proposed.
d. Principal building setbacks or build-to lines along all streets and property lines.
e. Maximum building heights.
f. Buffers, landscape strips and open space standards.
g. Exceptions or variations from the sign, parking or street design requirements of this Code, if any are being requested for the individual area.
h. An indication whether the internal streets will be public or private.
i. Proposed restrictive covenants (for informational purposes only).
j. Any other relevant or applicable standard or requirement for the individual area.
k. A description of intended plans for the provision of utilities, including water, sewer, drainage facilities and street lighting, as applicable.
Section 504 Planned Unit Development (PUD). City of Duluth UDC
5-12
l. Exceptions or variations from the sign, parking or street design requirements of the City, if any are being requested for the planned unit development in general.
m. For all streets and utilities not proposed for dedication to the public, provisions for the ownership and maintenance must be explained.
n. Applications may include prospective front, side and rear elevation drawings of repre-sentative building types. These drawings shall indicate general architectural character-istics. If the PUD is approved, general compliance with the architectural elevations shall be required.
504.04 Master Concept Plan Required.
(a) Applications for rezoning to a Planned Unit Development District shall require a master concept plan, including, at a minimum, those items enumerated below. The Planning and Development Planning and Development Director, Planning Commission and/or City Council may require, in addition, such other information, studies, plats, plans or architectural elevations deemed neces-sary to perform an adequate review of the proposed application.
(b) Master concept plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer, architect, land surveyor, land planner or landscape architect, and his/her seal of registration or professional initials shall be indicated on such plans.
(c) After rezoning is approved, development of a PUD or any portion of a PUD will require submis-sion and approval of a preliminary subdivision plat or a conceptual site plan, as applicable to the type of development proposed, in accordance with the requirements and procedures of the Procedures and Permits Article of this Development Code.
504.05 Master Concept Plan Requirements.
All master concept plans required by this Section shall contain, at a minimum, the following infor-mation:
(a) Boundaries of the subject property based on the boundary descriptions or boundary survey submitted with the rezoning application.
(b) Title of the proposed development and the name, address and contact information of the prop-erty owner or their designated representative.
(c) The name, address and contact information of the architect, engineer or other designer of the proposed development.
(d) Scale, date, north arrow, and general location map showing relationship of the site to the sur-rounding area, streets and/or natural features.
(e) All existing streets within or adjacent to the property, including right-of-way and street pave-ment widths; location of existing buildings to be retained or removed; water courses and im-poundments, wetlands and the limits of the 100-year flood plain; and other physical characteris-tics of the property relevant to the development proposal.
(f) Common open space areas to be retained, and the type, location and extent of primary conser-vation areas.
(g) The general location of the proposed major street circulation system to be located within the planned unit development.
City of Duluth UDC Section 505 Conservation Areas.
5-13
(h) General approximate delineation of individual areas of the planned unit development that differ by land use or development standards, keyed to a description for each area contained in the de-velopment summary report prepared in accordance with this Section.
504.06 Review Standards for PUD Rezoning.
In considering and acting upon applications for rezoning to the Planned Unit Development District, in addition to the standards for rezoning consideration in the Procedures and Permits Article of this De-velopment Code, the City Council may consider and base their recommendation and decision, re-spectively, on the following information:
(a) Conformity to the purpose and intent of the Planned Unit Development District.
(b) Quality of site design.
(c) Integration of a variety of land uses, building types and densities.
(d) Preservation of natural features.
(e) Compatibility with adjacent land uses.
(f) Provision and type of open space and the provision of other amenities designed to benefit the general public.
(g) Adequacy of utilities and other public works.
504.07 Report and Concept Plan Establish PUD Requirements.
The approved development summary report, master concept plan, and all other information, studies, plats, plans or architectural elevations submitted in the application, or required to be submitted by the City Council, shall establish the standards and minimum requirements for the subject property and shall become the conditions of zoning approval that apply to the subject property, regardless of changes in property ownership.
504.08 Revisions to Approved PUD.
(a) Any changes that, in the opinion of the Planning and Development Director, result in a devel-opment of such intent and character that has not been conceptually approved by the City Coun-cil shall require additional approval in accordance with procedures established in the Procedures and Permits Article for a revision of conditions of rezoning approval. Such changes may be addi-tions in the types of land uses, increases in square footage or density, decreases in lot sizes, changes in the location or dimensions of major streets, decreases in dwelling unit floor areas, major alterations in the land use patterns, or other substantial changes that are inconsistent with the summary report or the master concept plan approved for the PUD. Otherwise minor changes may be approved by the Planning and Development Director prior to issuance of devel-opment or building permits.
(b) As development of each portion of a planned unit development proceeds, the master concept plan map shall be updated to show each final subdivision plat as it is approved for recording, and each site plan for a multi-family or nonresidential project upon its approval for a land dis-turbing activity permit. No certificates of occupancy will be issued within those areas until the zoning official has received the updated master concept plan map.
Section 505. Conservation Areas.
505.01 Purpose.
Section 505 Conservation Areas. City of Duluth UDC
5-14
The purposes of this Section, among others, are as follows:
(1) To recognize the current development rights of property owners established through zon-ing;
(2) To conserve open land, including those areas containing unique and sensitive natural fea-tures such as stream buffers and wetlands, by setting them aside from development;
(3) To reduce erosion and sedimentation by the retention of existing vegetation;
(4) To enhance water quality of streams and waterways, and to protect valuable groundwater resources; and
(5) To provide notification to future property owners of natural resources that must be pro-tected on their property.
505.02 Designation of Conservation Areas.
Conservation Areas are required to be protected in a Conservation Subdivision, a PUD, or any new subdivision. These areas are defined as follows:
(a) Floodways within the 100-year Floodplain.
These areas are designated on maps prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), and must be confirmed as to their specific location on a preliminary plat for a subdivision or site development plan for a multi-family or nonresidential project.
(b) Flood Hazard Areas.
All areas within the 100-year floodplain but lying outside any floodway, wetland or other designated primary conservation area fall under this category. The boundaries of the 100-year floodplain are designated as the flood hazard area on maps prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), and must be confirmed as to their specific loca-tion on a preliminary plat for a subdivision or site development plan for a multi-family or nonresidential project.
(c) Required Stream Buffers.
Natural vegetative stream buffers along the banks of all perennial streams and other state waters, as required by the Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control provisions of the Erosion Control and Stormwater Management Article of this UDC.
(d) Wetlands.
Wetlands are those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas.
505.03 Allowed Uses in Conservation Areas.
The following requirements apply only to land set aside under conservation or natural resource easements in fulfillment of the provisions of this Article.
(a) Areas identified as conservation areas shall remain in their natural, undisturbed state. Such un-disturbed areas include floodways, required stream buffers, and designated wetlands and wet-land buffers.
City of Duluth UDC Section 506 Natural Resource Easements.
5-15
(b) Flood hazard areas outside of the floodway may be used for natural (unpaved) trails and for ag-ricultural uses such as cultivated farmland and pasture, provided that no fence or structure shall be constructed that would impede the free flow of flood waters.
505.04 Prohibited Uses.
The following uses are not allowed in conservation areas:
(a) Roads and non-permeable paved surfaces except necessary road crossings or as approved oth-erwise by the City of Duluth;
(b) Above-ground utility rights-of-way except necessary utility crossings or as approved otherwise by the City of Duluth; and
(c) Other uses inconsistent with the purposes of this Article.
505.05 Natural Resource or Conservation Easement Required.
Conservation areas that are required or intended to be protected under the provisions of this Article must be included within an easement, as follows:
All conservation areas in a Conservation Subdivision, PUD, conventional subdivision, multi-family or nonresidential development that are required to be protected by the provisions of this Article shall be permanently protected from further subdivision, development and unauthorized use as follows:
(a) By a natural resource easement in a conventional subdivision, multi-family or nonresidential de-velopment; or
(b) By a conservation easement in an open space subdivision or a planned unit development.
505.06 Ownership of Land in Conservation and Natural Resource Easements.
Land within a conservation or natural resource easement may be included within the lots in a subdi-vision, on land owned by a homeowners association or other entity that meets the provisions for an Owners Association as described herein, or transferred to a nonprofit conservation organization or land trust organized under Georgia law.
Section 506. Natural Resource Easements.
506.01 Natural Resource Easements; Creation.
(a) The natural resource easement, when required, shall be shown on the final subdivision plat and recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court at the same time as the final plat.
(b) When included within the lots in a subdivision, the natural resource easement shall be granted at no cost to a homeowners association or other entity that meets the provisions for an Own-ers Association as described herein.
(c) The natural resource easement shall grant a third-party right of enforcement to the Duluth City Council to enforce, at its discretion, any of the terms of the natural resource easement.
506.02 Natural Resource Easements; Guidelines.
The following guidelines must be incorporated into any natural resource easement in a form ac-ceptable to the City Attorney:
(a) The easement specifically and clearly identifies the boundaries of the property subject to the easement through reference to the easement area shown on the final subdivision plat;
Section 507 Conservation Easements. City of Duluth UDC
5-16
(b) The easement contains restrictions as to what the owner may do with the property and specifi-cally delineates what may not be done with the property. Limitations shall be consistent with the type of area protected and the applicable requirements of this Article to such areas, and may include but shall not be confined to prohibitions against subdivision, earthmoving, dump-ing, signs, utility lines, construction, changes to existing structures and uses made of the proper-ty;
(c) The easement provides for the right of the holder of the easement to inspect the property to as-sure observance of restrictions and also provides for enforcement procedures;
(d) The easement provides for the maintenance of the open space; and
(e) The easement contains provisions governing its amendment, including provisions that the easement shall not be altered or terminated except with the express written permission of the City.
Section 507. Conservation Easements.
507.01 Conservation Easements; Creation.
(a) The conservation easement, when required, shall be created subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A 44-10-1, et seq., which is known as the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act.
(b) The conservation easement shall be approved by the City Council and shall be granted at no cost to a charitable corporation, charitable association or charitable trust that qualifies as a holder under the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act.
(c) Such holder shall be approved by the City Council on the basis of their past experience as a holder of conservation easements and their lack of an ownership or corporate relationship with the owner or developer of the project.
(d) The conservation easement shall grant a third-party right of enforcement to the Duluth City Council to enforce, at its discretion, any of the terms of the conservation easement.
(e) The conservation easement may not be granted to the owner of the property to which the easement will apply, including a homeowners association holding natural resource conservation areas as common open space in an open space subdivision or planned development.
(f) An undivided property ownership interest in the common open space shall be granted to each property in an open space subdivision or planned development.
507.02 Conservation Easements; Guidelines.
The following guidelines are required to be incorporated into any conservation easement, at a mini-mum, in a form acceptable to the City Attorney:
(a) The easement recognizes and describes in a statement of purpose the special qualities of the property subject to the easement. Conditions within the tract subject to the conservation ease-ment may be shown by map and/or photograph;
(b) The easement clearly identifies the owner of the property subject to the easement, the holder of the easement, and the responsibilities of the property owner and easement holder;
(c) The easement specifically and clearly identifies the boundaries of the property subject to the easement, either by metes and bounds legal description, survey plat or reference to the ease-ment area shown on the final subdivision plat;
City of Duluth UDC Section 508 Owners Association.
5-17
(d) The easement contains restrictions as to what the owner may do with the property and specifi-cally delineates what may not be done with the property. Limitations shall be consistent with the type of area protected and the applicable requirements of this Article to such areas, and may include but shall not be confined to prohibitions against subdivision, earthmoving, dump-ing, signs, utility lines, construction, changes to existing structures, and uses made of the prop-erty;
(e) The easement provides for the right of the easement holder to inspect the property to assure observance of restrictions and also provides for enforcement procedures;
(f) The easement provides for the maintenance of the open space; and
(g) The easement contains provisions governing its amendment, including provisions that the easement shall not be altered or terminated except with the express written permission of all entities having either a property right or enforcement right in the easement.
Section 508. Owners Association.
508.01 Homeowners Association; When Required.
For any residential development that is subdivided into two or more separate parcels, such as a sin-gle-family detached subdivision, and that contains common open space, a natural resource ease-ment, a conservation easement or other lands or structures in common ownership, a homeowners association that provides for building and grounds maintenance and repair, insurance and working capital shall be required.
(a) Membership in the homeowners association must be mandatory for each property in the de-velopment.
(b) Such associations must also include homeowners declaration and bylaws, including covenants, conditions and regulations applicable to each property in the development.
(c) The declaration and bylaws shall be enforced by the Association or by an Association Manage-ment Company designated by them, which shall have the power to compel the payment of membership dues and assessments.
(d) The homeowners' association shall be formed under the provisions of the Georgia Property Owners Association Law (O.C.G.A.  44-3-220, et seq.), and shall contain adequate provisions to qualify it as a holder under the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Law (O.C.G.A.  44-10-1, et seq.) if it is to act as a holder of a conservation easement.
(e) The documents creating the homeowners association must provide that an adequate reserve fund for the association will exist at the time that control of the association transfers from the developer to the purchasers of homes in the development. The reserve fund must be equal to no less than two months payment of the normal monthly dues assessment per dwelling unit es-tablished by the association, times the number of existing dwelling units.
(f) The covenants, conditions and regulations shall, at a minimum, regulate and control the follow-ing:
(1) Equal access and right of use to all shared facilities;
(2) Perpetual and continued maintenance of open and shared space, specifically including storm water detention facilities;
(3) Tax liability in the case of default;
Section 508 Owners Association. City of Duluth UDC
5-18
(4) The method of assessment for dues and related costs;
(5) Where appropriate, party wall maintenance and restoration in the event of damage or de-struction;
(6) Animals, including household pets;
(7) Signs;
(8) Exterior items such as fences, lawn ornaments, and landscape areas and buffers;
(9) Building improvements;
(10) Outside storage;
(11) Overnight parking of vehicles;
(12) Decorations and holiday lighting; and
(13) Trash collection containers.
(g) For subdivisions, the homeowners association must be formed and incorporated at the same time a final plat for the subdivision or any portion of the subdivision is first recorded. A copy of the proposed homeowners association documents is to be submitted with an application for fi-nal subdivision plat approval.
(h) For subdivisions, the homeowners association must be formed and incorporated at the same time a final plat for the subdivision or any portion of the subdivision is first recorded. A copy of the proposed homeowners association documents is to be submitted with an application for fi-nal subdivision plat approval.
508.02 Nonresidential Owners Association.
For any nonresidential development that is subdivided into two or more separate parcels, such as an office park, and that contains common open space, a natural resource easement, a conservation easement or other lands or structures in common ownership, an association of the property owners that is consistent with the pertinent requirements for a homeowners association, above, shall be re-quired.
6-i
Article 6. Sign Regulations
Article 6 provides for the types of signs that may be placed on a property, and regulates such characteristics as their size, num-ber, placement, and timing.
Table of Contents Page
Section 601. Findings, Purpose and Intent. ..............................................................................................6-1
601.01 Statement of Legislative Purpose. ............................................................................................................... 6-1
601.02 Findings of Fact. ........................................................................................................................................... 6-1
601.03 Purpose and Intent. ..................................................................................................................................... 6-2
Section 602. Definitions. .........................................................................................................................6-2
Section 603. Applicability. ..................................................................................................................... 6-15
603.01 Signs that are Regulated. ........................................................................................................................... 6-15
603.02 Signs that are Exempt from Permitting Requirements. ............................................................................. 6-15
603.03 Signs that are Prohibited. ........................................................................................................................... 6-15
Section 604. Requirements that Apply to Signs in General. .................................................................... 6-18
604.01 Compliance with Other Codes and Provisions. .......................................................................................... 6-18
604.02 Computation of Sign Area. ......................................................................................................................... 6-18
604.03 Number of Signs. ........................................................................................................................................ 6-20
604.04 Height Measurements. .............................................................................................................................. 6-20
604.05 Lighting Restrictions. .................................................................................................................................. 6-21
604.06 Construction and Maintenance. ................................................................................................................ 6-21
604.07 Language and Legibility. ............................................................................................................................. 6-21
604.08 Visibility Clearance Area............................................................................................................................. 6-22
604.09 Electronic Changeable Copy Signs. ............................................................................................................ 6-22
Section 605. Regulation of Principal Freestanding and Principal Building Signs. ...................................... 6-24
605.01 Applicability. ............................................................................................................................................... 6-24
605.02 Principal SignsResidential Use Property. ................................................................................................ 6-24
Table 6-A: Principal Freestanding and Building SignsResidential Uses .................................................. 6-25
605.03 Principal SignsNonresidential Use Property. .......................................................................................... 6-26
Table 6-B: Principal Freestanding and Building SignsNonresidential Uses ............................................. 6-28
605.04 Adjustments. .............................................................................................................................................. 6-29
Table 6-C: Major Roadway Adjustment ..................................................................................................... 6-30
Section 606. Regulation of Project Entrance Signs. ................................................................................. 6-32
606.01 Applicability. ............................................................................................................................................... 6-32
606.02 Sign Structure. ............................................................................................................................................ 6-32
606.03 Project Entrance Sign Installations. ............................................................................................................ 6-32
606.04 Entrances to Subdivisions. ......................................................................................................................... 6-33
606.05 Entrances to Un-Subdivided Developments. ............................................................................................. 6-33
606.06 Illumination. ............................................................................................................................................... 6-33
Table 6-E: Project Entrance SignsBy Land Use ........................................................................................ 6-33
Section 601 Findings, Purpose and Intent. City of Duluth UDC
6-ii
Section 607. Landscaping Requirements for Signs. ................................................................................. 6-34
607.01 Landscaping Required. .............................................................................................................................. 6-34
607.02 Maintenance of required plant materials. ................................................................................................ 6-34
Section 608. Additional Regulations for Specific Types of Signs. ............................................................. 6-35
608.01 Miscellaneous Freestanding Signs. ............................................................................................................ 6-35
608.02 Miscellaneous Building Signs. .................................................................................................................... 6-35
608.03 Billboards. .................................................................................................................................................. 6-37
608.04 Flags. .......................................................................................................................................................... 6-38
608.05 Suspended Signs. ....................................................................................................................................... 6-38
608.06 Changeable Copy Signs. ............................................................................................................................. 6-38
Section 609. Temporary Signs. .............................................................................................................. 6-39
609.01 Temporary Signs; Allowed. ........................................................................................................................ 6-39
609.02 Issuance of a Temporary Sign Permit. ....................................................................................................... 6-39
609.03 Size of Temporary Signs. ........................................................................................................................... 6-39
609.04 Location of Temporary Signs. .................................................................................................................... 6-39
609.05 Construction and Lighting Standards of Temporary Signs. ....................................................................... 6-40
609.06 Temporary Banners, Portable Signs, Festoons and Inflatable Signs. ........................................................ 6-40
Section 610. Sign Permits; Requirements and Procedures. ..................................................................... 6-41
610.01 Issuance of Permits for Permanent Signs. ................................................................................................. 6-41
610.02 Issuance of Permits for Temporary Signs. ................................................................................................. 6-42
610.03 Application for a Sign Permit. .................................................................................................................... 6-42
610.04 Process for sign permit approval. .............................................................................................................. 6-43
610.05 Master Sign Plans. ..................................................................................................................................... 6-43
610.06 Fees. .......................................................................................................................................................... 6-44
Section 611. Nonconforming Signs. ....................................................................................................... 6-45
611.01 Nonconforming Signs; Registration. .......................................................................................................... 6-45
611.02 Nonconforming Signs; Provisions. ............................................................................................................. 6-45
611.03 Relocation of a Nonconforming Sign. ........................................................................................................ 6-45
Section 612. Special Exceptions for Signs. .............................................................................................. 6-45
612.01 Prior Variances. ......................................................................................................................................... 6-45
612.02 Special Exceptions. .................................................................................................................................... 6-46
612.03 Special Exception Approval Procedure. ..................................................................................................... 6-46
Section 613. Intent, Interpretation and Severability. ............................................................................. 6-46
Section 614. Administration, Enforcement, and Penalties. ..................................................................... 6-46
614.01 Enforcement. ............................................................................................................................................. 6-46
614.02 Inspections. ............................................................................................................................................... 6-47
614.03 Abandoned Signs. ...................................................................................................................................... 6-47
614.04 Administrative Fees, Citations and Penalties. ........................................................................................... 6-48
6-1
Article 6. Sign Regulations
Section 601. Findings, Purpose and Intent.
601.01 Statement of Legislative Purpose.
(a) The Mayor and Council recognize that signs provide an important medium through which individ-uals, businesses, and government may convey a variety of messages. However, left unregulated, signs can become a threat to the public health and safety as a traffic hazard, as a detriment to property values, and as an aesthetic nuisance affecting the overall economic growth of Duluth. Numerous professional studies have been prepared that examine and establish the effect of signs on traffic safety, aesthetics and economic prosperity, including the following:
1. Klauer, S.G., T.A. Dingus, V.L. Neale, J.D. Sudweeks, D.J. Ramsey. The Impact of Driver Inattention on Near-Crash/Crash Risk: An Analysis Using the 100-Car Naturalistic Driving Study Data. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. DOT HS 810 594. April 2006.
2. Snyder, Jonathan, Samuel S. Fels Fund. Beyond Aesthetics: How Billboards Affect Eco-nomic Prosperity. December 2011.
3. Wachtel, J., 2009. Safety Impacts of the Emerging Digital Display Technologies for Out-door Advertising Signs. Prepared for AASHTO and the Standing Committee on Research of the National Cooperative Highway Research Program (NCHRP), April 2009. The Veridian Group, Inc., Berkeley, California.
4. Weitz, Jerry, Ph.D.,AICP. The Public Purpose of Roswell's Sign Ordinance and the Impli-cations of Doing Without It: A Position Paper. December 7, 1999.
(b) Based on a review of the cited materials and the studies referenced therein as well as other re-lated studies, the Mayor and Council find that unregulated signs:
(1) Can be a safety hazard to drivers and pedestrians;
(2) Can be a detriment to the public health;
(3) Can hamper economic growth;
(4) Can lower property values;
(5) Can adversely impact public investments;
(6) Can degrade the utility of public safety signs; and
(7) Can adversely impact the aesthetic quality of the community and surrounding environment.
601.02 Findings of Fact.
The Mayor and Council find that:
(a) Signs are a proper use of private property, are a means of personal free expression and a neces-sary component of a commercial environment. As such, signs are entitled to the protection of the law. However, an improperly regulated sign environment imposes health and safety dangers to the public;
(b) The result of effective sign regulation will be to lessen hazardous conditions, confusion and visual clutter caused by the proliferation, improper placement, illumination and excessive height and size of signs which compete for the attention of pedestrians and vehicular traffic;
Section 602 Definitions. City of Duluth UDC
6-2
(c) Proper regulation of signs is a necessary prerequisite to a peaceable, orderly and safely designed business environment;
(d) Through proper regulation of signs, the aesthetic attractiveness and economic well-being of the city will be enhanced as a place to live, work and conduct business.
(e) Concerns about aesthetic and safety issues as balanced with concerns about freedom of expres-sion or speech are reasonably promoted in the City of Duluth by the provisions of this Article.
601.03 Purpose and Intent.
The purpose and intent of these sign regulations are:
(a) To aid in the identification of businesses and other commercial establishments in the City for po-lice, fire and other emergency responses, and to avoid confusion and delay in response to such emergencies;
(b) To protect the public health, morals and welfare from the display of unconstitutionally obscene language and the advertisement of illegal activities.
(c) To promote the mental and physical health, safety and welfare of the public by providing for the orderly and harmonious display of signs within the community;
(d) To maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment by minimizing visual clutter, encouraging a positive visual environment, and avoiding the erection of displays which produce deleterious and injurious effects to adjacent properties and to the natural beauty of the environment;
(e) To provide for the safety of the traveling public, both vehicular and pedestrian, by limiting distrac-tions, hazards, and obstructions;
(f) To maintain the Citys ability to attract sources of economic development and growth and to aid in the identification of properties and enterprises for the convenience of the public;
(g) To protect the historical character of the city;
(h) To encourage the effective use of signs as a means for communication in the City of Duluth by allowing the maximum amount of expression or speech consistent with the compatibility of such expression or speech with other land uses and with the aesthetic and public health, safety and welfare concerns which the City of Duluth is charged by law and the Georgia Constitution with preserving and protecting;
(i) To enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations while supporting the pol-icies contained in the Comprehensive Plan.
Section 602. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed, in addition to the definitions contained in the Interpretation and Definitions Article of this Development Code. If the same word or phrase is defined in this Article, below, and in the Interpreta-tions and Definitions Article, the definition contained in this Article shall be taken as the correct defi-nition and applied throughout this Development Code.
Architecturally Treated. A structure that is constructed of or covered with such materials as brick, stone, painted or treated wood, or stucco, or covered with artificial representations of such materials that are visually undistinguishable from the natural materials and have a life expectancy of at least 20 years as evidenced by a manufacturers warranty.
City of Duluth UDC Section 602 Definitions.
6-3
Banner. See sign, banner.
Beacon. A stationary or revolving light which flashes or projects illumination, single color or multi-colored, in any manner which is intended to attract or divert attention; except, however, this term is not intended to include any kind of lighting device which is required or necessary under the safety regulations described by the Federal Aviation Administration or similar agencies.
Building Canopy. See under canopy.
Building Sign. A sign that in any manner is fastened to, projects from, or is placed upon the exterior wall, or a window, door or roof of a building. The term building sign includes but is not limited to the following:
(1) Awning Sign. A sign imposed, mounted or painted upon an awning.
(2) Building Marker. A sign composed of concrete, bronze or other permanent material which is built into the surface of the building at the time of its construction.
(3) Canopy Sign. A sign imposed, mounted or painted upon a canopy, as defined herein.
(4) Mansard Sign. A sign imposed, mounted or painted upon the fascia portion of a mansard roof.
(5) Marquee Sign. Any sign attached flat against or upon a permanent marquee of a building.
(6) Projecting Sign. A sign affixed flat to a wall and extending more than 6 inches from the sur-face of such wall, or any sign attached to and extending at an angle from a wall surface (usu-ally perpendicular).
(7) Roof Sign. A sign that is mounted on, applied to, or otherwise structurally supported by the roof of a building (other than the fascia portion of a mansard roof).
(8) Under-Canopy Sign. A display attached to the underside of a marquee or building canopy and protruding over a pedestrian walkway.
(9) Wall (or Faade) Sign. A sign that is fastened to, painted on or placed directly upon the ex-terior wall of a building faade or building canopy, with the sign face parallel to the wall or canopy face.
(10) Window Sign. A sign that is applied, painted or placed on, behind or inside a windowpane or a glass door and intended to be viewed from outside the building.
Section 602 Definitions. City of Duluth UDC
6-4
The following are Illustrative Examples of Building Signs by Type:
Wall Sign
Wall Sign Wall Sign Awning Signs
Awning Sign
Building Marker Canopy Sign Mansard Sign
Marquee Sign
Projecting Sign Projecting Sign Roof (and Canopy) Sign
Under-Canopy Sign Under-Canopy Sign Window Sign Window Signs
City of Duluth UDC Section 602 Definitions.
6-5
Business Park. One or more buildings located on a property in common ownership, management or operation, units of which are owned, leased or rented primarily for office, institutional or light indus-trial purposes.
Canopy:
(1) Building Canopy. A permanent roof-like structure projecting from a building and open on at least one side for the purpose of shielding a pedestrian walkway from the elements.
(2) Freestanding Canopy. A freestanding roof-like structure supported by columns intended to shield a vehicular driveway or service area from the elements.
Character Area. A portion of the city designated as any one of the various character areas created within the Citys Comprehensive Plan and shown as to its boundaries and extent on the Future Devel-opment Map subtitled Character Areas included as a part of said Plan, and as may be amended from time to time by the City Council.
Column Sign. See under freestanding sign.
Commercial Speech. The expression of an idea, opinion or message that directs or attracts attention to a business operated for profit; or to a product, commodity or service for sale, trade, barter, swap or lease; or to any other commercial interest or activity.
Days. The term days shall mean working days exclusive of holidays authorized by the Mayor and
Council and weekends, unless the term is stated as cal-endar days or the context implies otherwise.
Faade. The exterior vertical surfaces of a building that comprise the front, side or rear wall.
Feather Banner. A banner mounted on a pole, such as the examples shown to the right. Such signs may be wind activated (see sign, animated) or rigidly mounted in a stationary position.
Festoons. Strings of light bulbs or other lighted devices, and strings of ribbons, tinsel, pennants, streamers, pin-wheels or other similar devices designed to move in the
wind.
Flag. A sign made of paper, woven natural or synthetic fabric, thin plastic or similar lightweight pliable material that is normally displayed by flying from a pole as a wind-activated device, but is not otherwise defined herein as a banner, pennant or feather banner.
Fluorescent Color. A color that is intense, brilliantly colored and apparently giving off light, such as day glow (day-glo) colors.
Freestanding Canopy. See under canopy.
Freestanding Sign. A permanent sign which is attached to or part of a completely self-supporting struc-ture, other than a building. The supporting structure shall be set firmly in or below the ground surface and shall not be attached to any building or any other structure, whether portable or stationary. The term freestanding sign includes but is not limited to the following:
(1) Pole Sign. A sign that is mounted on one or more freestanding stanchions or columns such that the sign body is elevated above the ground by such supporting stanchions or columns,
Examples of Feather Banners
Section 602 Definitions. City of Duluth UDC
6-6
and such supporting stanchions or columns are each less than 10% of the width of the sign body.
(2) Column Sign. A sign that is mounted on one or more freestanding stanchions or columns such that the sign body is elevated above the ground by such supporting stanchions or col-umns, and such supporting stanchions or columns are each 10% of the width of the sign body or more.
(3) Monument Sign. A freestanding sign in which the entire bottom of the base of the sign struc-ture is in contact with the ground, providing a solid and continuous background for the sign from the ground to the top of the sign structure; the base of which is as wide as or wider than the total width of the sign body plus any supporting columns.
(4) Hybrid Monument Sign. A freestanding sign in which the entire bottom of the base of the sign structure is in contact with the ground, but a solid and continuous background for the sign from the ground to the top of the sign structure is not provided; the base of which is as wide as or wider than the total width of the sign body plus any supporting columns.
The following are Illustrative Examples of Freestanding Signs by Type:
Pole Sign
Pole Sign
Column Sign
Column Sign
Column Sign
Monument Sign
City of Duluth UDC Section 602 Definitions.
6-7
Monument Sign
Monument Sign
Hybrid Monument Sign
Ground Cover. Low growing, spreading plants, other than turf grass, such as but not limited to ivy, liriope, juniper, mondo grass or sedge.
Guy or Guy Wire. A cable used to support or stabilize a freestanding pole or structure, such as a lattice telecommunications or citizens band antenna, utility pole or traffic signal stanchion.
Holiday or Seasonal Event. A day established as a legal holiday by federal, state or local law; a nation-ally recognized holiday such as Halloween or Mothers Day; a nationally recognized calendar season such as Fall or Spring; a religious day or term of days such as Easter, Yom Kippur or Christmas, or Lent, Ramadan or Hanukah.
Hybrid Monument Sign. See under freestanding sign.
Illuminated Sign. See sign, illuminated.
Incidental Sign. See sign, incidental.
Iridescent Color. A color which varies in color when seen at different angles; having a play of lustrous rainbow-like colors; pearlescent.
Kiosk. A freestanding sign structure, often cylindrical in shape, intended to be viewed from all sides and erected for the purpose of posting signs, notices or other public announcements. Kiosks that are composed of flat faces are treated as multi-faced signs.
Landscape Materials. Any combination of living plant materials, nonliving materials (such as rocks, pebbles, wood chips, mulch and pavers) and decorative features such as sculpture, patterned walks, fountains, and pools. This definition includes synthetic landscaping materials that are visually indistin-guishable from natural materials.
Leased Sign. An agreement by which a property owner conveys, usually for a specified rent, to other persons, permission to erect and maintain a sign upon their property.
LED Sign. Any sign or portion thereof that uses light emitting diode technology or other similar semi-conductor technology to produce an illuminated image, picture, or message of any kind whether the image, picture, or message is moving or stationary. This type of sign includes any sign that uses LED technology of any kind, whether conventional (using discrete LEDs), surface mounted (otherwise known as individually mounted LEDs), transmissive, organic light emitting diodes (OLED), light emitting polymer (LEP), organic electro polymer (OEL), or any other similar technology. An LED sign is consid-ered to be a form of electronic changeable copy sign (see under sign, changeable copy).
Marquee Sign. See under building sign.
Section 602 Definitions. City of Duluth UDC
6-8
Miscellaneous Building Sign. A building sign (as defined herein), other than a principal building sign, a
temporary sign or an incidental sign, commonly found on the wall of a nonresidential use property.
The following are Illustrative Examples of Miscellaneous Building Signs:
Miscellaneous Freestanding Sign. A freestanding sign, other than a freestanding principal sign, temporary
sign or incidental sign, commonly found on multi-family and nonresidential use properties located
at entrance and exit driveways, drive-through windows, internal driving lanes, parking lots, designated
handicap parking spaces, etc.
The following are Illustrative Examples of Miscellaneous Freestanding Signs:
City of Duluth UDC Section 602 Definitions.
6-9
Monument Sign. See under freestanding sign.
Nonresidential Use. See use, nonresidential.
Parapet Wall. A building faade that extends above the eave line or edge of a roof.
Pennant. A lightweight plastic, fabric or similar material designed to move in the wind; pennants are often suspended from a rope, wire, or string in series. The term pennant shall not include a banner or a flag as regu-lated by this Article.
Personal (noncommercial) Speech. The expression of an idea, opinion or message that does not direct or attract attention to a business operated for profit; or to a product, commodity or service for sale, trade, barter, swap
or lease; or to any other commercial interest or activity.
Planned Center. A single office, medical, commercial or industrial property that is designed or intended for occupancy by two or more principal businesses that are separately owned and have no corporate relationship. A planned center may consist of a single building, such as a shopping center, or multiple buildings, such as an office condominium center.
Pole Sign. See under freestanding sign.
Portable Sign. See sign, portable.
Principal Building. The building in which is conducted the principal use of the parcel on which it is located. Parcels with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings, but storage build-ings, garages, and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings.
Principal Sign. See sign, principal.
Project Entrance Sign. See sign, project entrance.
Residential Use. See use, residential.
Roof Sign. See under building sign.
Seasonal Event. See holiday or seasonal event.
Shopping Center. See planned center.
Shrub. A self-supporting woody plant that may reach a height of less than 15 feet, such as but not limited to azalea, boxwood, yew, hawthorn, hydrangea, holly, nandina or camellia.
Sign. Any structure, device, object, design or display that is used or intended to be used to attract the attention of or to convey information to the public, and that is placed in such a way, whether out of doors or inside or near a window, as to be in the view of the general public from the exterior of any building on the property.
A Parapet Wall
Section 602 Definitions. City of Duluth UDC
6-10
Sign, A-frame, Sidewalk or Sandwich. A temporary, movable sign not secured
or attached to the ground or surface upon which it is located. This type of sign
is typically A shaped or in some variation thereof and which is usually double
sided. This includes a sign displayed on an easel.
Sign, Aggregate Area. The combined sign area of all sign faces of a particular
category on a single parcel. For example the aggregate sign area of all freestanding
signs on a parcel is the sum total of the sign face areas of all freestanding
signs on such parcel.
Sign, Animated. A sign that has moving parts or includes action, motion, or
color changes, or the optical illusion of action, motion, or color changes, including
signs using electronic ink, signs set in motion by wind or by mechanical means such as the blowing
of air or motorized parts, or made up of a series of sections that turn, including any type of screen
using animated or scrolling displays such as an LED (light emitting diode) screen or any other type of
video display.
Sign, Banner. A sign of fabric, thin plastic or similar lightweight material that is mounted to a pole or a
building at one or more edges and is intended or displayed as commercial speech. Flags displaying
noncommercial speech shall not be considered to be banners.
Sign, Billboard. Any monument sign erected on undeveloped property.
Sign Body. That portion of a sign structure that is intended or designed primarily to support or display
the sign face, exclusive of the signs base or decorative cap, if any.
Sign, Building Marker. See under building sign.
Sign, Canopy. See under building sign.
Sign, Changeable Copy. A type of animated sign that is capable of changing the position or format of
word messages or other displays on the sign face or change the visible display of words, numbers,
symbols and graphics by the use of a matrix of electric lamps, movable discs, movable panels, light
apertures or other methods, provided these changes are actuated by either a control mechanism or
manually on the face of the sign. Changeable copy signs include the following types:
A-Frame Sign
City of Duluth UDC Section 602 Definitions.
6-11
(1) Manually activated: A sign whose alphabetic, pictographic, or symbolic informational con-tent can be changed or altered by placing such letters or other message elements directly on the sign face by hand.
(2) Electronic: A sign whose alphabetic, pictographic, or symbolic informational content can be changed and is displayed electrically or electronically. See also LED sign.
Sign, Channeled Letter. Signs that have their let-ters cut out of the sign face or raised above the sign face, described as:
(1) Internally channeled letters: Letters or
other symbols cut into a sign face and located above a recessed background surface, often designed for the background surface to be illuminated by an artificial light source.
(2) Reverse channeled letters: Letters or other symbols raised above a background surface de-signed to be illuminated from behind and within the letters or symbols by an artificial light source.
Sign Copy. The words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors or other design elements that are used to convey the message, idea or intent for which a sign has been erected or placed.
Sign, Dilapidated/Deteriorated. A sign that is structurally unsound, has defective parts, or is in need of painting or other maintenance.
Sign, Double-Faced. A sign structure with two sign faces that are parallel (back-to-back) or that form an angle to one another of no more than 60 degrees, where each sign face is designed to be seen from a different direction and the two sign faces are separated from each other at their nearest point by no more than 12 inches. Sign faces or sign modules on a single sign structure that are separated by more than 12 inches are treated as separate signs.
Sign Face. That portion of the surface of a sign structure where words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements are or may be located in order to convey the message, idea, or intent for which the sign has been erected or placed. The sign face may be composed of two or more modules on the same surface that are separated or surrounded by portions of a sign structure not intended to contain any advertising message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature.
Sign, Flag. See flag.
Sign, Height. The vertical distance from the ground to the highest point of the sign structure, as meas-ured from the adjacent finished grade at the base of the sign.
Sign, Illuminated. Any sign or portion thereof which is illuminated by artificial light, either from an interior or exterior source, including outline, reflective or phosphorescent light, whether or not the source of light is directly affixed as part of the sign, and shall also include signs with reflectors that depend upon sunlight or automobile headlights for an image.
(1) Direct or Internal Illumination. A sign illuminated by an internal source.
(2) Indirect or External Illumination. A sign illuminated by an external light source directed pri-marily toward such sign.
Sign, Incidental. A small sign, emblem or decal no larger than 1 square feet in area. Such signs are normally located on doors, windows and gas pumps, or in parking lots or loading areas, may be free-standing or building signs, and are generally not readily visible or legible from public rights-of-way.
Section 602 Definitions. City of Duluth UDC
6-12
The following are Illustrative Examples of Incidental Signs:
Sign, Inflatable. A sign that is either expanded to its full dimensions through mechanical means of an
air blower or supported by gasses contained within the sign, or sign parts, at a pressure greater than
atmospheric pressure.
Sign, Kiosk. See kiosk.
Sign, Marquee. See under building sign.
Sign, Mobile. See vehicular sign.
Sign Module. Each portion or unit of a sign face that is clearly separable from other such units by virtue
of its individual or independent construction or framing.
Sign, Monument. See under freestanding sign.
Sign, Multi-Faced. A single freestanding sign structure consisting of two sign faces (see double-faced
sign) or three or more sign faces that are separated from each other at their nearest point by no more
than 12 inches. Sign faces or sign modules on a single sign structure that are separated by more than
12 inches are treated as separate signs.
Sign, Neon. An illuminated sign containing a glass tube filled with neon or phosphors, which is bent to
form letters, symbols or other shapes, or otherwise used to highlight, decorate or outline the sign.
Sign, Nonconforming. A sign legally existing at the time of its placement or erection that could not
have been approved under the terms of this Article.
Sign, Permanent. Any sign that is securely affixed to the ground or to a building and not readily removable.
Temporary signs are not considered to be permanent signs.
City of Duluth UDC Section 602 Definitions.
6-13
Sign, Pole. See under freestanding sign.
Sign, Portable. A sign whose principal supporting structure is intended, by design and construction, to be used by resting upon the ground for support and may be easily moved or relocated for reuse. Portable signs shall include, but are not limited to, signs mounted upon a trailer, bench, wheeled carrier or other non-motorized mobile structure with or without wheels. See also sign, a-frame, sidewalk or sandwich.
Sign, Principal. The main, most prominent or largest freestanding or building sign on a propertys street frontage or principal building, other than a project entrance sign as defined in this Article. Such signs are of permanent construction and not placed as temporary signage.
Sign, Prohibited. Any sign, other than a non-conforming sign, not conforming to this Article.
Sign, Project Entrance. A permanent freestanding sign located at an entrance designed and permitted for vehicular access into a multi-family development, or into a development containing multiple lots, such as but not limited to a particular single-family residential subdivision, a townhouse condominium subdivision, or a commercial subdivision such as an office park or industrial park where buildings are located on separate lots.
The following are Illustrative Examples of Project Entrance Signs:
Sign, Projecting. See under building sign.
Sign, Roof. See under building sign.
Sign, Temporary. Any sign, the use of which is short-term in nature, that is affixed to or placed on the ground or to a building but is readily removable and not intended for permanent installation.
Sign, Under Canopy. See under building sign.
Sign, Wall. See under building sign.
Subtenant. A natural person, business or other entity that subleases or is otherwise allowed to occupy a portion of land or a building, the majority of which is also occupied by a tenant. For the purposes of this Development Code, a subtenant is not treated as a tenant as defined herein.
Tenant. A natural person, business or other entity that occupies land or buildings by ownership, under a lease, through payment of rent, or at will; the primary occupant, inhabitant, or dweller of a place. See also subtenant.
Section 602 Definitions. City of Duluth UDC
6-14
Tenant Frontage. The horizontal distance in feet between the walls that delimit an exterior faade of a tenant space. A tenant space may be a stand-alone building with a single occupant, or a portion of a planned center that is separated from all other tenant spaces for occupancy by a single tenant.
Use, Nonresidential. A principal use that is a business engaged in the sale of goods or the provision of personal, professional, business, entertainment or other services; an institutional or nonprofit organi-zation; a business engaged in the fabrication, manufacture or production of durable or non-durable goods; an activity for the administration or support of a business or organization; or a place of lodging for the travelling public, such as a hotel, motel or bed and breakfast.
Use, Residential. A principal use that is intended for occupancy by an owner or lessee as their perma-nent place of abode.
Vehicular Sign. Any sign placed, mounted, painted on or affixed to a motor vehicle or to a freight, flat-bed or storage trailer or other conveyance, whether motorized or drawn.
The following are Illustrative Examples of Vehicular Signs:
Wall Sign. See under building sign.
Window Sign. See under building sign.
City of Duluth UDC Section 603 Applicability.
6-15
Section 603. Applicability.
603.01 Signs that are Regulated.
The regulations and requirements of this Article apply to all signs that are or are intended to be viewed from a public right-of-way or adjacent property, or that are intended to be viewed from outdoor areas of private property, except as otherwise exempt under this Section.
603.02 Signs that are Exempt from Permitting Requirements.
The following signs are exempt from the permitting requirements of this Article; provided, however, that all such signs must meet the setback requirements of this Article and shall not be located within any public right-of-way or within any Visibility Clearance Area set forth in Section 604.08.
(a) Signs erected by or at the direction of the City or any government entity in the right-of-way or on any government owned parcel are exempt from provisions of this Article.
(b) Historic markers authorized by the City are exempt.
(c) Property address numbers as required by the City are considered official governmental signs and are exempt.
(d) Incidental signs (as defined in this Development Code) that are located in conjunction with a multi-family or nonresidential use are exempt, provided such signs are not illuminated and that the aggregate of all such signs on a property may not exceed 9 square feet (unless a larger aggregate area is required by law or government regulation).
(e) Displays or decorations related to a holiday or seasonal event (as defined in this Development Code) that are placed on a property by the owner or with the owners permission as personal (noncommercial) speech (also as defined in this Development Code) are exempt.
(f) Signs containing a non-commercial message with a maximum total sign face area not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet per lot and a maximum height of four (4) feet per sign.
(g) Signs located on property which is listed for sale or lease with a total maximum area of sixteen (16) square feet per lot and a maximum height of four (4) feet per sign.
(h) Window displays of goods available on a site are not considered to be signs and are exempt from these sign regulations.
(i) A building design or color that is associated with a particular establishment or organization but which conveys no message is not considered to be a sign and is exempt from these sign regula-tions.
603.03 Signs that are Prohibited.
The following signs are prohibited to the extent noted.
(a) All signs, other than legal non-conforming signs, which are not in compliance with this Article are prohibited and illegal and shall not be erected or maintained.
(b) Privately owned signs erected on or above public property.
(1) No person shall erect a sign on or projecting over public property other than the governmen-tal entity responsible for such property, or a public utility company or contractor occupying or working on public property pursuant to government contract or franchise.
Section 603 Applicability. City of Duluth UDC
6-16
(2) For the purpose of this Article the public right-of-way shall be measured and determined by the utility poles, unless otherwise indicated or more detailed information is available.
(c) Any sign placed or erected on a property without the permission of the property owner.
(d) Roof signs, as defined in this Development Code.
(e) Vehicular signs, as defined in this Article, are not allowed to be placed or parked in such a manner as to be viewed or intended to be viewed from a public right-of-way, except that this prohibition shall not apply in the following circumstances:
(1) When such conveyances are actively being used to transport persons, goods or services in the normal course of business;
(2) When such conveyances are parked in an inconspicuous area; or
(3) When such conveyances are actively being used for storage of construction materials for, and on the same lot with, a bona fide construction project for which building and other ap-plicable permits have been issued and where construction is underway.
(f) Animated signs, except electronic changeable copy signs, banners and flags as may be regulated by this Article, are not allowed.
(g) Signs that pose a threat to public safety are not allowed, such as:
(1) Signs containing or imitating an official traffic sign or signal or contain the words stop, go, danger, caution, warning, or similar words, except for construction signs and barri-cades and except when the words are incorporated in the permanent name of a business.
(2) Signs that display intermittent or blinking lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or on police, fire, ambulance or rescue vehicles.
(3) Signs located so as to obscure, or otherwise interfere with the effectiveness of any official traffic sign, signal or device.
(4) Signs located so as to obscure, or otherwise interfere with a motor vehicle operators view of approaching, merging, or intersecting traffic.
(5) Signs that obstruct any fire escape; any means of ingress, egress, or ventilation; or prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereto; and signs attached in any manner to a fire escape.
(h) Hand written, hand painted, handmade or other unprofessionally fabricated signs. A profession-ally hand-painted sign is one that has been prepared or created by a person engaged in the paid occupation of sign-painting and generally reproduces font sets created by such foundries as Adobe, Microsoft, BitStream, etc.
The following are illustrative examples of professionally hand-painted signs that would not be prohibited:
City of Duluth UDC Section 603 Applicability.
6-17
(i) Signs located on courtesy benches, waste containers, trashcans and similar devices.
(j) Pole signs and column signs, except historic pole signs allowed under Section 605.04(b)(1).
(k) Signs displaying words, characters, and/or illustrations of an obscene, indecent or immoral nature as defined by the Code of Ordinances of the City of Duluth or as defined by the State of Georgia at O.C.G.A. Section 16-12-80 (b), or displaying nudity as defined by the State of Georgia at O.C.G.A. Section 16-12-81 (b)(1).
(l) Signs that advertise or encourage illegal activity as defined by local, state or federal laws.
(m) Unshielded illuminated devices that produce glare or create a hazard or nuisance to motorists or occupants of adjacent properties.
(n) A sign that emits or utilizes in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing, or a sign that emits smoke, vapor, particles or odor.
(o) Signs with lighting or control mechanisms that cause radio, television or other communications interference.
(p) Motion picture mechanisms or video displays used in such a manner as to permit or allow moving or animated images to be visible from a public right-of-way or sidewalk.
(q) Certain illuminated signs, as follows:
(1) Signs containing, including, or illuminated by any flashing, intermittent, or moving lights, scrolling lights, and/or utilizing changes in the intensity of lighting are prohibited.
(2) Any illumination of a sign that interferes with the effectiveness of, or obscures, an official traffic sign, device, or signal is prohibited.
(3) Any illumination of a sign that is not effectively shielded so as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed at any portion of the traveled way of a street and which are of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or to impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle, or which otherwise interfere with the operation of any motor vehicle, is prohibited.
(4) No red, green or yellow illuminated sign shall be placed within 300 feet of any traffic light.
(5) Search lights or spotlights, except for special business promotions or a new business grand opening. For each event, such devices shall receive prior written approval through issuance of a Temporary Sign Permit by the City, along with written consent from the Gwinnett County Airport Authority. Such lights shall not create a nuisance or interfere with vehicular traffic, and shall adhere to all applicable regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
Section 604 Requirements that Apply to Signs in General. City of Duluth UDC
6-18
(r) Banners except as allowed by this Article for specific types of signs, including temporary signage under Section 609.06.
(s) Portable signs, except A-frame signs as may be allowed under this Article for a nonresidential use, or as provided for temporary signage t under Section 609.06 of this Article.
(t) Festoons, as defined in this Development Code, except as provided for temporary signage under Section 609.06 of this Article.
(u) Inflatable signs, including air or gas filled balloons or other inflatable devices, are prohibited ex-cept as exempted as seasonal and holiday decorations under Section 603.02(e) of this Article or as provided for temporary signage under Section 609.06 of this Article.
Section 604. Requirements that Apply to Signs in General.
604.01 Compliance with Other Codes and Provisions.
(a) Any sign that will be erected, replaced, reconstructed, repaired, altered, relocated or maintained within the city shall conform to the requirements of the International Building Code, Appendix H, and to the requirements of the National Electrical Code, Article 600, Electrical Signs and Outdoor Lighting, as adopted with amendments by the State of Georgia. Where the provisions of the building or electrical code and this Article conflict or overlap, the most stringent requirement shall prevail and be controlling.
(b) In accordance with the National Electrical Code specifications, all signs shall be located in such a way that they maintain horizontal and vertical clearance from all overhead utilities. In no case shall any sign be installed within 3 feet horizontally or vertically from any overhead utility line or utility guy wire.
(c) Any sign that will be erected, replaced, reconstructed, repaired, altered or relocated within the city shall conform to all other provisions of this Unified Development Code and other ordinances of the City of Duluth. In the event of conflict between the provisions of this Article and other articles of this Development Code or City ordinances, the most stringent requirements shall pre-vail and be controlling.
604.02 Computation of Sign Area.
(a) Generally.
(1) The area of a sign face or module shall be computed by means of the smallest rectangle that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, color, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets other regulations of the City and is clearly inci-dental to the display itself.
(2) If a sign face is composed of two or more sign modules, the sign face area shall be the area of each module, measured in accordance with the preceding paragraph (1), totaled together.
(3) The area of a sign structure shall be computed by means of the smallest rectangle that will encompass the extreme limits of the sign, by multiplying:
a. The width of the body of the sign (exclusive of the signs base or decorative cap, if any) measured at the widest portion of the sign body; times
City of Duluth UDC Section 604 Requirements that Apply to Signs in General.
6-19
b. The total height of the sign as defined in this Article under sign height.
(4) The following are examples of how sign structure and sign face area measurements are made; the signs shown are illustrative and only provided for clarity.
(b) Area of Multi-Faced Signs.
The sign face area of a sign structure with more than one side, and such sides are not more than 12 inches apart at their closest point, shall be computed as follows:
(1) Double-faced signs.
For double-faced signs, when the sign face surfaces are parallel (back-to-back), or where the smallest angle formed between the two faces is 60 degrees or less, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of the largest side. For double-faced signs where the interior angle formed by the faces is more than 60 degrees, the sign face area shall be the total area of both sides.
(2) Signs with three or more faces.
a. For sign structures having only three sides and the interior angle formed between each of the sides is 60 degrees, the sign face area shall be taken as the area of the largest of the three sides.
b. For all other multi-faced signs with three or more sides, the sign face area shall be either the largest sign on any one side, or the largest total of all sign faces that are joined by an interior angle of more than 60 degrees, whichever can be viewed from an adjoining street.
Sign Face Area
Three-sided Sign Structures
Section 604 Requirements that Apply to Signs in General. City of Duluth UDC
6-20
(c) Free-Form Signs.
For signs that have no identifiable frame or border, the smallest rectangle that includes all of the
signs words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors or other design elements intended to
convey the signs message shall establish the area of the sign face.
Free-Form Sign
Kiosk Sign
(d) Kiosks.
For a kiosk or other cylindrical sign structure, the area of the sign face shall be the largest measurement
achieved from any view of the sign structure. Measurements shall be made as a flat
plane rectangle projected on or bisecting the sign structure.
604.03 Number of Signs.
(a) For the purpose of determining number of signs, a single sign shall be considered to be a single
sign structure, display surface or display device containing the sign copy (as defined in this Development
Code) or other elements organized, related, and composed to form a unit.
(b) Refer to the definition of sign face and sign copy for additional information.
604.04 Height Measurements.
(a) For a freestanding sign structure located within 100 feet of an adjacent street right-of-way (as
measured perpendicular to the street), the following applies:
(1) For a sign located on land at or above the crown of the roadway in the adjacent street, the
height of a sign shall be equal to the vertical distance from the average grade at the base of
the sign to the highest point of any portion of the sign. Any earthen berms or other site improvements
that raise the sign above the pre-construction natural grade of the land upon
which the sign is placed shall be included in the height measurement of the sign.
(2) For a sign located on land below the crown of the roadway in the adjacent street, the height
of a sign shall be equal to the vertical distance from the crown of the roadway to the highest
point of any portion of the sign. Any earthen berms, elevated foundations or other site improvements
that raise the sign up to the level of the crown of the roadway shall not be included
in the height measurement of the sign.
City of Duluth UDC Section 604 Requirements that Apply to Signs in General.
6-21
(b) For a freestanding sign structure located 100 feet or more from an adjacent street right-of-way (as measured perpendicular to the street), the height of a sign shall be equal to the vertical dis-tance from the average grade at the base of the sign to the highest point of any portion of the
sign. Any earthen berms or other site improvements that raise the sign above the pre-construc-tion natural grade of the land upon which the sign is placed shall be included in the height measurement of the sign.
604.05 Lighting Restrictions.
In addition to illuminated signs that are prohibited under Section 603.03, the following applies to all illumination of signs:
(a) Only permanent signs shall be illuminated, either directly or indirectly.
(b) A permit will not be issued for an illuminated sign on a nonresidential property within 100 feet from any property line of a residentially zoned parcel.
(c) In a residential zoning district only project entrance signs may be illuminated, and such signs may only be illuminated indirectly by an external light source, such as floodlights or shielded neon tubes.
(d) Any signage with internal lighting composed of light bulbs or neon tubing shall be covered so that the light sources are not directly visible from the outside.
604.06 Construction and Maintenance.
(a) All signs shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with the Duluth Building Code.
(b) The City may, at its discretion, require certification to confirm that the structural requirements of the Citys codes are met.
(c) All signs, together with their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in good repair and unless constructed of galvanized or non-corroding metal, shall be given a protective coating as necessary to maintain a clean appearance and safe condition.
604.07 Language and Legibility.
(a) Every principal freestanding sign shall contain the street number and the official street name in English letters and Arabic numbers of a size equivalent to the predominant size of the letters and numbers on the sign.
(b) To aid in proper and timely response in an emergency, the name of the business or the type of business on the premises must also be indicated in English.
Section 604 Requirements that Apply to Signs in General. City of Duluth UDC
6-22
(c) Nothing in this section shall prohibit the same and/or additional information on the sign from being written in a language other than English, provided that an English translation of the sign is included with the application for a sign permit in accordance with Section 610.03(d).
604.08 Visibility Clearance Area.
(a) No sign more than 3 feet in height shall be erected within 30 feet of an intersection with a public or private street, private drive or other access point, or otherwise interfere with traffic movement and visibility.
(b) Such visibility clearance area shall be established as the triangular area formed by the street right-of-way lines (or such lines extended to their intersection) and a line connecting such right-of-way lines at points 30 feet from the intersection of the right-of-way lines, or within 30 feet of the intersection of a street right-of-way line and the edge of a driveway.
604.09 Electronic Changeable Copy Signs.
Electronic changeable copy signs, as defined in this Development Code, regardless of the technology employed, must conform to the following standards:
(a) All electronic changeable copy signs viewable from a public street or sidewalk shall present only static displays (still pictures and printing). Such signs not viewable from a public street or sidewalk may display movies, animation or video containing motion.
(b) Each static image shall be maintained for a duration of at least 8 seconds. The change time be-tween each static image shall be perceived as Instantaneous within the capability of the technol-ogy employed (generally about 1/10th of a second).
(c) For signs viewable from a public street or sidewalk, no flashing, scrolling, or other variation in the static image that gives an illusion of movement or variation in light intensity during the display of a single image is allowed.
City of Duluth UDC Section 604 Requirements that Apply to Signs in General.
6-23
(d) LED signs.
In addition to all other requirements of this Section 604.09 and this Article, LED signs (as defined in this Development Code) must comply with the following:
(1) All such signs shall be tri-color signs or better, in which each pixel consists of a group of at least one red, green and blue LED or similar light emitting device.
(2) Maximum distances between pixels shall be as follows:
a. For building signs, no more than 10 mm between pixels, measured center-to-center both horizontally and vertically.
b. For freestanding signs (including billboards as defined in this Development Code), no more than 16 mm between pixels, measured center-to-center both horizontally and ver-tically.
(3) All such signs shall be certified by a Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory (NRTL) recog-nized by the US Occupational Safety & Health Administration (OSHA) in accordance with 29 C.F.R. 1910.7.
(4) Maximum brightness.
a. The sign must employ a light sensing device that adjusts the brightness as ambient light conditions change.
b. The sign shall not operate at a brightness level of more than 0.30 foot candles above ambient light levels measured at 100 feet from the sign (150 feet for sign faces greater than 100 square feet in area), as certified under paragraph (f) below.
(5) A fail safe device shall be installed that, in the event of a failure of the light sensing device, drops the brightness level to the lowest night-time level allowed, regardless of the time of day.
(e) Other electronic changeable copy signs.
(1) Electronic changeable copy signs utilizing TV-type displays (LCD or Plasma, for instance) must comply with the following in addition to all other applicable requirements of this Section 604.09 and this Article:
a. Such signs shall be installed only as building signs.
b. Such signs shall have a minimum resolution of 1080p (High Definition) or equivalent.
c. At any time of the day or night, such signs shall not operate at a brightness level of more than 0.30 foot candles above ambient light levels measured at 100 feet from the sign (150 feet for sign faces greater than 100 square feet in area), as certified under para-graph (f) below.
(2) Electronic changeable copy signs utilizing incandescent bulbs are not allowed.
(f) As part of an application for a sign permit, the sign owner must provide the City with a written statement from the installer that the sign will comply with the Citys brightness requirements and all other requirements of this Section 604.09, and shall certify to such compliance within 30 days after installation of the sign.
Section 605 Regulation of Principal Freestanding and Principal Building Signs. City of Duluth UDC
6-24
(g) Operation of an electronic changeable copy sign in violation of any provision of this Section 604.09, including overriding the signs light-sensing or fail-safe devices, may result in the discon-nection of the electrical power supply to the sign at the owners expense, under the procedures of Section 614.
Section 605. Regulation of Principal Freestanding and Principal Building Signs.
605.01 Applicability.
(a) This Section applies only to principal signs, as defined in this Development Code, that are perma-nent and freestanding on a property or attached to a building, and that are not otherwise exempt from these Sign Regulations.
(b) Additional signage that is regulated on a property include:
(1) Project entrance signs, under Section 606;
(2) Miscellaneous freestanding signs, miscellaneous building signs, and other types of specific signs enumerated under Section 608; and,
(3) Temporary signs, under Section 609.
(c) Signs in planned development districts.
For signs located within a project zoned as a Planned Development District, each property or in-dividual project within the planned development shall conform to the sign regulations established as part of the zoning approval for the planned development. If no such provisions are included in the zoning approval of the planned development, each property or individual development within a planned development shall conform to the provisions of this Article in accordance with the land use of said property (or the predominant use of the ground floor in the case of a mixed-use build-ing).
(d) Signs for mixed-use buildings.
For buildings that are occupied or designed for occupancy by both residential and nonresidential uses, the signage regulations that apply shall be based on the predominant use of the ground floor of the building.
605.02 Principal SignsResidential Use Property.
All principal freestanding and principal building signs erected or placed on a property or development occupied by a single-family or multi-family residential use shall comply with the following provisions:
(a) Principal freestanding signs on individual properties are not allowed. Project entrance signs are allowed in lieu of principal freestanding signs for single-family and multi-family developments. See Section 606.
(b) In all residential zoning districts, one building sign per housing unit is allowed. These signs shall not exceed one square foot in sign face area. If affixed to a multi-tenant building in an RM district or property zoned for multi-family purposes, the building sign shall not exceed 4 square feet in size.
(c) A single-family detached home, townhouse condominium or manufactured home, located on an individual lot, must comply with the provisions of this Section and Table 6-A under single-family residence.
City of Duluth UDC Section 605 Regulation of Principal Freestanding and Principal Building Signs.
6-25
(d) Multi-family developments, such as apartments, condominiums, manufactured home parks, nurs-ing homes and other residential developments occupying a single property in common, must com-ply with the provisions of this Section and Table 6-A under multi-family developments.
(e) Other (non-principal) signage allowed.
(1) For other permanent freestanding signage allowed within a multi-family development, see Section 608.01 regarding miscellaneous freestanding signs.
(2) For temporary signage on any residential property, see Section 609.
Table 6-A: Principal Freestanding and Building SignsResidential Uses Single-Family Residence 1 Multi-Family Developments 2
Principal Freestanding Signs
Max. number of Principal Free-standing Signs
None 3
None 4
Principal Building Signs
Number of Building Signs (wall or window signs)
1 per housing unit
1 per housing unit,
1 per multi-family building
Maximum sign face area of Build-ing Signs
1 sq. ft. per housing unit
1 sq. ft. for each housing unit,
4 sq. ft. per multi-family build-ing
Max. percent coverage if placed in Window
Covering no more than 20% of window
Covering no more than 20% of window
Sign Characteristics
Animated
Not allowed
Not allowed
Changeable Copy SignManual
Not allowed
Not allowed
Changeable Copy SignElectronic
Not allowed
Not allowed
Illumination, internal
Not allowed
Not allowed
Illumination, external
Not allowed
Not allowed
1 Includes one-family dwellings, townhouses and manufactured homes on individual lots.
2 Includes all residential developments occupying a single property in common, such as apartments, condominiums, manufactured home parks, and nursing homes.
3 Principal freestanding signs are not allowed on a single-family residential lot. (See, however, Temporary Signs, under Section 609.) Princi-pal freestanding signs on a single-family development are limited to Project Entrance Signs (see Section 606).
4 Principal freestanding signs on a multi-family development are limited to Project Entrance Signs (see Section 606). For other freestanding signs allowed on a multi-family development property, see Miscellaneous Freestanding Signs under Section 608.01 and Temporary Signs, under Section 609.
Section 605 Regulation of Principal Freestanding and Principal Building Signs. City of Duluth UDC
6-26
Table 6-A: Principal Freestanding and Building SignsResidential Uses Single-Family Residence 1 Multi-Family Developments 2
Illumination, exposed bulbs or neon
Not allowed
Not allowed
605.03 Principal SignsNonresidential Use Property.
All principal freestanding and principal building signs erected or placed on a property or development occupied by a nonresidential use5 shall comply with the following provisions:
(a) Principal freestanding signs.
Principal freestanding signs on a property shall comply with the provisions of this Section and the restrictions for such signs as shown on Table 6-B for the zoning applicable to the property.
(1) Type of freestanding signs allowed.
Principal freestanding signs on nonresidential use properties shall be monument or hybrid monument signs (as defined in this Development Code). All such signs shall be mounted on a base constructed of the same material matching the faade of the principal use (brick, stone, stucco or wood) or similar quality, color and texture as the primary masonry materials used in the exterior finish of the primary structure on the site. The accent materials may be ap-proved by the Planning and Development Director on a case-by-case basis.
(2) Joint signs.
Multiple businesses in a planned center on a single parcel shall share the number of free-standing signs allowed on the parcel as joint signs.
(3) Any principal freestanding sign located within a parking lot or other area accessible by vehi-cles shall be surrounded by protective curbing, the area within which shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements of Section 607.01. No freestanding sign shall be permit-ted to encroach in a parking area to such extent that the remaining parking spaces fail to meet the standards of this Development Code for off-street parking.
(4) Freestanding sign faces shall be mounted on architecturally treated sign structures.
(5) A principal freestanding sign must be set back at least 10 feet from the edge of any entrance driveway providing direct access from a street. This setback shall not apply to any parking lot spaces, parking lot aisle or internal drive on the property. See also Section 604.08 regarding height limitations within the Visibility Clearance Area.
(6) Land-locked properties.
5 Nonresidential uses include commercial retail and service establishments, professional and other offices, motels, institutional uses such as fraternal organizations and places of worship, industries, and storage and transfer warehouses, and others as defined in this Develop-ment Code.
City of Duluth UDC Section 605 Regulation of Principal Freestanding and Principal Building Signs.
6-27
a. Places of business within nonresidential zoning districts that do not own road frontage, may be granted approval of a principal freestanding sign on or near the access easement to their business provided written permission is obtained from the property owner.
b. Multiple buildings or properties served by a common access easement shall share one joint sign at the road frontage as described in Paragraph (2) above. The Planning and Development Director may allow one principal freestanding sign serving multiple par-cels that share the same access easement.
(b) Principal building signs.
Principal building signs on a nonresidential property shall comply with the provisions of this Sub-section and the restrictions for such signs shown on Table 6-B for the use applicable to the prop-erty.
(1) Wall, projecting or canopy signs.
a. Wall or projecting signs shall not extend above the parapet wall of a building or eave line of a pitched roof.
b. Canopy sign, projecting sign and wall sign requirements shall be interchangeable; all such signs are regulated collectively as building signs.
(2) Window signs coverage.
No more than 50% of the total area of all windows and glass doors shall be covered by a principal building sign, per facade. Incidental signs as defined in this Development Code are not counted toward window coverage. Window signs are allowed in all non-residential zon-ing districts except the O-N zoning district.
Section 605 Regulation of Principal Freestanding and Principal Building Signs. City of Duluth UDC
6-28
Table 6-B: Principal Freestanding and Building SignsNonresidential Uses Property Zoned O-N (Office-Neighborhood) All Other Nonresidential Properties 6 One or Two Tenants 7 Three or More Tenants Principal Freestanding Signs
Max. number of Princi-pal Freestanding Signs
1 per property
1 per street frontage
1 per street frontage
1 street frontage:
Max. area of Principal Freestanding Sign face
24 sq. ft.
50 sq. ft.
1 sq. ft. per linear foot of frontage, up to a maximum of 150 sq. ft.
Max. height of sign
8 ft.
8 ft.
15 ft.
2 street frontages:
Max. area of Principal Freestanding Sign face
24 sq. ft.
100 sq. ft. total for both signs
(max. 1 sign 64 sq. ft.)
Each sign: 1 sq. ft. per linear foot of frontage, up to a maximum of 150 sq. ft.
Max. height of signs
8 ft.
12 ft.
15 ft.
Min. setback from street right-of-way line 8
0 ft.
0 ft.
0 ft.
Monument sign al-lowed
Yes
Yes
Yes
Hybrid monument sign allowed
Yes
Yes
Yes
Column sign allowed
No
No
No
Pole sign allowed
No
No
No
Changeable Copy Sign allowed on Freestand-ing Sign
No
Yes, manually activated or electronic
Yes, manually activated or electronic
6 See Adjustments, below.
7 Tenant as defined in this Development Code: A natural person, business or other entity that occupies land or buildings by ownership, under a lease, through payment of rent, or at will; an occupant, inhabitant, or dweller of a place. Subtenants are not considered tenants for the purposes of this Article.
8 See the Visibility Clearance Area setback requirements under Section 604.08.
City of Duluth UDC Section 605 Regulation of Principal Freestanding and Principal Building Signs.
6-29
Table 6-B: Principal Freestanding and Building SignsNonresidential Uses Property Zoned O-N (Office-Neighborhood) All Other Nonresidential Properties 6 One or Two Tenants 7 Three or More Tenants Principal Building Signs
Max. number of Princi-pal Building Signs
1
1 per 300 linear feet of tenant frontage, per fa-ade
1 per tenant frontage, per faade
Max. area of sign face
10 sq. ft.
The greater of 2 sq. ft. per linear foot of ten-ant frontage, or 20% of each tenants facade
The greater of 2 sq. ft. per linear foot of ten-ant frontage, or 20% of each tenants facade
Max. percent coverage if placed in Window
Not allowed
Covering no more than 50% of total window and glass door area per facade
Covering no more than 50% of total window and glass door area per facade
Changeable Copy Sign allowed on Building
Yes, manually activated only
Yes, manually activated only
Sign Characteristics
Animated
Not allowed
Not allowed
Not allowed
Illumination, internal
Not allowed
Yes, with restrictions 9
Yes, with restrictions 9
Illumination, external
Not allowed
Yes
Yes
Illumination, exposed bulbs or neon
Not allowed
Not allowed
Not allowed
605.04 Adjustments.
The maximum size of certain principal signs may be increased, or the sign restrictions otherwise mod-ified, under any one of the following circumstances.
(a) Property Adjacent to a Major Roadway.
(1) The following thoroughfares are established as major roadways in the Citys Comprehen-sive Plan: Peachtree Industrial Boulevard, US 23/SR 13 (Buford Highway), SR 120 (Duluth Highway/Abbotts Bridge Road), and Pleasant Hill Road.
(2) For nonresidential uses fronting on any of these major roadways, the following adjustments are allowed for each principal freestanding sign on the property:
9 See Sections 603.03(q) and 604.06.
Section 605 Regulation of Principal Freestanding and Principal Building Signs. City of Duluth UDC
6-30
Table 6-C: Major Roadway Adjustment Posted Speed Limit Nonresidential Properties Not Zoned O-N One or Two Tenants Three or More Tenants
35 mph
(No increase)
Max. area of sign face
50 sq. ft.
1 sq. ft. per linear foot of frontage, up to a maxi-mum of 150 sq. ft.
Max. height of sign
8 ft.
15 ft. 1 Street Frontage
45 mph
Max. area of sign face
64 sq. ft.
1.3 sq. ft. per linear foot of frontage, up to a maxi-mum of 200 sq. ft.
Max. height of sign
11 ft.
17 ft.
55 mph
Max. area of sign face
80 sq. ft.
1.6 sq. ft. per linear foot of frontage, up to a maxi-mum of 240 sq. ft.
Max. height of sign
12 ft.
19 ft. 2 Street Frontages
45 mph
Max. area of sign face
80 sq. ft.
1.3 sq. ft. per linear foot of frontage, up to a maxi-mum of 200 sq. ft.
Max. height of sign
12 ft.
17 ft.
55 mph
Max. area of sign face
100 sq. ft.
1.6 sq. ft. per linear foot of frontage, up to a maxi-mum of 240 sq. ft.
Max. height of sign
13 ft.
19 ft.
Source: Multipliers are drawn from Context-Sensitive Signage Design, Marya Morris, Mark L. Hinshaw, Doug-las Mace, Alan Weinstein, American Planning Association Planning Advisory Service, Chicago IL., June 2001.
City of Duluth UDC Section 605 Regulation of Principal Freestanding and Principal Building Signs.
6-31
(b) Property Located within Downtown Duluth.
Downtown Duluth consists of the area zoned Central Business District (CBD). Within the CBD, the
following adjustments are allowed:
(1) Historic Pole Signs.
One historic pole sign shall be allowed on a property in the CBD district.
Historic pole signs shall have hanging signage, shall be L
shaped and fabricated of wrought iron or similar material. The sign
structure shall not exceed 10 feet in height and shall not overhang
the sidewalk or right-of-way. The maximum sign face for this type of
sign shall be 16 square feet. This type of sign shall be permitted in
lieu of a monument sign and not in addition to. An example of a historic
pole sign is illustrated on the right.
(2) Building Signs.
a. Building signs that are located on or project from a wall, canopy or marquee of a principal
building may extend above the parapet wall of a building or eave line of a pitched
roof, but to no greater extent than one-half the height of the sign. The following are
examples of the extension of such signs:
b. One building sign on each faade of a building that adjoins a public street or pedestrian
walkway may be an electronic changeable copy sign that complies with the provisions
of Section 604.09, or a neon sign, or an illuminated sign using an internal or external
light source.
(3) Window Signs.
Window signs are encouraged in the CBD in order to promote identity and the look and
feel of a pedestrian shopping village. Window signs collectively are allowed to cover up
to 75% of the total area of all windows and glass doors, per facade. Window signs may
be painted on the inside of the window. Adhesive lettering shall not be allowed. Neon
signs shall be allowed in the window but hand written signs that are prohibited under
Section 603.03(h) shall not be allowed.
(4) Portable Signs.
Downtown merchants may display one removable A-frame, sandwich board, easel or sidewalk
sign on the sidewalk in front of the respective business during regular business hours
without a sign permit. The sign must be placed within 10 feet of the main customer entrance
Section 606 Regulation of Project Entrance Signs. City of Duluth UDC
6-32
to the building. However, signs may not be placed on the right-of-way, Town Green or be-come a visual obstruction to oncoming traffic or block the sidewalk for pedestrian activity. These signs may be double faced and shall be limited to 6 square feet per side with a maxi-mum height of 4 feet.
(5) Prohibited Materials.
Printed plastic, flat vinyl, flat metal, and adhesive lettering materials for signs shall be pro-hibited.
Section 606. Regulation of Project Entrance Signs.
606.01 Applicability.
This Section applies to all project entrance signs, as defined herein, that are located at the designated entrances to a residential subdivision, a multi-family development, or a nonresidential subdivision (such as an office park or industrial park).
606.02 Sign Structure.
All project entrance sign faces shall be mounted on an architecturally treated monument sign structure or an architecturally treated decorative wall.
606.03 Project Entrance Sign Installations.
Designs for project entrance signs are classified as two types:
(1) Single Sign Installation: A project entrance sign designed as a single sign structure with two back-to-back faces, oriented to be seen from both directions on the road adjacent to the
development.
(2) Dual Sign Installation: A project entrance sign designed as two separate sign structures, each with a single sign face individually oriented toward the intersection so as to be viewed from only one direction on the road adjacent to the development, and each located on opposite sides of the project entrance.
(3) If the developer chooses to construct two signs per entrance, these signs shall be placed on either side of the roadway; signs cannot be constructed in a center island of any roadway.
Adjacent Road ROW
Adjacent Road ROW
Seen only from this direction
Seen only from this direction
Seen only from this direction
Seen only from this direction
Project Entrance
Project Entrance
Road ROW
Road ROW
One sign structure
One sign structure with one sign facing with one sign facing intersectionintersection
One sign structure
One sign structure with one sign facing with one sign facing intersectionintersection
Seen from this direction
Seen from this direction
Adjacent Road ROW
Adjacent Road ROW
Seen from this direction
Seen from this direction
Projec
Project Entrancet Road ROW
One sign structure
One sign structure with backwith back--toto--back back sign facessign faces
City of Duluth UDC Section 606 Regulation of Project Entrance Signs.
6-33
606.04 Entrances to Subdivisions.
(a) A subdivision may have a single or a dual project entrance sign installation at any entrance into the subdivision from an adjoining street outside the subdivision.
(b) In addition to any principal freestanding signage allowed on a lot within a nonresidential subdivi-sion under Section 605.03(a), if the lot is a corner lot located at an entrance into any residential or nonresidential subdivision, then such lot may contain no more than one permanent project entrance sign for the subdivision in accordance with the provisions for such signs on Table 6-D.
(c) If a dual sign installation is planned, one project entrance sign may be placed on each corner lot flanking the entrance.
606.05 Entrances to Un-Subdivided Developments.
In addition to any principal freestanding signage allowed on a lot, if any, a multi-family development or a residential or nonresidential condominium project may contain project entrance signs as follows: a single or a dual project entrance sign installation is allowed at any entrance into the development from an adjoining street outside the development, in accordance with the provisions for such signs on Table 6-D.
606.06 Illumination.
(a) Any project entrance sign may be lighted by external illumination. If floodlights or other incandes-cent bulbs are used, they may not be directed onto the street or toward vehicular traffic. If neon tubes are used, they must be shielded from view.
(b) Internal illumination, including channeled letter signs and electronic changeable copy signs, may be used for office park or industrial park subdivisions.
Table 6-D: Project Entrance SignsBy Land Use Residential Use Nonresidential Use Single-Family Subdivision 10 Multi-Family Development 11 Office or Industrial Park (subdivision)
Project Entrance Signs
Max. number of Project Entrance Signs per devel-opment
1 single or dual sign in-stallation at each en-trance into the subdivi-sion
1 single or a dual sign in-stallation at each en-trance into the develop-ment
1 single or a dual sign in-stallation at each en-trance into the subdivi-sion
10 Includes one-family dwellings, townhouses and manufactured homes on individual lots.
11 Includes all residential developments occupying a single property in common, such as apartments, condominiums, manufactured home parks, and nursing homes.
Section 607 Landscaping Requirements for Signs. City of Duluth UDC
6-34
Table 6-D: Project Entrance SignsBy Land Use Residential Use Nonresidential Use Single-Family Subdivision 10 Multi-Family Development 11 Office or Industrial Park (subdivision)
Max. number per project entrance
1 sign per corner lot at an entrance into the subdivision
(2 signs per entrance)
2 signs at each entrance fronting on a separate street
1 sign per corner lot at an entrance into the subdivision
(2 signs per entrance)
Max. sign face area 12
50 sq. ft. each
50 sq. ft. each
50 sq. ft. each
Max. sign height
15 ft.
15 ft.
15 ft.
Sign Characteristics
Animated
Not allowed
Not allowed
Not allowed
Changeable copy -Manual
Not allowed
Not allowed
Not allowed
Changeable copy-Elec-tronic
Not allowed
Not allowed
Allowed
Illumination, external
Allowed
Allowed
Allowed
Illumination, internal
Not allowed
Not allowed
Allowed
Illumination by exposed bulbs or neon tubes
Not allowed
Not allowed
Not allowed
Section 607. Landscaping Requirements for Signs.
All signs regulated under Section 605 except for single-family residences, and under Section 606, shall meet or exceed the standards of this Section.
607.01 Landscaping Required.
There shall be established a landscaping area along the long side of each principal freestanding sign and each project entrance sign that extends no less than 2 feet out from the sign face. The sign land-scaping area may be at ground level or accommodated within planters created as an integral part of the sign base. Within this sign landscaping area, the following standards shall apply:
(a) All portions of the sign landscaping area shall be covered by landscape materials, as defined in this Development Code. A minimum of 80% of the required landscape area shall be covered with living plant materials, which may include any combination of ground covers and shrubs.
(b) Shrubs that are provided within the sign landscaping area must be at least 12 inches tall at the time of planting, and be of a species that will not normally exceed 4 feet in height at maturity.
(c) Plant materials may be clustered for decorative effect following professional landscaping stand-ards for spacing, location and design.
607.02 Maintenance of required plant materials.
12 If two signs are planned, signs shall be symmetrical in size and shape and shall not exceed 50 square feet each.
City of Duluth UDC Section 608 Additional Regulations for Specific Types of Signs.
6-35
The owner, tenant and their agent, if any, and their successors and assigns shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance in good condition of the plant materials used to meet the minimum landscaping requirements of this Section.
Section 608. Additional Regulations for Specific Types of Signs.
608.01 Miscellaneous Freestanding Signs.
Freestanding signs in addition to those regulated under Section 605 are allowed as accessory uses on a property occupied by a residential, commercial, industrial or institutional use if each sign complies with all of the following:
(a) Permanently installed miscellaneous freestanding signs may be located within the area between a street right-of-way line and the minimum building setback required from that street right-of-way line for the zoning of the property, if such signs are located within 3 feet of driveways that provide access into or from the property.
There shall be no more than 2 such signs per driveway and each such sign shall not exceed 6 square feet in sign face area nor be more than 3 feet in height.
(b) Miscellaneous freestanding signs located farther from the street than the minimum building set-back from that street right-of-way line required by the zoning of the property, shall be allowed as follows:
(1) On a property occupied by a multi-family or nonresidential use, one miscellaneous sign not to exceed 32 square feet in sign face area or more than 8 feet in height may be located on the property for each principal building on the lot, or for each drive-through service window on the building.
(2) Other miscellaneous freestanding signs are allowed beyond the minimum building setback, provided that such signs are no more than 6 square feet in sign face area nor more than 3 feet in height (except signs that are required by law to be higher than 3 feet, such as those marking a handicapped parking space).
(3) Portable signs are not allowed as miscellaneous freestanding signs ex-cept for an A-Frame sign for a nonresidential use (also known as a sandwich board sign). Such A-Frame signs must be located no far-ther from an entrance to the owners business than 6 feet, and may be no larger than 6 square feet in sign face area nor be more than 3 feet in height. Such A-Frame signs must be stored indoors when the owners establishment is not open for business.
608.02 Miscellaneous Building Signs.
Miscellaneous building signs (as defined in this Development Code) not other-wise prohibited under 603.03, are allowed on nonresidential use properties in addition to the principal building signs allowed under Section 605.03(b), as fol-lows:
(a) General miscellaneous building signs.
Miscellaneous building signs are allowed, provided that such signs shall be placed only on a tenant space faade fronting on a dedicated public street. Such signs are limited as follows:
A-Frame Sign
Section 608 Additional Regulations for Specific Types of Signs. City of Duluth UDC
6-36
(1) For single-occupant buildings, the maximum aggregate area for all miscellaneous building signs shall be 1 square foot of sign face area per linear foot of the length of the tenant front-age (as defined in this Article) on which the signs are affixed, or 10% of the area of the faade, whichever is greater. No single such sign shall be larger than 6 square feet in sign face area.
(2) For planned centers, the maximum aggregate area for all miscellaneous building signs for each tenant space shall be 1 square foot of sign face area per linear foot of the tenant front-age (as defined in this Article), or 10% of the area of the tenants faade, whichever is greater. No single such sign shall be larger than 6 square feet in sign face area.
(3) Such miscellaneous building signs placed in a window may not result in the obstruction of more than 50% of the window area in combination with all other signs in the window.
(b) Subtenant signs.
(1) Each business that occupies space within a principal business as a subtenant is allowed one wall sign in addition to the principal building sign allowed for the principal business under Section 605.03(b). Each subtenant wall sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in sign face area, nor shall the total for all such subtenant signs collectively exceed the sign face area allowed for the principal business.
(2) The following are examples of subtenant wall signs allowed by this Subsection:
(c) Sidewalk pedestrian signs.
Each tenant (other than a subtenant) located within a planned center is allowed to have one side-walk pedestrian sign in lieu of an under-canopy sign allowed by this Article, as follows:
(1) The sidewalk pedestrian sign must be post mounted in a sidewalk planter.
(2) Each such sign is allowed to have a maximum sign face area of 6 square feet.
(3) The following is an example of sidewalk pedestrian signs allowed by this Subsection:
City of Duluth UDC Section 608 Additional Regulations for Specific Types of Signs.
6-37
(d) Convenience stores and service stations with pump islands.
Additional signage is permitted as follows:
(1) One sign per freestanding or building canopy face per public street frontage with a maximum of 16 square feet each is allowed. The canopy sign shall not extend above or below the edge of the canopy.
(2) Spreader bars (signs located under canopy over pump islands) shall be limited to no more than two signs per spreader bar, not to exceed 4 square feet per sign. However, total square footage for all spreader bars shall not exceed 24 square feet.
(3) On-site separate drive-through car wash building(s), shall be allowed one permanent wall sign, not to exceed 8 square feet with an approved sign permit. This sign shall be for inci-dental purposes only.
(e) Service entrance signs.
For any tenant space that has a service entrance at the rear of the building, at least one service entrance sign is required.
(1) Service entrance signs shall be located directly on or adjacent to the service entrance door.
(2) The combined area of signs at a single service entrance shall not exceed 6 square feet and must be clearly legible for public safety personnel.
608.03 Billboards.
In addition to the general regulations and restrictions applying to all sign classifications, billboard signs (as defined in this Development Code) shall comply with the following:
(a) All applications for billboards shall be accompanied by written permission of the owner of the property on which the proposed sign is to be placed, a site plan showing the proposed location of the sign, and a scale drawing of the sign.
(b) Billboards will be permitted only on undeveloped property that is zoned M-1 or M-2 and shall be removed when a Land Disturbance (i.e., Clearing, Grubbing, Grading or Development) Permit is issued for development on the property on which a billboard is located.
(c) Location and Spacing.
(1) No billboard shall be placed within 500 feet of a residence, church, school, park or cemetery.
(2) No billboard shall be located within 1,000 feet of another billboard as measured along the right-of-way of the street or streets on which such billboard is located, and provided further that no billboard may be located closer than 500 feet to another billboard in any direction.
(3) Billboards shall be erected only in the buildable area of the lot. No trees or other vegetation shall be cut or removed in locating or erecting a billboard.
(d) Size and Height Regulations.
No billboard sign shall exceed 50 square feet or have more than one sign face or exceed 12 feet in height.
(e) Conformance to State Law.
Any billboard located or to be located within 660 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of a U.S. or State-numbered highway (which includes SR 13/US 23Buford Highway, and SR 120
Section 608 Additional Regulations for Specific Types of Signs. City of Duluth UDC
6-38
Duluth Highway/Abbotts Bridge Road), or located or to be located beyond 660 feet of such high-way but visible and intended to be read from such highway, must comply with the following:
(1) Such sign shall comply with all applicable requirements of the Georgia Outdoor Advertising Act, O.C.G.A. 32-6-70 et seq.
(2) Such sign shall comply with all requirements of this Article and, specifically, this Section 608.03.
(3) In the case of a conflict between the Georgia Outdoor Advertising Act and the Citys regula-tions, the billboard must comply with the most restrictive requirements with respect to each and every item of regulation.
608.04 Flags.
(a) All flags mounted on a free-standing flagpole must have a minimum vertical clearance of 8 feet above the ground, sidewalk, private drive or parking area, as applicable. Flags mounted on a pole projecting from a building must provide a minimum vertical clearance of 8 feet above a sidewalk or other area of pedestrian movement.
(b) No flag on the property of a residential use shall exceed 15 square feet in area or be higher than 40 feet above the ground when mounted on a free-standing flagpole.
(c) Nonresidential uses are limited to three flags, each of which must be mounted on a free-standing flagpole, resulting in no more than three flagpoles on a nonresidential property.
(d) The display of the Flag of the United States of America shall be guided by Title 4, Section 3 of the US Code, which prohibits the use of the American Flag for commercial purposes.
(e) A free-standing flagpole shall not be erected or constructed without first obtaining a building per-mit.
608.05 Suspended Signs.
(a) Suspended signs must have a minimum clearance of 8 feet to grade.
(b) If any sign is located within, suspended over or projects above a public right-of-way, the sign owner shall obtain and maintain in force liability insurance for such a sign in such form and such amount as the Planning and Development Director may reasonably from time to time determine, provided that the amount of such liability insurance shall be at least $500,000.00 per occurrence per sign.
608.06 Changeable Copy Signs.
(a) Manually activated changeable copy signs.
Manually activated changeable copy signs are permitted in conjunction with freestanding signs, wall signs, and joint signs so long as the changeable copy portion of the sign face does not exceed 60% of the overall sign face of the freestanding or wall signs or 30% of the overall sign face of a joint sign; and provided that the total sign face does not exceed the size limitations imposed else-where by this Article.
(b) Electronic changeable copy signs.
Electronic changeable copy signs may be installed on any freestanding principal sign or principal building on a property occupied by a nonresidential use in accordance with the provisions of Sec-tion 605.03.
City of Duluth UDC Section 609 Temporary Signs.
6-39
Section 609. Temporary Signs.
609.01 Temporary Signs; Allowed.
(a) Certain signs in addition to those allowed under Section 605 and Section 608 are allowed on a property through the issuance of a temporary sign permit. Such temporary signs shall not be re-stricted as to the message displayed on the sign, but must comply with the provisions of this Sec-tion.
(b) Temporary signs must comply with all requirements of this Article, including the prohibitions of Section 603.03 and general requirements applying to all signs, except as modified by the provi-sions of this Section.
(c) Fixed location: All temporary signs must be installed at a fixed location, either attached to the ground as a freestanding sign or attached to a building. Temporary signs shall not be attached to a vehicle or other movable, animated or portable device, or attached to, held by or displayed upon a person.
609.02 Issuance of a Temporary Sign Permit.
(a) A temporary sign may not be displayed unless a permit is issued pursuant to Section 610.02, un-less otherwise exempt under Section 603.02.
(b) A temporary sign permit shall only be valid for a period of 30 days from the date of issuance, after which time the owner of the temporary sign or owner of the premises where such sign is located shall remove the sign from the premises.
(c) (c) No more than one temporary sign permit may be issued to the same premises per quarter, not to exceed four temporary sign permits per one calendar year.
609.03 Size of Temporary Signs.
Temporary signs are restricted to the following sign areas and sign heights:
(a) Single-family residential, townhouse condominium or manufactured home lot.
Temporary signs located on such subdivided lots shall not exceed 6 square feet in sign face area and 5 feet in height.
(b) Residential or nonresidential subdivision or condominium development under construction.
Signage within a residential or nonresidential subdivision or condominium development under construction shall not exceed 32 square feet in sign face area and 8 feet in height.
(c) Multi-family, manufactured home park or nonresidential use property (as defined in this Article).
Temporary signs located on a multi-family, manufactured home park, or nonresidential use prop-erty shall not exceed 32 square feet in total sign face area and 8 feet in height per sign.
609.04 Location of Temporary Signs.
(a) All temporary signs shall be located as follows:
(1) At least 10 feet from any street right-of-way line, back of street curb or edge of street pave-ment, whichever is farthest from the street.
(2) At least 10 feet from any side or rear property line and the pavement edge of a driveway.
Section 609 Temporary Signs. City of Duluth UDC
6-40
(3) Temporary signs located within 30 feet of an intersection of two streets or a driveway and a street shall be no more than 3 feet in height.
(b) Temporary signs are not allowed to be placed within or over a public street right-of-way or private street easement.
(c) A temporary sign must be a freestanding sign or a building sign (as defined in this Article), and shall not be affixed to any tree, utility pole or official traffic sign or structure.
A temporary sign shall be erected and maintained only with the permission of the owner of the property upon which the sign is located.
609.05 Construction and Lighting Standards of Temporary Signs.
(a) Construction standards for signs requiring building permits.
A temporary sign for which issuance of a building permit is required by the Building Code shall meet the same engineering design and materials standards as for permanent signs as required by the Building Code.
(b) Construction standards for signs not requiring building permits.
(1) Nonpermanent but water-resistant construction materials may be used, such as but not lim-ited to poster board, foam core board or illustration board.
(2) The words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors or other design elements that con-vey the signs message shall be permanently applied to the signs face.
(c) Electronic and manual changeable copy signs shall not be allowed.
(d) Lighting.
Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.
609.06 Temporary Banners, Portable Signs, Festoons and Inflatable Signs.
All of the following types of signs are allowed one time only for a change in use or change in occupancy of the premises from two weeks prior to the change in use or occupancy until two weeks after the change in use or occupancy with the issuance of a temporary sign permit, and in accordance with the duration, number, size, location and lighting limitations of Section 609. For holiday or seasonal deco-rations (in contrast to commercial signs), see Section 603.02.
(a) Banners.
Banners are allowed with the following additional provisions:
(1) For a banner that is no more than 12 square feet in sign face area, such banner shall be placed on the site or on a building in such a manner as not to create a safety hazard as determined by the Planning and Development Director. They shall meet the same setback requirements as all other temporary signs. Such a banner shall not be hung as an under-canopy sign, flown as a flag, attached to or hung from an existing freestanding sign, or used as any other form of sign.
(2) A banner that is more than 12 square feet in sign face area but no more than 24 square feet in size shall be allowed only as a wall or window sign and shall be placed flush upon the wall or window to which it is attached. Such a banner shall not be hung as an under-canopy sign, flown as a flag, or used as any other form of sign.
City of Duluth UDC Section 610 Sign Permits; Requirements and Procedures.
6-41
(3) A banner that is larger than 24 square feet in size is not allowed.
(b) Portable signs.
No more than one portable sign is allowed on a property developed for commercial, industrial or institutional use, subject to the following restrictions:
(1) Maximum size: The maximum size of a portable sign shall not exceed 6 square feet per side. Said sign shall not have flashing lights or animated devices, but may be internally illuminated and may be a manually activated changeable copy sign.
(2) Placement: The sign must be placed on the site in compliance with Section 609.04 of this Article.
(3) Securely anchored: To prevent wind damage to the sign or other property, the sign must be securely anchored to the site in a manner acceptable to the Planning and Development Di-rector.
(4) Electrical connections: All electrical connections to the sign must be in compliance with the Electrical Code as adopted by the City, and must be inspected prior to use.
(c) Festoons.
Festoons such as strings of light bulbs and other illuminated devices, and strings of ribbons, tinsel, pennants, streamers, pinwheels or other similar devices designed to move in the wind are al-lowed, provided that no part of any such festoon shall be located in or over a public right-of-way and no hazard to traffic safety shall be created.
(d) Inflatable Signs.
Inflatable signs, such as air or gas filled devices and other inflatable devices, are allowed on parcels greater than 2.5 acres in land area. Inflatable signs shall not exceed a total maximum of 300 square feet of sign area and be securely attached to the ground. Inflatable signs must be de-inflated and properly disposed of or stored at the expiration of the permit period.
Section 610. Sign Permits; Requirements and Procedures.
610.01 Issuance of Permits for Permanent Signs.
(a) Sign permits; when required.
(1) The Department is hereby authorized to issue a sign permit for any permanent sign provided all requirements of this Article are met.
(2) Except for signs that are exempt from the requirements of this Article under Section 603.02 or are exempt from permitting under Section 610.01(b), below, a sign permit must be issued by the Department before a permanent sign may be:
a. Erected or relocated;
b. Attached to, suspended from, or supported on a building or structure; or
c. Altered, enlarged, or materially improved (including the replacement of a sign face with an electronic changeable copy sign).
(3) Any sign using electrical wiring and connection shall require a sign permit and an electrical permit. Such a sign permit shall become null and void if an electrical permit is not secured, if
Section 610 Sign Permits; Requirements and Procedures. City of Duluth UDC
6-42
required, or if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed within a period of 6 months after the date of issuance.
(b) Permanent Signs exempt from permitting.
The following signs may be erected or placed without securing a sign permit or payment of a fee, provided that each is located and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this Article and all other applicable codes and regulations.
(1) Miscellaneous freestanding signs allowed under Section 608.01, unless such signs require issuance of a building or electrical permit.
(2) Miscellaneous building signs allowed under Section 608.02, unless such signs require issu-ance of a building or electrical permit.
(3) Flags meeting the standards of Section 608.04 do not require a sign permit for the flag. Flags mounted on a free-standing flagpole require a building permit for the permanent flagpole itself.
(4) Incidental signs at the entrance drive of residences, estates, farms, ranches, and plantations which do not exceed 1 square feet in area.
610.02 Issuance of Permits for Temporary Signs.
(a) The Department is hereby authorized to issue a sign permit for any temporary sign provided all requirements of this Article are met. A temporary sign permit must be issued by the Department before a sign may be erected or attached to, suspended from, or supported on a building or struc-ture except for signs that are exempt from the requirements of this Article under Section 603.02 or are exempt from permitting under Section 610.01(b), above.
(b) Any temporary sign using electrical wiring and connection shall require a sign permit and an elec-trical permit, both of which must be issued simultaneously.
(c) Identification stickers issued by the Department of Planning and Development in conjunction with a temporary sign permit must be adhered to the front side of all signs approved under the permit and must be visible from the street.
610.03 Application for a Sign Permit.
(a) An application for a sign permit (and accompanying building or electrical permit, if required) shall be made using the forms provided by the Planning Department, shall be filled in with all infor-mation required, and shall be submitted in the number of copies as required. Incomplete applica-tions will be returned to the applicant without further review as though no application had been received.
(b) Sign permit applications shall be accompanied by a scale drawing of each proposed sign, site plan for monument signs, drawing of facade of building elevation showing proposed placement of each wall, canopy or projecting sign and any other information which the Department may require in the exercise of sound discretion in acting upon the application.
(c) Any person performing new electrical work relating to signs must apply for an electrical permit and hold a valid electrician's trade license issued by the State of Georgia to perform such work. If the electrical wiring exists from a previous sign and no new electrical wiring is necessary for illu-mination, the sign company may connect the electrical service.
(d) Use of Foreign Languages.
City of Duluth UDC Section 610 Sign Permits; Requirements and Procedures.
6-43
(1) For any sign for which a Sign Permit is required that uses words in a language other than English, the English translation of the sign shall be provided on the Sign Permit Application. See also Section 604.07 regarding business names, street numbers and street names.
(2) Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the use of foreign words or characters as long as they do not contain obscene language or advertise an illegal activity.
610.04 Process for sign permit approval.
(a) If the plans, specifications and intended use of the applied for sign or part thereof conform in all respects to the applicable provisions of this Article and the Duluth Building Code, a sign permit shall be issued.
(b) Review time period.
Upon receipt of a complete and proper application by the Department, the application will be reviewed and a sign permit will be issued or denied within the following time periods:
(1) For a temporary sign: 10 days.
(2) For a sign that is included in and found consistent with an approved Master Sign Plan: 5 days.
(3) For any other permanent sign: 30 days.
If no decision is made by the Planning and Development Director within the applicable time pe-riod, then the permit shall be deemed to be approved.
(c) If after review and investigation by the Department, it is determined that the application fails to meet the applicable provisions of this Article or the Duluth Building Code, the permit shall be denied, and the Planning and Development Director shall notify the applicant in writing of the denial and reasons for denial. The written notice of denial shall be sent by certified mail to the designated address of the applicant on the application.
610.05 Master Sign Plans.
(a) Master Sign Plans that are required by this Article or that are submitted voluntarily for pre-ap-proval of sign permits must comply with the requirements of this Section.
(b) Master Sign Plans shall illustrate all proposed signs in sufficient detail so as to provide knowledge-able review and design specificity. Master sign plans shall show, describe or illustrate all signs proposed to be located on a lot or within a development (and the buildings and structures related thereto) for which sign permits will be required under Section 610.01(a).
(c) Master Sign Plans must include:
(1) Location.
An accurate drawing to scale showing the position of the sign or signs in relation to nearby buildings or structures (including other signs), driveways, parking areas, property and right-of-way lines, and any other limiting site features (survey not required). The drawing must show or note (as applicable):
a. The location and size of all other signs on the parcel that are proposed to remain;
b. The distance in feet to the nearest existing freestanding sign; and
c. The distance in feet from the location of the proposed sign(s) to the nearest residentially zoned parcel.
Section 610 Sign Permits; Requirements and Procedures. City of Duluth UDC
6-44
(2) Specifications.
An accurate drawing to scale of the plans, specifications and method of construction and attachment of the sign or signs to the building or ground. The drawing shall specifically in-clude the size of the sign structure(s) and sign face area(s), overall height of the sign(s), a site distance diagram, and any protective devices around the base of the sign(s). For any sign for which a building permit is required, the drawing shall be an engineered structural drawing designed to all Building Code requirements.
(3) Design.
The master sign plan shall include such drawings and specifications as may be required to clearly illustrate the design elements of the sign or signs, including the construction materi-als, size, letter style and color of all elements of the sign(s), including the sign structure, the sign face, and background surfaces. The plan shall also show landscaping details meeting the requirements of this Article, including the extent of the designated landscaping area, the lo-cation of specific landscape materials, and the botanical and common name of plants by lo-cation on the plan.
(d) Signs that are otherwise exempt under this Article need not be shown on the Master Sign Plan.
(e) Approval.
(1) A Master Sign Plan depicting signs that conform to all requirements of this Article may be approved administratively by the Planning and Development Director.
(2) A Master Sign Plan depicting signs that exceed or modify one or more requirements of this Article may only be approved by the Planning Commission. Following review of a complete application by the Planning Department, the plan will be placed on the agenda of the next available Planning Commission meeting.
(3) Upon approval, the Master Sign Plan shall supersede any conflicting restrictions and regula-tions of this Article for the property to which it pertains, and shall not be adversely affected by any subsequent amendments to this Article. If approval is denied by the Planning and Development Director or the Planning Commission, as applicable, the applicant may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of the Appeals Article of this Development Code.
(f) Recordation of approved Master Sign Plan.
(1) The Master Sign Plan as approved must be recorded by the owner in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court and a copy of the approved Master Sign Plan, as recorded, must be filed with the Planning and Development Director prior to issuance of a sign permit for any part of the development or premises.
(2) The recorded Master Sign Plan must be included in any sale, lease or other transfer of right of occupancy affecting any part of the development or premises to which the Master Sign Plan applies.
(3) All tenants of the property or development, whether an owner, lessee, subtenant, purchaser or other occupant, must comply with the approved Master Sign Plan.
610.06 Fees.
(a) Fees for all types of sign permits shall be charged as set by the Mayor and Council from time to time.
City of Duluth UDC Section 611 Nonconforming Signs.
6-45
(b) The sign permit fee shall be required of all signs requiring issuance of a sign permit under Section 610.01(a) or Section 610.02. A separate fee shall be charged for any required building or electrical permit. The exemption from sign fees does not waive compliance with the sign provisions of this Article including but, not limited to, all size, height and location restrictions.
(c) If a permit is not obtained prior to installation, each applicable permit is subject to double fee.
Section 611. Nonconforming Signs.
Any sign that was legally in existence on the effective date of this Article or any amendments thereto, and became nonconforming with respect to the requirements of this Article or any amendments thereto, may continue in existence as long as the size of the sign is not increased beyond that existing size on the effective date of this Article and any change thereto is made in conformance with this Article.
611.01 Nonconforming Signs; Registration.
The burden of proof that an existing sign qualifies as a legal nonconforming sign lies with the owner of the sign. Registration of a nonconforming sign is encouraged to establish its status, but is not required.
(a) Any sign and sign structure that is or has become a nonconforming sign may be registered by the owner with the Department of Planning and Development. If the sign was legally erected prior to the effective date of this Article or any amendments thereto, the sign shall be registered and allowed to continue to exist under the provisions of Section 611.02.
(b) At the time that a legal nonconforming sign is registered, a sign permit shall be issued to the sign owner and the sign shall be so marked in accordance with Departmental procedures.
611.02 Nonconforming Signs; Provisions.
(a) A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced, enlarged, or altered except within the provisions of this Article.
(b) The substitution or interchange of poster panels or painted boards on nonconforming signs shall be allowed provided the size, shape or location of said sign does not change.
(c) Repair and maintenance of nonconforming signs may be performed as necessary unless more than 50% of the sign is repaired, altered, or replaced, as determined by the Planning and Devel-opment Director. If more than 50% of the sign is affected, then any legal nonconforming status is lost and the sign must be brought into compliance with the current sign regulations; provided that signs damaged by fire or act of God may be restored to their original condition.
611.03 Relocation of a Nonconforming Sign.
(a) An existing sign that was legally erected and that becomes nonconforming as to the setback re-quirements of this Article due to road widening may be moved to meet the setback requirements of this Article. Such sign shall not be increased in size or changed in any manner except as to become conforming.
(b) Any sign erected to replace a nonconforming sign must meet all requirements and provisions of this Article.
Section 612. Special Exceptions for Signs.
612.01 Prior Variances.
Section 613 Intent, Interpretation and Severability. City of Duluth UDC
6-46
All variances and exceptions heretofore granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall remain in full force and effect and all terms, conditions and obligations imposed by this board shall remain in effect and be binding.
612.02 Special Exceptions.
(a) The Planning and Development Director has the authority to administratively grant a Special Ex-ception under the Appeals Article of this Development Code if the applicant can provide a reason-able case and will not vary from the regulations herein by more than 10%, with the exception of the number of days a temporary sign is allowed.
(b) The Planning and Development Director may grant variance Special Exception for the number of signs per storefront or building faade provided the organization of the signs or sign components is consistent with this Article, provides a balanced appearance on the building or similar circum-stance, provided the overall allowable square footage has not been exceeded.
612.03 Special Exception Approval Procedure.
Any person may apply for a Special Exception from the provisions of this Article. Any such Special Ex-ception appeal shall be considered in accordance with the provisions, policies and procedures of the Appeals Article of this Development Code.
Section 613. Intent, Interpretation and Severability.
(a) In interpreting the provisions of this Article, nothing shall be construed as intent to regulate the content of the message displayed on any sign. Designation of types of signs in any manner which may relate to the entity, organization, or person erecting the sign or to the information contained on the sign are merely instructional to assist in categorizing signs for size, height and location purposes and shall not be construed to prohibit any similar type of sign or to in any way restrict the content of the sign.
(b) All signs may display a non-commercial message in addition to or in lieu of any other message. It is the intent of this Article to regulate only the number, size, height, timing and location of signs to accomplish the purposes set forth in Section 601 of this Article.
(c) In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional including but, not limited to, a declaration or adjudication that such section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of the Article relates to the content of any sign or in any way violates the constitutional provisions of free speech under the State of Georgia or United States Constitution, such adjudication shall in no manner effect the other sec-tions, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this Article, which shall remain in full force and effect as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. The City Council hereby declares it would have adopted the remaining parts of the Article if it had known that such part or parts thereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. The provisions of this Article are de-clared severable to the maximum extent allowed by law and under no circumstances shall any sign regardless of content, purpose or location, be erected in the City of Duluth which exceeds the greatest height or size allowed for the largest sign authorized under the provisions of this Article.
Section 614. Administration, Enforcement, and Penalties.
614.01 Enforcement.
City of Duluth UDC Section 614 Administration, Enforcement, and Penalties.
6-47
(a) All of the provisions of this Article shall be administered and enforced by the Department of Plan-ning and Development whose duties shall include rendering interpretations as to the require-ments of this Article, issuing permits, inspecting signs (both existing and installed) under the pro-visions of this Article, and enforcement of all provisions of this Article.
(b) All questions arising in connection with the administration and enforcement of this Article shall be presented first to the Planning Department and then to the Zoning Board of Appeals on appeal of a decision from the Planning and Development Director, subject to applicable provisions of this Article.
(c) A sign permit may be revoked by the Planning and Development Director, or his/her designee, if it is found not to be in compliance with this Article due to intentional misinformation, misrepre-sentation, or significant error on the sign permit application.
(d) Issuance of a sign permit in no way prevents the Planning and Development Director, or his/her designee, from later declaring the sign to be non-conforming or unlawful if upon further review of available information the sign is found not to comply with the requirements of this Article.
614.02 Inspections.
(a) The Department shall inspect or cause to be inspected, by a duly authorized representative, every sign, after issuance of a Sign Permit, during or upon its installation in order to determine that each such sign meets the requirements set forth in this Article. Inspections shall include but are not limited to footings and electrical wiring.
(b) It shall be the duty of the Department to notify the sign contractor (if known) and the sign owner or property owner, of any discrepancies or violations found during the sign inspection. This notice shall be in writing and provide the specifics as to the discrepancies or violations found during the inspection and may be served in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested.
(c) All deficiencies or violations shall be corrected, within 48 hours, following service of this notice by the Department or a Duly Authorized Representative. The Department or its Duly Authorized Rep-resentative may extend the time limit to correct the violation no more than 5 working days or reduce the limit no less than 24 hours. The Planning and Development Director may approve ex-tension of the correction of the violation limited to 14 days with a written justification.
(d) The Department or a Duly Authorized Representative is herein authorized to enter private prop-erty for the purpose of making an inspection to insure compliance with all provisions of this Arti-cle.
(e) The Planning and Development Director shall have the authority to cause to be removed after due notice any sign which shows gross neglect or becomes dilapidated by giving the owner 10 days written notice to correct the deficiencies or to remove the sign(s). If the owner refuses to comply, the Planning and Development Director shall have the authority to have said sign(s) re-moved at the expense of the owner.
614.03 Abandoned Signs.
(a) If a building, structure or premise is vacated, any associated temporary signs shall be removed by the property owner or the sign owner within 10 days, following service of notice by the Department. If the property owner or sign owner fails to comply within 10 days after written notification, the City may cause the removal of the sign at the property owners or sign owners expense.
Section 614 Administration, Enforcement, and Penalties. City of Duluth UDC
6-48
(b) If a nonconforming sign or sign structure has not been in use whereby the property has been vacated for a period of 3 months or longer and the sign has not been updated to convey a current message, any such sign on the property, building, or structure loses its legal nonconforming status and must be removed or brought into compliance with the current sign regulations.
(c) A sign that no longer correctly directs or exhorts any person, or no longer advertises a bona fide business, lessor, owner, project or activity conducted or product available on the premises where such sign is displayed, shall be removed by the property owner or the sign owner within 10 days following service of notice by the Department. If the property owner or sign owner fails to comply within 10 days after written notification, the City may cause the removal of the sign at the prop-erty owners or sign owners expense.
614.04 Administrative Fees, Citations and Penalties.
(a) Any sworn officer of the City of Duluth is hereby empowered to issue a citation for violation of this Article in any case where it is found that a sign has been erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained in violation of any provision of this Article. Non-Permanent signs still erected after the expiration date of the approved sign permit shall be removed by the owner/applicant or a citation will be issued for violation of this Article.
(b) Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the requirements of this Article shall, upon conviction of a violation of this Article, be punished as provided by law by the imposition of a fine of not less than $50.00 and not more than $1000.00 (which may not be stayed or sus-pended), imprisonment of not more than 30 days, or both. Each violation shall be considered a separate offense, and each day in violation shall be considered a separate offense.
(c) Any employee of the City or community service workers under the supervision of a City employee shall have the authority to remove and confiscate any sign that is located within the public right-of-way and does not comply with the requirements of this Article. Signs confiscated by any City employee for non-compliance, shall be stored at the City Maintenance Facility for a period of 2 weeks. If signs are not claimed within 2 weeks, signs shall be discarded without further investiga-tion. The owners of confiscated signs may claim the confiscated signs within the 2 week period but shall be required to pay an administrative fee of $100.00 per sign confiscated to reimburse the City for the administrative time and use of resources incurred by the City in the confiscation and storage of the signs.
7-i
Article 7. Buffers, Landscaping and Tree Protection
Article 7 sets out the minimum requirements and standards for the protection of the natural environment through tree protec-tion and preservation, the planting of trees and other landscape material, the provision of natural and/or planted buffers be-tween dissimilar uses, and the promotion of water-efficient landscaping principles and techniques.
Table of Contents Page
Section 701. Definitions. .........................................................................................................................7-1
DIVISION I. BUFFER REGULATIONS. .......................................................................................................7-5
Section 702. Minimum Buffer Regulations ...............................................................................................7-5
702.01 Applicability. ................................................................................................................................................. 7-5
702.02 Minimum Buffer Requirements, Location and Width. ................................................................................. 7-5
Table 7-A: Situations Where Buffer Required ............................................................................................... 7-6
702.03 Buffer Area Requirements, Special Circumstances. ..................................................................................... 7-6
702.04 Approval of Reduction in Buffer Widths. ..................................................................................................... 7-7
702.05 Screening Requirements. ............................................................................................................................. 7-7
702.06 Screening Requirements for Accessory Uses. .............................................................................................. 7-9
702.07 Exhibits Required. ........................................................................................................................................ 7-9
702.08 Distance Requirements for Structures and Uses. ........................................................................................ 7-9
702.09 Standards for Temporary Construction Buffers. .......................................................................................... 7-9
DIVISION II. LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS. ............................................................................................... 7-10
Section 703. Applicability. ..................................................................................................................... 7-10
703.01 Non-Residential and Multi-Family Uses. .................................................................................................... 7-10
703.02 Residential Subdivisions. ............................................................................................................................ 7-11
Section 704. Native Vegetation Required .............................................................................................. 7-11
Section 705. Landscape Strip Planting Requirements. ............................................................................ 7-11
705.01 Ten Foot Wide Landscape Strips. ............................................................................................................... 7-11
705.02 Five Foot Wide Landscape Strips. .............................................................................................................. 7-11
Section 706. Parking Lot Landscape Requirements ................................................................................ 7-12
Section 707. No-Access Easement Screening Requirements. .................................................................. 7-12
Section 708. Buffer and Landscape Plan Specifications. ......................................................................... 7-12
Section 709. Water-Efficient Design Consideration. ............................................................................... 7-13
DIVISION III. TREE PRESERVATION AND TREE REPLACEMENT REGULATIONS. .......................................... 7-14
Section 710. Purpose and Intent. .......................................................................................................... 7-14
Section 711. Exemptions. ...................................................................................................................... 7-14
Table of Contents Continued City of Duluth UDC
7-ii
Section 712. Approval to Remove Trees. ............................................................................................... 7-15
712.01 Tree Removal Approval Required for Development Activity. ................................................................... 7-15
712.02 Application Requirements for Tree Removal. ........................................................................................... 7-15
712.03 Tree Survey Plan and Inventory. ............................................................................................................... 7-16
712.04 Tree Survey Inspection. ............................................................................................................................. 7-16
712.05 Tree Removal Permit. ................................................................................................................................ 7-16
Section 713. Minimum Tree Density Requirements. .............................................................................. 7-17
Section 714. Tree Survey Plan and Inventory. ........................................................................................ 7-17
Section 715. Tree Protection. ................................................................................................................ 7-18
Section 716. Tree Preservation Standards. ............................................................................................ 7-18
Section 717. Tree Damage. ................................................................................................................... 7-19
Section 718. Tree Planting Standards. ................................................................................................... 7-19
Section 719. Plan and Plat Specification. ............................................................................................... 7-19
719.01 Tree Preservation/Replacement Plan Specifications. ............................................................................... 7-19
Section 720. Compliance. ...................................................................................................................... 7-21
720.01 Artificial Materials Prohibited. .................................................................................................................. 7-21
720.02 Warranty or Maintenance Surety. ............................................................................................................ 7-21
720.03 Inspection. ................................................................................................................................................. 7-21
720.04 Performance Surety. ................................................................................................................................. 7-21
720.05 Continuing Maintenance. .......................................................................................................................... 7-22
Section 721. Enforcement, Violation and Penalties. ............................................................................... 7-22
721.01 Enforcement. ............................................................................................................................................. 7-22
721.02 Violation and Penalty. ............................................................................................................................... 7-23
Section 722. Calculating Tree Density. ................................................................................................... 7-23
Table 7-C: Conversion of Replacement Tree Caliper to Density Factor Units ............................................ 7-24
Section 723. Specimen Trees. ................................................................................................................ 7-25
723.02 Size Criteria ................................................................................................................................................ 7-25
723.03 Condition Criteria ...................................................................................................................................... 7-25
Section 724. Examples of Single Family Lot Tree Planting Requirements................................................. 7-26
DIVISION IV. INSTALLATION AND OPERATION OF IRRIGATION SYSTEMS OR DEVICES. ............................. 7-27
DIVISION V. OUTDOOR WATERING RESTRICTIONS ................................................................................ 7-27
Section 725. Restriction on Outdoor Watering of Landscape. ................................................................. 7-27
7-1
Article 7. Buffers, Landscaping and Tree Conservation
Section 701. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed, in addition to the definitions contained in the Interpretations and Definitions Article of this Development Code.
Basal Area. The cross-sectional area expressed in square inches, of a tree trunk at diameter breast-height (DBH) expressed herein in terms of units per acre.
Buffer. Land area used to visibly separate one use from another through screening and distance to shield or block noise, light, glare, or visual or other conditions, to block physical to non-similar areas,
or to reduce air pollution, dust, dirt, and litter. See also Natural Buffer and Structural Buffer.
Caliper. A standard of trunk measurement for
understory or replacement trees. Caliper inches
are measured at the height of 6 inches above the
ground for trees up to and including 4-inch cali-
per and 12 inches above the ground for trees
larger than 4-inch caliper.
Clearing. The removal of vegetation from a prop-
erty, whether by cutting or other means.
Clear Cutting. The broad removal of all trees
and/or vegetation from a particular area.
Conifer Tree. Any tree with needle leaves and a woody cone fruit including, but not limited to, pine, juniper and cedar species.
Construction Buffer. A type of buffer which is temporary and remains in effect during the construc-tion of a project.
Critical Root Zone. The minimum area beneath a tree which must be left undisturbed in order to pre-serve a sufficient Critical Root Zone (CRZ) will typically be represented by a concentric circle centering on the trees trunk with a radius equal in feet to one times the number of inches of the trunk diame-ter. Example: the CRZ radius of a 20 inch diameter tree is 20 feet.
Density Factor. A unit of measure used to prescribe the calculated tree coverage on a site.
Development Activity. Any alteration of the natural environment which requires the approval of a development or site plan and issuance of a development permit. Development Activity shall also in-clude the thinning or removal of trees from undeveloped land in conjunction with a forest man-agement program, and the removal of trees incidental to the development of land or to the market-ing of land for development.
Development Permit. A permit issued by the City that authorizes Development Activity, and includes, but is not limited to, a soil erosion permit, clearing and grubbing permit, land disturbance permit or building permit.
Diameter Breast Height (DBH). The standard measure of overstory tree size (for trees existing on a site). The tree trunk is measured at a height of 4 feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trucks below 4 feet, measure the trunk at its most narrow point beneath the split.
Section 701 Definitions. City of Duluth UDC
7-2
Drip Line. A line on the ground established by a vertical plane ex-
tending from a trees outermost branch tips down to the ground; i.e.
the line enclosing the area directly beneath the trees crown from
which rainfall would drip.
Floodplain, 100 year. Those lands subject to flooding, which have at
least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calen-
dar year, and specifically, the floodplain as shown on the Federal
Emergency Management Agency Map (FEMA).
Grading. The placement, removal, or movement of earth by use of
mechanical equipment on a property.
Grubbing. The removal of stumps or roots from a site.
Hardwood Tree. Any tree that is not coniferous (cone bearing). This definition is based on the collo-quialism, and does not necessarily reflect any true qualities of the tree.
Land Disturbance Permit. Any permit other than a Building Permit issued by the City of Duluth that authorizes clearing or grading activities on a site or portion of a site. Said permit may be Clearing, Clearing and Grubbing, Grading, or Development Permit as defined and authorized under this Devel-opment Code.
Landscape Strip. Land area located within the bound-ary of a lot and required to be set aside and used for landscaping upon which only limited encroachments are authorized.
Lot Building Area. The area of a lot encompassed by front, sides and rear yard setbacks or building line as required by this Development Code.
Natural Buffer. Buffers that contain deciduous or perennial vegetation, including evergreen shrubs and trees suitable to local growing conditions that provide an opaque visual screen during all seasons of the year.
Non-Development Activity. Any alteration of the nat-ural environment which does not require develop-
ment or site plan approval, but which would include the proposed removal or destruction of any tree(s). Any removal of trees that constitutes Development Activity as that term is herein defined shall not con-stitute Non-Development Activity.
Overstory Tree. Those trees that compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and will generally reach a mature height of greater than 40 feet.
Pervious Surface. All that area of land that can be landscaped or planted, allows natural passage through by water, and is not covered by man-made materials or structures such as buildings or paving.
Example of a Natural Buffer
Example of a Natural Buffer
City of Duluth UDC Section 701 Definitions.
7-3
Plantable Area. The pervious surface area (expressed in square footage) available for the preserva-tion or planting of trees on a single-family subdivision lot. Plantable Area shall not include that por-tion of the lot that is covered by buildings and structures permitted pursuant to the maximum lot coverage standards of the Development Code.
Replacement Planting. The planting of trees on a site that before development had more trees, and after development shall have fewer trees per acre.
Screening. A method of shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another by opaque fencing, walls, berms, densely planted vegetation, or the like.
Shrub. A woody plant of relatively low height, as distinguished from a tree by having several items ra-ther than a single trunk.
Softwood Tree. Any coniferous (cone bearing) tree. This definition is based on the colloquialism, and does not necessarily reflect any true qualities of the tree.
Specimen Tree. Any tree which has been determined by a registered landscape architect or the Plan-ning and Development Director to be of high value because of its type, size, age and/or of historical significance, or other professional criteria, and has been so designated in administrative standards established by the City. This is usually a plant with desirable form, foliage, fruit, or flower that can be emphasized although isolated.
Structural Buffer. A buffer that creates a visual screen through construction of a solid wooden fence, decorative masonry wall, earthen berm, or combination of fence or wall with an earthen berm, which may be supplemented with vegetation, so as to present an opaque visual separation when viewed from one side to the other throughout the year.
Timber Harvesting. The felling, loading and transportation of timber products (pulpwood etc.). The term timber harvesting may include both clear cutting and selective cutting of timber.
Tree. Any living, self-supporting woody or fibrous plant which normally obtains a Diameter Breast Height of at least 3 inches, and typically has one main stem or trunk and many branches.
Tree Removal or Removal of Trees. Any act which causes a tree to die within 2 years after commis-sion of the act, including but not limited to damage inflicted upon the root system or trunk as the re-sult of.
Example
Exampless of of StructuralStructural BufferBuffers: s: Opaque Fence or Wall (L) and Opaque Fence or Wall (L) and
Opaque Fence and Earthen Berm (R)
Opaque Fence and Earthen Berm (R)
Section 701 Definitions. City of Duluth UDC
7-4
(1) The improper use of machinery on the trees;
(2) The storage or materials in or around the trees;
(3) Soil compaction;
(4) Altering the natural grade to expose the roots or to cover the trees root system with more than 4 inches of soil.
(5) Causing the infection or infestation of the tree by pests, fungus or harmful bacteria.
(6) Pruning judged to be excessive by the Planning and Development Director or not in accord-ance with the standard set forth by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA).
(7) Paving with concrete, asphalt or other impervious surface within such proximity as to be harmful to the tree or its root system; and
(8) Application of herbicides or defoliants to any tree without first obtaining a permit.
Tree Density Unit (TDU). A credit assigned to a tree, based on the diameter of the tree, in accord-ance with tables contained in this Article.
Tree Density Standard (TDS). The minimum number of Tree Density Units per acre which must be achieved on a property after development.
Tree Diameter. The widest cross-sectional dimension of a tree trunk measured at diameter breast height (DBH) or at a point below dbh for new trees or multi-trunked species, but in no case less than
6 inches from the ground.
Tree Protection Area (TPA). Any portion of a site wherein are located existing trees which are proposed to be preserved in order to comply with the requirements of this Development Code. The Tree Protec-tion Area shall include no less than the total area beneath the tree canopy as defined by the drip line of the tree or group of trees col-lectively.
Tree Preservation/Replacement Plan (TP/RP). A plan that identifies Tree Protection Areas where existing trees are to be preserved and where proposed replacement trees are to be planted on a property to meet minimum requirements, as well as methods of tree protec-tion to be undertaken on the site and other pertinent information.
Tree Save Area. An area designated for the purpose of meeting tree
density requirements, saving natural trees, and/or preserving natural buffers.
Tree Thinning. Selective cutting or thinning of trees only for the clear purpose of good forestry man-agement in order to protect said forest from disease or infestation and in no way shall be construct-ed as clear cutting.
Understory. Those trees that grown beneath the overstory, and will generally reach a mature height of less than 40 feet.
Zoning Buffer. A buffer required by this Development Code or as a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval for a specific property.
Tree Protection Area (minimum)
Tree Protection Area (minimum)
City of Duluth UDC Section 702 Minimum Buffer Regulations
7-5
DIVISION I. BUFFER REGULATIONS.
Section 702. Minimum Buffer Regulations
702.01 Applicability.
(a) Buffers shall be required between uncomplimentary uses in accordance with the provisions of Section 702.02 or as a condition of zoning, special use, or variance approval.
(b) On properties where tree harvesting is proposed, all buffers as required in this Article shall re-main intact and undisturbed. Any tree classified as a specimen tree as defined in this Article shall not be removed from the property where tree harvesting is occurring without written ap-proval of the Planning and Development Director.
(c) Except as otherwise provided herein, all standards for permanent buffers, temporary construc-tion buffers and landscape strips shall be followed when establishing buffers and landscape strips.
(d) The Duluth City Council may establish minimum buffer requirements in situations other than those given in this Code Division as a condition of rezoning or as a condition of a special use ap-proval.
702.02 Minimum Buffer Requirements, Location and Width.
(a) A buffer shall be required for the following properties:
(1) All property zoned C-1, C-2, HC-Auto, HC-Retail, O-I, O-N, M-1 and M-2, shall have a buffer along any rear and side property lines abutting a residential district.
(2) All property zoned RM and MH shall have a buffer along any rear and side property lines abutting a lower density residential district.
(3) All property zoned PUD shall have a buffer along any rear and side property lines abutting an RA-200, R-100 or R-75 residential district, as specified in Article 5 of this UDC.
(b) Minimum buffer width requirements are shown in Table 7-A.
(c) The Duluth Council may increase the minimum buffer width requirements given in this Section as a condition of rezoning or as a condition of a special use approval. The Duluth Zoning Board of Appeals may increase the minimum buffer requirements given in this Section as a condition to granting a variance.
Section 702 Minimum Buffer Regulations City of Duluth UDC
7-6
Table 7-A: Situations Where Buffer Required 1. Provide a buffer on the lot of this use ? ? ? ? ? 2. Along a side or rear lot line next to this use or zoning
? Single-Family Residence Multi-Family Office or Institutional Commercial1 Industrial
Single-Family Residential2
None
50 feet
50 feet
50 feet3
50 feet
Multi-Family Residential4
None
None
35 feet
35 feet
35 feet
Office, Institutional, Commercial or Industrial
None
None
None
None
None
1 For the purpose of this Section, includes any manufactured housing development.
2 Includes any land zoned RA-200, R-100, and R-75.
3 Buffer requirement also applies to land zoned PUD that abuts a single-family residential zoning district; see also Article 5 for additional requirements.
4 Includes any land zoned RM and MH.
702.03 Buffer Area Requirements, Special Circumstances.
All required buffer areas shall be established in accordance with the following requirements:
(a) Buffers shall meet the minimum width requirements for uncomplimentary districts as shown in Section 702.02.
(b) In the event the required buffer width is partially or completely contained within an existing easement (e.g. power or natural gas transmission, etc.), a minimum buffer of no less than 25 feet in width shall be required outside the easement; however, any and all screening and sup-plemental plantings requirements of the Section 702.05 shall be met outside of the easement area.
(a) When a proposed development adjoins an existing development of a higher intensity, but the full width of the required buffer does not exist on the existing development, the new develop-ment shall provide a buffer of adequate width to meet the full width required on Table 7-A when considered in combination with any existing buffer on the property of the adjoining exist-ing development.
(b) All screening requirements and other applicable conditions of Section 702.05 shall be met. These screening requirements also apply where a non-residential use abuts a public street(s) across from a residential district.
(c) No access through this buffer shall be allowed.
(d) Buffering and open space requirements as required in this Article shall be met on properties where tree harvesting is proposed. See also the notice requirements for tree harvesting in the Forestry and Logging Section of the Restrictions on Particular Uses of this Development Code.
City of Duluth UDC Section 702 Minimum Buffer Regulations
7-7
Illustrative Examples of Natural Buffers
(landscaping, landscaped berm)
(e) Additional buffer specifications may be placed on properties by the Planning and Development Director, the Planning Commission and/or the City Council and these must be adhered to as well.
702.04 Approval of Reduction in Buffer Widths.
The Planning and Development Director, in certain circumstances, may approve the reduction of a buffer width required in Section 702.02 in accordance with the procedures in the Procedures and Permits Article of this Development Code; however, in determining whether a buffer width may be reduced, the Planning and Development Director must be satisfied that:
(a) Existing topography and/or vegetation within the reduced buffer area achieve the intent of this Article.
(b) The requested buffer width reduction does not reduce the required buffer width by any more than 50%.
(c) All other standards for permanent buffers listed in this Article, including all screening and sup-plemental plantings requirements, will be met in spite of the buffer width reduction.
702.05 Screening Requirements.
(a) General Requirements.
(1) Buffers shall be natural and free of encroachments except as authorized by a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval, or as authorized herein, and shall contain the ex-isting tree cover and vegetation as well as any supplemental plantings or replantings as may be required.
(2) Buffers shall be of such nature and density so as to screen activities, structures and use on the property from view from the normal level of a first story window on an abutting lot and shall further provide a year-round effective visual screening.
(3) Buffers required alongside property lines shall extend to a street right-of-way line unless otherwise required by the Planning and Development Director in order to observe the sight distance requirements contained in the Project Design and Construction Standards Article of this Development Code, or as authorized by a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval.
(4) In situations where the required buffer width is partially or completely contained within an existing easement (e.g. power or natural transmission, etc.), the screening requirements of
this Article shall be met outside of the easement area.
Section 702 Minimum Buffer Regulations City of Duluth UDC
7-8
Illustrative E
Illustrative Examplexampless ofof StructuralStructural BufferBufferss
(fencing/landscaping and fencing/landscaped berm)
(fencing/landscaping and fencing/landscaped berm)
(b) Supplemental Plantings.
(1) Buffers in which vegetation is non-existent or is inadequate to meet the screening require-ments of this Article shall be planted with supplemental plantings so as to provide a year-round effective visual screen.
(2) Supplemental plantings and re-plantings shall consist of evergreen trees, shrubs, or combi-nation thereof, native or adaptable to the region as submitted by a registered landscape architect.
(3) All supplemental plantings shall be installed to allow for proper plant growth and mainte-nance.
(c) Non-Vegetative Screening (Structural Buffer).
(1) Non-vegetative materials utilized to satisfy the screening requirements of this Article, in addition to the use of existing vegetation and/or supplemental plantings, may consist of walls, fences, earthen berms or any combination thereof.
(2) If walls or fences are to be utilized, their placement and installation shall be such so as to cause minimal disturbance of existing vegetation and located so as to provide an effective visual screen.
(3) Electric fencing shall be prohibited as a structural buffer.
(d) Disturbance or Encroachments.
(1) Ditches, swales, stormwater conveyance facilities, stormwater detention ponds, sanitary sewer conveyance facilities, similar facilities, and any associated easements, shall not en-croach into a buffer except that necessary access and utility crossings (e.g. stormwater or sanitary sewer pipes) may encroach into the buffer as near to perpendicular as practical.
(2) Supplemental plantings or re-plantings of vegetation, or authorized non-vegetative screen-ing devices shall be allowed to encroach into a buffer provided there is minimal disturbance of any significant existing vegetation.
City of Duluth UDC Section 702 Minimum Buffer Regulations
7-9
(3) Land disturbance is authorized in areas of a buffer that are devoid of significant vegetation provided that the final grade and re-plantings of vegetation meet the screening require-ments contained herein.
(4) Dying, diseased or dead vegetation may be removed from a buffer provided minimal dis-turbance occurs. Vegetation thus removed shall be replaced where necessary to meet the screening requirements contained herein.
(e) Protection during Land Disturbing Activities.
(1) During authorized land disturbing activities, buffers shall be clearly demarcated and pro-tected prior to commencement of, and during, construction.
(2) The method of demarcation and protection utilized shall be in accordance with best man-agement practices or as required by the Planning and Development Department.
(3) Also see the Procedures and Permits Article of this Development Code for requirements.
702.06 Screening Requirements for Accessory Uses.
(a) A 5-foot wide landscape strip, planted in accordance with this Article or an 8-foot high solid en-closure of the same or similar materials as the front faade of the primary structure shall be re-quired to surround three sides of any accessory use located on property zoned for non-residential or multi-family use.
(b) The Planning and Development Director may reduce the number of sides for which the land-scape strip or solid enclosure is required, provided he or she determines that such a reduction will still allow for the achievement of the intent of this Article.
(c) Accessory uses here include, but are not limited to, dumpsters, utility and maintenance struc-tures, storage buildings and loading facilities.
(d) Also see the accessory use and structure provisions of the Restrictions on Particular Uses Article.
702.07 Exhibits Required.
All buffers shall be shown on the appropriate permit application(s) and on the required site plan or final subdivision plat for a development.
702.08 Distance Requirements for Structures and Uses.
All accessory structures, including parking facilities, driveways and retaining walls shall be located a minimum of 5 feet from any required buffer area. All principal structures shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from any required buffer area.
702.09 Standards for Temporary Construction Buffers.
(a) Where Required.
(1) The City Council may require the establishment of temporary construction buffers as a condition of rezoning or as a condition of a Special Use Permit.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals may require the establishment of temporary construction buffers as a condition to granting a Variance.
(b) Time Constraints.
Construction buffers shall only be in effect during the construction period of a project and shall terminate upon project completion. In the case of a residential subdivision, a construction buff-
Section 703 Applicability. City of Duluth UDC
7-10
er shall terminate upon each individual lot with the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for
the principal dwelling.
(c) Disturbance or Encroachments.
(1) Construction buffers shall be natural, undisturbed and free of encroachments except as authorized
by a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval, or as authorized herein.
(2) The encroachment of ditches, swales, stormwater conveyance facilities, stormwater detention
ponds, sediment basins, sanitary sewer conveyance facilities, similar facilities, and any
associated easements, into a construction buffer shall not be authorized except that necessary
access and utility crossings (e.g. stormwater or sanitary sewer pipes), and natural bottom
detention ponds (sediment basins must be located outside of the construction buffer)
and their appurtenant structures which require no grading and removal of trees, may encroach
upon the construction buffer.
(3) If the construction buffer on a residential lot is devoid of existing trees and vegetation, and
a tree survey is submitted to document this situation prior to conducting land disturbing activities
(including clearing) on the lot, then the Planning and Development Department may
authorize the encroachment of a building or structure into the construction buffer for a distance
not to exceed 10 feet.
(d) Protection during Land Disturbing Activities.
(1) During authorized land disturbing activities, construction buffers shall be clearly demarcated
and protected prior to commencement of, and during, construction.
(2) The method of demarcation and protection utilized shall be in accordance with best management
practices or as required by the Planning and Development Department.
DIVISION II. LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS.
Section 703. Applicability.
703.01 Non-Residential and Multi-Family Uses.
(a) Non-residential and multi-family uses shall provide for landscape plantings on-site as follows:
(1) In a Landscape Strip at least 10 feet in which adjacent to any street right-of-way abutting
the property and running the length of the entire property frontage; and
(2) As required by a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval.
Non-Residential
Use
Multi-Family
Use
Single-
Family Use
Continuous 10-foot landscape strip along property
frontage
50-foot buffer
between uses
City of Duluth UDC Section 704 Native Vegetation Required
7-11
703.02 Residential Subdivisions.
Residential subdivisions shall provide for landscape plantings on-site as follows:
(1) In no-access easements that are required to be provided by this Development Code along the line of double frontage lots abutting upon a major thoroughfare; and
(2) As required by a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval.
Section 704. Native Vegetation Required
(a) Landscaping Trees shall use be appropriate for the Plant Hardiness Zone(s) for Gwinnett County as defined by the Cooperative Extension, University of Georgia College of Agricultural and Envi-ronmental Sciences or as recommended by the Georgia Forestry Commission. The use of native tree species is strongly preferred.
(b) Plant species included on the Georgia Exotic Pest Plant Council Invasive Plant List are prohibited, with the exception that the following species may be used with Planning and Development De-partment approval: Bermuda grass (Cynodon dactylon), bahia grass (Paspalum notatum), peri-winkle (Vinca spp.), cornflower (Centaurea cyanus), Queen Annes lace (Daucus carota), weeping lovegrass (Eragrostis curvula), tall fescue (Festuca arundinacea), tawny daylily (Hemerocallis ful-va), rose of Sharon (Hibiscus syriacus), largeleaf lantana (Lantana camara), peppermint (Mentha x piperita), Chinese holly (Ilex cornuta), Japanese holly (Ilex crenata), giant foxtail (Setaria fa-beri), Yellow foxtail (Setaria pumila), and tall vervain (Vebena bonariensis).
(c) See also Section 709. Water Efficient Design Consideration.
Section 705. Landscape Strip Planting Requirements.
705.01 Ten Foot Wide Landscape Strips.
Landscape Strips which are required to be 10 feet in which shall contain landscaping and plantings within said strip as follows:
(a) One tree for each 25 linear feet of strip length shall be provided.
(b) Four shrubs for each 25 linear feet of strip length shall be provided.
(c) The remaining ground area shall be sodden, seeded or hydro seeded with grass, and/or planted with groundcover species and/or provided with other landscaping material, or any combination thereof.
705.02 Five Foot Wide Landscape Strips.
Landscape Strips which are required to be 5 feet in width shall contain landscaping and plantings within said strip as follows:
10-Feet Wide Planting Strip: 1 Tree and 4 Shrubs per 25 Linear Feet
Section 706 Parking Lot Landscape Requirements City of Duluth UDC
7-12
(a) One tree for each 50 linear feet of strip length shall be provided.
(b) Eight shrubs for each 50 linear feet of strip length shall be provided.
(c) The remaining ground area shall be sodden, seeded or hydro seeded with grass, and/or planted with groundcover species and/or provided with other landscaping material, or any combination thereof.
(d) Encroachment into Landscape Strips.
Required Landscaped Strips shall not be encroached upon by parking spaces, driveway surfaces or stormwater detention facilities except that driveway crossings may traverse such strip as near to a perpendicular alignment as practical.
Section 706. Parking Lot Landscape Requirements
See the Parking and Loading Article of this Development Code.
Section 707. No-Access Easement Screening Requirements.
No-access easements which are required to be provided and recorded by this Development Code, or as a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval, shall be screened as follows:
(a) Planted with a single line of evergreen trees or shrubs; or,
(b) Contain a solid or decorative fence; or,
(c) Contain such other landscaping treatments or grade changes which will produce a partial screening effect as authorized by the Planning and Development Director.
Section 708. Buffer and Landscape Plan Specifications.
(a) A buffer and landscape plan shall be prepared for any project wherein buffer areas or other landscaping areas or treatment are required by this Development Code, conditions of zoning, special use or variance approval, or other regulations of the City of Duluth, and shall be ap-proved prior to issuance of a development permit.
(b) While the plan shall cover, at a minimum, the required buffer and landscape areas, the plan can be combined with a general landscaping plan for the entire project and/or tree preserva-tion/replacement plan (if required), at the developer's option.
(c) The buffer and landscape plan shall be prepared by a registered landscape architect.
(d) The buffer and landscape plan shall be shown on a site plan or boundary survey drawn to the same or a larger scale as the other plan documents prepared for the development permit appli-cation and shall cover the same area.
5-Feet Wide Planting Strip: 1 Tree and 8 Shrubs per 50 Linear Feet
City of Duluth UDC Section 709 Water-Efficient Design Consideration.
7-13
(e) The buffer and landscape plan shall contain but need not be limited to the following:
(1) Project name and land district, land lot, and acreage.
(2) Developer's name and telephone number.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the registered landscape architect responsible for preparation of the plan, and the seal or statement of professional qualifications of said person (which may be attached separately). The performance of professional services in the preparation of plans required herein shall comply with Georgia Law governing the prac-tice of the profession.
(4) Boundary lines of each buffer or other landscape area, appropriately labeled.
(5) Delineation of undisturbed buffer areas, and any other areas wherein trees are proposed to be retained to meet city requirements, along the drip lines of the trees or groups of trees contained therein. These areas shall be treated in accordance with the tree protection area requirements contained in this Article, and labeled as such. Protective barriers and signage as required by this Article shall be shown as to location and detailed.
(6) General location of all proposed trees, shrubs, vines, groundcovers, mulching, and other features proposed within the buffer/landscape area. A scale sufficient to clearly indicate all details shall be used, along with a north arrow.
(7) Within areas involving or adjacent to land form changes, existing and finish grade topo-graphic lines at an interval of no more than 2 feet may be required.
(8) For new plant materials to be installed, a plant material list including but not limited to:
a. Common and botanical names of all proposed plants.
b. Plant quantities.
c. Size and condition of plants. (Example: 1 inch caliper, 6 feet height, balled and bur-lapped.)
d. Spacing. Remarks as necessary to insure proper plant selection upon installation. (Ex-ample: Specimen, multi-trunked)
Section 709. Water-Efficient Design Consideration.
Individuals or firms who prepare the plans and plats required by this Article shall use water-efficient landscaping principles and techniques as one of the criterion to be used in plant selection and design.
(a) Principles and Techniques of Water-Efficient Landscaping.
The recommended principles and techniques to be considered are as follows:
(1) Proper Location and Design - locating plants where they will naturally thrive and not re-quire excessive water and maintenance to survive, as well as grouping plants by water needs, and limiting and concentrating high water using plants.
(2) Turf Selection - selecting turf grasses that can survive the variable rainfall conditions in this region, and limiting turf areas.
(3) Efficient Watering - once plants are established, avoid watering during periods of normal rainfall and during droughts, watering every week to 10 days or less depending on the drought tolerance of the plants.
Section 710 Purpose and Intent. City of Duluth UDC
7-14
(4) Soil Improvements - loosening and breaking up the soil beyond the immediate planting ar-ea to allow better water absorption and to promote deep roots.
(5) Mulching - using mulch to hold moisture in the soil which helps maximize the benefits of watering as well as preventing weeds.
(6) Plant Selection - selecting plants according to their watering requirements and optimum lo-cations.
(7) Maintenance - maintaining the landscape to maximize water conservations such as increas-ing mowing heights and avoiding fertilizing during dry spells.
DIVISION III. TREE PRESERVATION AND TREE REPLACEMENT REGULATIONS.
Section 710. Purpose and Intent.
The City deems it necessary and desirable in the interest of public health, safety and welfare to enact provisions for the preservation, planting and replacement of trees and to prevent the in-discriminate removal of trees in the City without denying the reasonable use and enjoyment of real property. The importance of trees is recognized for their shade, cooling, noise and wind re-duction, soil erosion prevention, oxygen production, dust filtration, carbon dioxide absorption, aesthetic and economic enhancement of all real property, and their contribution to the general wellbeing and quality of life of the citizens of Duluth. Consistent with the expressed purpose of this Code Division, all persons shall make reasonable efforts to preserve and retain certain exist-ing, self-supporting trees as defined herein. It is also the intent of this Code Division that all ap-plicable sites within the City maintain or obtain a minimum tree density, as defined and ex-plained herein.
Section 711. Exemptions.
The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this Code Division:
(a) The removal of trees from a developed residentially zoned, single-family lot.
(b) The necessary removal of trees by a utility company within dedicated utility easements provided alternative methods to trenching are used when possible including boring and tunneling.
(c) The removal of trees on public right-of-ways conducted by, on behalf of, or any activity pursuant to work to be dedicated to, a federal, state, county, municipal or other governmental agency in pursuance of its lawful activities or functions in the construction or improvement of public right-of-way.
(d) The removal of trees from golf courses, lakes, and detention ponds and drainage easements.
(e) The removal of any tree which has become or threatened to become a danger to human life or property or the removal of a diseased or infested tree to prevent the transmission of disease or infestation. The owner/developer, prior to removal of the diseased tree(s), shall provide a re-port from a professional arborist to the Planning and Development Director prior to tree remov-al. This report shall identify the conditions of the tree(s) that necessitate removal. In the case of immediate danger to life and property the tree may be taken down and an inspection requested to verify the condition of the tree.
(f) Notwithstanding the foregoing, all reasonable efforts shall be made to save Specimen Trees.
City of Duluth UDC Section 712 Approval to Remove Trees.
7-15
Section 712. Approval to Remove Trees.
712.01 Tree Removal Approval Required for Development Activity.
(a) No person shall engage in any new development activity, such as the construction of a subdivi-sion, multi-family project or nonresidential development, without meeting the requirements of a site development plan as required in 712.01(a) Site Development Plans of Article 11.
(b) For any existing multi-family or nonresidential development for which a development permit was previously issued, no tree shall be removed that would reduce the tree density on the property below that required under this Article without the reissuance of the tree removal per-mit (or approval of a sketch if qualified under Section 712.02(b)).
(c) No person shall clear cut any parcels or combination greater than 2 acres without specific plan approval during zoning or first obtaining a Special Use approval. Clear cutting of parcels less than 2 acres shall not be allowed unless approved by the Planning and Development Director with clear evidence of necessity for development of the parcel.
712.02 Application Requirements for Tree Removal.
(a) When a person applies for tree removal approval as defined in Section 712.01, such person shall also file an application for a tree removal permit and provide the following information:
(1) A complete tree survey and inventory, as described in Section 712.03.
(2) An integrated site plan showing specimen trees, the trees to be saved and those to be re-moved, utilities to be installed, grading, the approximate location of all structures, drive-ways and curb cuts and proposed tree plantings and other landscaping.
(3) A detailed plan to protect and preserve trees before, during and for a period of 2 years af-ter construction, which plan shall contain the following information:
a. All items found on the Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Submittal check-list pertinent to normal plan review.
b. Site area (roads, utility lines, detention ponds, etc.)
c. The locations of existing and proposed structures, paving, driveways, cut and fill area, detention areas, etc.
d. Phase lines or limits of construction.
e. A delineation of all protected zones with any required dimensions.
f. Calculations showing compliance with the required site density factor (see Section 722) using existing trees and/or replacement trees.
g. Location of all existing and proposed utility lines or easements.
h. Locations of any boring sites for underground utilities.
i. Locations of all specimen trees and indications whether they are to be removed or preserved.
j. Locations of all tree protection devices, materials to be used in each location and de-tails.
k. A delineation of a tree save area in which trees have been inventoried for density cal-culations.
Section 712 Approval to Remove Trees. City of Duluth UDC
7-16
l. If applicable, locations and details of all permanent tree protection measures (tree wells, aeration system, permeable paving, retaining walls, bollards, etc.; and
m. Additional information as required on a case-by-case basis.
(b) Minor changes to existing development require only a sketch showing changes to be submitted to the Planning and Development Director for review and approval.
712.03 Tree Survey Plan and Inventory.
(a) The tree survey as required in this Article shall be in the form of a to-scale map or a site plan prepared and sealed by a registered surveyor or certified engineer, arborist or landscape archi-tect, noting the location of all trees (as described in Paragraph (b) below) within the area to be modified from its natural state and 25 feet beyond in each direction or to the property line, whichever is less.
(b) All specimen trees and all trees that are to be counted toward meeting density requirements must be shown on the survey and inventoried by size (caliper or DBH, whichever is applicable) and species.
(c) Sampling methods may be used to determine tree densities for forested (over 5 acres). Speci-men trees must be shown on the plan with an indication whether they are to be retained or re-moved. All tree protection zones and tree save areas must be delineated on the plan. All buff-ers with existing trees must be delineated on plans as tree save areas. Land disturbance within any buffer is subject to Planning and Development Department approval.
712.04 Tree Survey Inspection.
Following the receipt of the completed tree removal application and supporting data, the Planning and Development Director or his designee shall schedule and conduct an inspection of the proposed development site. The applicant or his designee shall be advised as to the date and time of the in-spection and given an opportunity to participate. Following inspections, the Planning and Develop-ment Director, consistent with the purposes of this Development Code, shall advise the applicant of any recommended changes in the applicants proposed tree removal, protection or replanting plans.
712.05 Tree Removal Permit.
(a) The Planning and Development Director shall review all applications and supporting data and take one of the following actions: approve, approve with conditions or disapprove.
(b) The issuance of a tree removal permit does not authorize any development activity until such time as an appropriate development plan approval is granted and a permit is issued pursuant to Section 1111 Land Disturbance Permits in Article 11.
(c) Tree removal and replacement shall begin no later than 180 days after issuance of the tree re-moval permit and shall be completed no later than two years after the issuance of the permit. The Planning and Development Director may refuse to issue any permit for tree removal until the submission of all development plans and receipt of other evidence satisfactory to the Direc-tor that there is a reasonable certainty that the development activity is imminent. One renewal of a permit at no additional fee shall be granted if a reasonable request is made.
(d) No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until all requirements of the tree planting have been satisfactorily completed or an acceptable performance guarantee has been approved (see Sec-tion 1130 Performance Guarantee of Article 11).
City of Duluth UDC Section 713 Minimum Tree Density Requirements.
7-17
Section 713. Minimum Tree Density Requirements.
(a) All sites within the City other than single-family residential lots shall maintain a minimum tree density of 20 units per acre. The term unit is an expression of basal area as defined herein, and is not synonymous with tree.
(1) The density requirements must be met whether or not a site had trees prior to develop-ment. The density may be achieved by counting existing trees to be preserved, planting new trees in accordance with the minimum standards of this Code Division, or some com-bination of the two. Minimum tree density shall be calculated and established pursuant to the formula and analysis set forth in this Article. The developer shall be subject to the min-imum tree density requirement set forth in this Paragraph, but the developer shall base its density calculations on the net site area excluding the infrastructure improvements (roads, utility lines, detention ponds, etc.). In no event shall a parking lot be considered an infra-structure improvement.
(2) A required buffer shall not be counted towards tree density. Tree Save Areas may be counted in overall density for up to a 50% credit on individual lot requirements for residen-tial lots.
(b) All single-family residential lots being developed as a subdivision in the City shall maintain a min-imum tree density based upon the maximum number of trees that can be maintained within 20% of the lots Plantable Area, taking into consideration the standards established in this De-velopment Code for tree size and separation. The density requirement must be met whether or not the individual lot had trees prior to development.
(c) Replanting lots shall be at the ratio of not less than one overstory tree (minimum 2-inch caliper) for every three understory trees (minimum 1-inch caliper).
(d) Notwithstanding the foregoing, it is required that all reasonable efforts be made to save Speci-men Trees. (Reasonable efforts shall include, but not be limited to, alternate building design, building location, parking area layout, parking area location, water retention location and the like).
(e) Tree Save Areas are encouraged and will be given credit of up to 50% individual lot require-ments when the number of trees in the tree save areas is equal to or greater than the total number of trees required on the total number of lots within the subdivision. When a 50% reduc-tion on required trees is taken, the balance of the trees shall be planted in the front yard of the individual residential lots.
(f) Specimen trees and stands of trees must be replaced by species with potentials for comparable size and quality. Tree replacement in addition to the minimum site tree density may be required in recompense for the removal of specimen trees.
Section 714. Tree Survey Plan and Inventory.
(a) The tree survey as required herein shall be in the form of a to-scale map or a site plan prepared and sealed by a registered surveyor or certified engineer, arborist or landscape architect, noting the location of all trees within the area to be modified from its natural state and 25 feet beyond in each direction or to the property line, whichever is less.
(b) All Specimen Trees and all trees that are to be counted toward meeting density requirements must be shown on the survey and inventoried by size (caliper or DBH, whichever is applicable) and species.
Section 715 Tree Protection. City of Duluth UDC
7-18
(c) Sampling methods may be used to determine tree densities for forested (over 5 acres). Specimen
Trees must be shown on the plan with an indication whether they are to be retained or
removed. All Tree Protection and Tree Save Areas must be delineated on the plan. All Buffers
with existing trees must be delineated on plans as Tree Save Areas. Land disturbance within any
Buffer is subject to Planning and Development Department approval.
Section 715. Tree Protection.
(a) The cleaning of equipment, storage of materials or dirt, disposal of waste material such as paint,
oil solvent or other harmful substances, or any other such act which may be harmful to the continued
vitality of the tree(s) within the Tree Protection Area, is prohibited.
(b) Prior to commencement of any grading, construction or tree removal, a Tree Protection Area for
any tree located within 25 feet of any proposed grading, construction or tree removal must be
established by physical barrier and maintained until such work is completed.
Section 716. Tree Preservation Standards.
Prior to any tree removal or commencement of
construction on a site, the following system shall be
used:
(a) Location and Types of Tree Protection Devices.
(1) Tree protection devices are to be installed
as shown on the plan or otherwise completely
surrounding the critical root zone
of all the trees to be preserved.
(2) The plan shall indicate whether the tree
protection device is to be active or passive.
(3) Active protection (see Materials section
below) is required where Tree Save Areas
are located in proximity to construction
activity.
(4) Passive protection (see Materials section
below) may be used in more remote locations
and in all protected zones not designated
as Tree Save Areas.
(5) The locations and installation of all tree
protection devices will be verified prior to
the issuance of the construction permit
for clearing and/or grading. All Tree Protection
Devices must be maintained intact
throughout construction.
(6) Once Protected Zones are established and approved, any changes are subject to Planning
and Development Department review.
Source: Georgia Forestry Commission
City of Duluth UDC Section 717 Tree Damage.
7-19
(b) Materials.
(1) Active tree protection shall consist of chain link, orange laminated plastic, wooden post, and rail fencing or other equivalent restraining material. In addition to fencing, where tree trunks are in jeopardy of being damaged by equipment, the Planning and Development Di-rector shall require 2 inch by 4 inch boards to be strapped around the trunks of trees. In addition, where active tree protection is required, each tree to be saved shall be marked at the base of the trunk with blue colored water-based paint.
(2) Passive protection shall consist of heavy mil plastic flagging, a minimum of 4 inches wide with dark letters on a bright background reading Tree Protection Area  Do Not Enter or equivalent signage on a continuous, durable restraint.
(c) Sequence of Installation and Removal.
All tree protection devices shall be installed prior to any clearing, grubbing or grading. Tree pro-tection must remain in functioning condition until the Certificate of Occupancy is issued.
Section 717. Tree Damage.
Any tree designated in the plan to be saved that is damaged during construction or as a result of such construction, shall be treated according to accepted National Arborists Association Standards, or re-placed with a tree(s) equal to the unit value of the tree removed. However, any Specimen Tree dam-aged as described above shall be replaced with a tree(s) two times the unit value of the tree re-moved.
Section 718. Tree Planting Standards.
(a) Trees selected for planting must be free from injury, pests, disease, nutritional disorders or root defects, and must be of good vigor in order to assure to reasonable expectation of survivability.
(b) It is desirable that replanted trees be ecologically compatible with the site and neighboring sites. Accordingly, the replanted trees shall be of the same or similar species as those removed unless the trees that were removed were non-native.
(c) Replacement trees shall be of a native species appropriate for the Plant Hardiness Zone(s) for Gwinnett County as defined by the Cooperative Extension, University of Georgia College of Agri-cultural and Environmental Sciences or as recommended by the Georgia Forestry Commission.
(d) See also Section 709.
Section 719. Plan and Plat Specification.
719.01 Tree Preservation/Replacement Plan Specifications.
(a) Tree Preservation/Replacement Plans shall be prepared by a professional landscape architect, Urban Forester, or Arborist in accordance with the specifications for such plans contained here-in. The performance of professional services in the preparation of plans required herein shall comply with Georgia Law governing the practice of the applicable profession. Other licensed professionals (e.g. architects, engineers, etc.) may be authorized by the Planning and Develop-ment Director to prepare Tree Preservations Plans, but not Tree Replacement Plans, provided that they demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Planning and Development Director, compe-tency and knowledge in the principals and practices of arboriculture.
(b) The Tree Preservation/Replacement Plan shall be shown on a copy of a Preliminary Plat, Con-cept Plan or Site Plan, with the exception of a permit to conduct tree thinning, as appropriate to
Section 719 Plan and Plat Specification. City of Duluth UDC
7-20
the proposed development, drawn to the same scale as the other plan documents prepared for a Land Disturbance Permit application on the property, and shall cover the same area. The plan may be combined with a required Buffer and Landscape Plan for the project, at the option of the developer.
(c) The Tree Preservation/Replacement Plan shall provide sufficient information and detail to clear-ly demonstrate that all applicable requirements and standards of this Article will be fully satis-fied.
(d) The Tree Preservation/Replacement Plan shall contain but need not be limited to:
(1) Project name, Land District, Land Lot, north arrow and scale.
(2) Developers name, address and telephone number.
(3) The name, address, and telephone number of the professional Landscape Architect, Urban Forester, Arborist or other authorized individual responsible for preparation of the plan, in accordance with the requirements of Section 719.01(a), above, and the Seal or statement of professional qualifications of said person (which may be attached separately).
(4) Delineation of all minimum yard areas, buffers, and landscape areas as required by this De-velopment Code or conditions of zoning, special use of variance approval.
(5) Total acreage of the site and total acreage exclusive of all zoning buffer areas.
(6) Delineation of all areas located within a 100-year floodplain.
(7) Existing Trees to be retained in Tree Protection Areas:
a. Trunk location and size (to the nearest inch in diameter at or below diameter breast height), of individual trees proposed to remain for credit toward meeting the mini-mum tree density standard on the property.
b. Groups of three or more trees whose drip lines combine into a single Tree Protection Area may be outlined as a group and their number, by diameter, shown in the re-quired Summary Table (see also subsection (10) below).
c. If the number and size of all existing trees to remain on the site exceeds the required tree density standard for the entire site, only those trees required to meet the mini-mum tree density standard must be shown.
d. All Tree Protection Areas are to be outlined and labeled.
(8) Tree Protection Measures:
a. A detail or description of the protective tree fencing, staking, or continuous ribbon to be installed, and the location of such measures, which at a minimum shall follow the drip line of all trees to be retained along adjoining areas of clearing, grading, or other construction activity.
b. Measures to be taken to avoid soil sedimentation intrusion into Tree Protection Areas, and the location of such devices.
c. Proposed location of temporary construction activities such as equipment or worker parking, materials storage, burn holes, equipment wash down areas, and entrance pads.
d. Proposed type and location of any tree save area signs or other pertinent signage.
City of Duluth UDC Section 720 Compliance.
7-21
(9) If replacement trees are proposed to be planted in order for the property to achieve the required Tree Density Standard, the replacement trees shall be shown and their spacing and diameter identified, to the extent needed to achieve the minimum requirements. Trees grouped together in tree planting areas may be listed on the required Summary Table by total number in the grouping, by size.
(10) A Summary Table of the number of existing trees to remain and new trees to be planted, by diameter to the nearest inch at or below dbh, shall be shown along with calculations show-ing the tree density achieved for the site. Additional credits shall be noted where applicable (see Section 722). Groupings of tree in Tree Protection Areas and areas for new tree plant-ing may be keyed to the Summary Table by area rather than having each tree individually labeled on the plan.
(e) The plan sheet which shows the grading plan, including existing and proposed contour lines, shall indicate the drip line location of all Tree Protection Areas through the use of shading on the plans. The exact location of each tree is not desired to be shown, only the limits of the Tree Pro-tection Area and any other areas which are not to be disturbed.
Section 720. Compliance.
720.01 Artificial Materials Prohibited.
All artificial plants, trees, shrubs, grass or other vegetation shall be prohibited from fulfilling the re-quirements of this Article.
720.02 Warranty or Maintenance Surety.
Upon final installation of new trees, shrubs or other landscape material planted to meet the re-quirements of this Code Division, and following acceptance by the Planning and Development De-partment in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Procedures and Permits Article of this Development Code, the owner shall either provide proof of warranty or post a Maintenance Bond or other acceptable surety, warranting the new trees, shrubs or landscape material for a period of no less than one year.
720.03 Inspection.
(a) The Planning and Development Department shall perform an inspection of the plantings and landscape materials required by this Code Division prior to expiration of the one year warranty or maintenance period. The owner shall be notified of any replacements or restoration that must be made to maintain compliance with this Code Division or conditions of zoning, special use or variance approval.
(b) Required landscape material found to be dead or near death shall be replaced prior to release by the Planning and Development Department of the warranty of maintenance surety. In no case shall replacement be delayed greater than 30 days from notification unless a performance bond is posted with the Planning and Development Department.
720.04 Performance Surety.
(a) Compliance Prior to Certificate of Occupancy or Final Plat Approval.
In the event that new trees proposed to be planted to achieve the Tree Density Standard as set forth in the Tree Regulations contained herein, or other trees or landscape material required to be planted as set forth in the Buffer Regulations or Landscape Regulations contained herein, are not installed upon application for a Certificate of Occupancy or Final Plat approval as appropri-
Section 721 Enforcement, Violation and Penalties. City of Duluth UDC
7-22
ate to the project, then a Performance Bond or other acceptable surety in an amount equal to 110% of the value of new trees or landscape material and their installation shall be posted with the Planning and Development Department in accordance with the performance bonding re-quirements and provisions of the Procedures and Permits Article of this UDC.
(b) Compliance upon Permit Completion or Expiration.
Properties where a permit is issued to conduct land disturbing activities that do not require the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or the approval of a Final Plat, or said activities as author-ized are completed or the permit expires, shall comply with the Tree Density Standard of this Ar-ticle as follows:
(1) Clearing, Clearing and Grubbing, or Grading only Permits.
Replacement trees proposed to be planted to achieve the Tree Density Standard of this Ar-ticle which is not planted upon completion or prior to expiration of a Clearing, Clearing and Grubbing, or Grading Permit, shall be planted within 30 days of the completion or expira-tion of said permit unless a Performance Bond is posted with the Planning and Develop-ment Department.
(2) Development Permits.
Replacement trees proposed to be planted to achieve the Tree Density Standard of this Ar-ticle which is not planted upon completion or prior to expiration of a Clearing, Clearing and Grubbing, or Grading Permit, shall be planted within 30 days of the completion or expira-tion of said permit unless a Performance Bond is posted with the Planning and Develop-ment Department.
720.05 Continuing Maintenance.
(a) The owner, occupant, tenant, and respective agent of each, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the perpetual maintenance and protection of buffers and landscape plantings required by this Article.
(b) The Planning and Development Department is hereby authorized to order diseased, infested, dying, dead or damaged landscaping required herein to be replaced.
(c) Buffers that, over a period of time, lose their screening ability shall be replanted to meet the re-quirements of this Article.
(d) Replacement trees and landscaping shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Article.
Section 721. Enforcement, Violation and Penalties.
721.01 Enforcement.
It shall be the responsibility of the Planning and Development Department to enforce this Article. The Planning and Development Director or his/her designee shall have the authority to revoke, suspend, or void any Clearing, Clearing and Grubbing, Grading, Development or Building Permit or to withhold issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, and shall have the authority to suspend all work on a site or any portion thereof, where tree removal or damage occurs in violation of this Article or the provi-sions of the approved Tree Preservation/Replacement Plan for the site.
City of Duluth UDC Section 722 Calculating Tree Density.
7-23
721.02 Violation and Penalty.
Any person violating provisions of this Article shall be guilty of violating duly adopted Article of the City of Duluth, and upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction, may be punished either by a fine not to exceed $1,000, or confinement in the City jail not to exceed 60 days, or both. Each day of non-compliance shall constitute a separate offense. The Court shall have the power and authority to place any person found guilty of a violation of this Article on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. As a condition of said suspension, the Court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law which may include mandatory attendance at an education-al program regarding tree preservation. The owner of any property wherein a violation exists, and any builder, contractor, or agent, who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense.
Section 722. Calculating Tree Density.
A basic requirement of this Code Division is that all applicable sites maintain a minimum tree density of 20 units per acre. The term unit is an expression of basal area (a standard forest inventory measurement), and is not synonymous with tree. A single tree equal to one tree unit is between 13 and 14 inches in diameter.
This density requirement must be met whether or not the site had trees prior to development. The density may be achieved by counting existing trees to be preserved, planting new trees, or some combination of the two as represented by the formula below.
SDF = EDF + RDF
SDF (Site Density Factor): The minimum tree density requirement to be maintained on a developed site, expressed in units per acre.
EDF (Existing Density Factor): The total number of tree density units measured or calculated based on trees that will remain as conserved on site.
RDF (Replacement Density Factor): Density or total unit value of new trees to be planted on a site.
The SDF is calculated by multiplying the number of site acres by units per acre required:
Example: A 2.2 acre site has a SDF of 2.2 x 20 units per acre = 44 units
The EDF is calculated by converting the diameter of individual trees to density factor units using Table 7-B. An example of determining the EDF by identifying the trees inventoried in a tree save area is shown below:
Trees Found
(DBH)
Quantity
Unit Value*
Total
5 - 8 pines
21
x
0.3
=
6.3
9 - 12 oaks
14
x
0.6
=
8.4
13 - 16 oaks
10
x
1.2
=
12
17 - 20 poplars
5
x
1.9
=
9.5
21 - 24 oaks
3
x
2.8
=
8.4
Total
44.6 Density Units (EDF)
*See Table 7-B
Section 722 Calculating Tree Density. City of Duluth UDC
7-24
Therefore, with a SDF requirement of 44 units, a tree save area totaling 44.6 density units satisfies the site density requirement. These trees will be protected in a tree save area.
To determine tree density on large sites, sample areas should be taken in areas to remain undisturbed. An approved timber cruising method (50 x 50 sample areas or Prism Method sampling) is required. Sample areas shall be flagged onsite, and locations delineated on the tree preservation plan.
Table 7-B: Converting Existing Tree Diameters (DBH) to Density Factor Units Diameters Density Factor Units
1  2 inches
Need not be counted
3  4 inches
0.1
5  8 inches
0.3
9  12 inches
0.6
13  16 inches
1.2
17  20 inches
1.9
21  24 inches
2.8
25  28 inches
3.8
29  32 inches
5.1
33  36 inches
6.5
37  40 inches
8.1
The unit value of any individual tree may be determined by using the formula: (Diameter2) x .7854  144
Replacement Density Factor (RDF): If enough trees do not exist onsite to meet the tree density requirements, replacement trees will be needed. Calculate the RDF by subtracting the EDF from the SDF.
For instance, if it was determined that the 2.2. acre sample site from the previous example had only enough existing trees to yield a 30 unit per acre EDF, then replacement trees totaling 14 density factor units would be required: SDF (44)  EDF (30) = RDF (14)
The density factor credit unit value for each caliper size or replacement (new) trees is provided in Table 7-C. Replacement tree caliper is measured at a point on the trunk 6 inches from the base.
Table 7-B: Conversion of Replacement Tree Caliper to Density Factor Units
(planted at ratio of 1 Overstory to 3 Understory trees) Caliper Size Density Factor Units
1 inch
Not to be used
2 inches
0.4
3 inches
0.5
4 inches
0.7
5 inches
0.9
6 inches
1.0
7 inches
1.2
8 inches
1.3
9 inches
1.5
City of Duluth UDC Section 723 Specimen Trees.
7-25
Table 7-B: Conversion of Replacement Tree Caliper to Density Factor Units
(planted at ratio of 1 Overstory to 3 Understory trees) Caliper Size Density Factor Units
10 inches
1.7
11 inches
1.9
12 inches
2.1
13 inches
2.3
14 inches
2.5
15 inches
2.8
NOTE: Tree diameter is measured at diameter breast height (dbh) or at any point below dbh for new trees or multi-trunked species, but in no case less than 6 inches from the ground.
NOTE: Tree diameter fractions may be rounded up if 0.5 inches or greater or rounded down if less than 0.5 inches.
NOTE: Multi-trunked ornamental trees shall be given credit by measuring the single largest trunk only. Tree-form shrubs shall not be given credit.
Container grown pine trees are given density factor credit as follows: 7 Gallons - .4 units. In order to qualify for credit, each such container grown pine tree shall be at least 4 feet tall, and have a trunk not less than 1 caliper inch. The use of 1 and 3 gallon pines is permitted only with prior approval.
The values in Table 7-C shall also be used to determine the quantity of replacement trees for any specimen tree recompense planting. Plantings replacing specimen trees are additional to planting required for site density requirements. See Sec. 723 below for specimen tree descriptions and requirements.
Section 723. Specimen Trees.
(a) Some trees on a site warrant special consideration and encouragement for preservation. These trees are referred to as specimen trees.
(b) The following criteria are used by the Planning and Development Director to identify specimen trees. Both the size and condition must be met for a tree to qualify.
(c) No specimen tree may be removed without prior written approval from the Planning and Devel-opment Director.
723.02 Size Criteria
(a) Overstory Trees: 24-inch diameter or larger hardwoods such as oaks, hickories, poplars, sweet gums, etc. 30-inch diameter or larger softwoods, such as pines, cedars, etc.
(b) Understory Trees: 6-inch diameter or larger such as dogwoods, redbuds, etc.
723.03 Condition Criteria
(a) Life expectancy of greater than 15 years.
(b) Relatively sound and solid trunk with no extensive decay.
(c) No more than one major and several minor dead limbs (hardwoods only).
(d) No major insect or pathological problems.
Section 724 Examples of Single Family Lot Tree Planting Requirements. City of Duluth UDC
7-26
(e) In order to encourage the preservation of specimen trees and the incorporation of these trees into the design of projects, additional density credit will be given for specimen trees which are successfully saved by a design feature specifically designated for such purpose. Credit for any specimen tree thus saved would be 2 times the assigned unit value shown in Section 722.
(f) If a specimen tree must be removed, due to criteria established in this Code Division, it will be replaced by a species with potential for comparable size and quality. All specimen trees re-moved must be replaced at a density of two (2.0) times the unit value of the tree removed, i.e., 30-inch diameter specimen trees (4.9 density units) must be replaced with 9.8 units. Species se-lection is subject to the approval of the Planning and Development Director.
(g) Any specimen tree, which is removed without the appropriate review and approval of the Plan-ning and Development Director, must be replaced by trees with a minimum caliper size of 5 inches per tree with a total density equal to 3 times the unit value of the tree removed. In addi-tion, the Citys Code Enforcement Officer will issue a citation for the removal of a specimen tree without appropriate review and approval of the Planning and Development Director requiring an appearance in the Citys Municipal Court. Size alone will determine whether a tree was of specimen quality if the tree is removed without approval.
(h) The Planning and Development Director may identify and require the preservation of a tree stand if it contains one or more specimen trees and the specimen trees are interlocked with other members of the stand in such a manner as to imperil the specimen tree if other members of the stand were to be removed.
Section 724. Examples of Single Family Lot Tree Planting Requirements.
Lot Size
- Minus Impervious Surface
X Times 20%
= Equals Plantable Area
12,000 SF
(R-75)
2,740 SF (9,260 SF)
1500 SF Home
1120 SF drive & turn around
120 SF patio
9,260 SF pervious surface
9,260 x 20%
1,852 SF
(a) Tree Computation:
5 Overstory trees x 200 sq. ft. of plantable area = 1,000 plantable area
12 Understory trees x 100 sq. ft. of plantable area = 1,200 plantable area
2,200 plantable area
(b) Lot Computation:
18,000 sq.ft.  3,400 sq. ft. impervious = 14,996 sq. ft. x 20% = 2,999 plantable area
(c) Tree Computation:
7 Overstory trees x 200 sq. ft. of plantable area = 1,400 plantable area
21 Understory trees x 100 sq. ft. of plantable area = 2,100 plantable area
3,500 plantable area
City of Duluth UDC Section 725 Restriction on Outdoor Watering of Landscape.
7-27
40,000 sq. ft.  3,900 sq. ft. impervious = 36,100 sq. ft. x 20% = 7,220 plantable area (RA-200)
(d) Tree Computation:
17 Overstory trees x 200 sq. ft. of plantable area = 3,400 plantable area
51 Understory trees x 100 sq. ft. of plantable area = 5,100 plantable area
8,500 plantable area
DIVISION IV. INSTALLATION AND OPERATION OF IRRIGATION SYSTEMS OR DEVICES.
(a) The installation of residential and commercial irrigation systems requires the issuance of a build-ing permit from the Planning and Development Department.
(b) Freeze sensors are to be installed and maintained on all residential and commercial irrigation systems equipped with automatic irrigation controllers, which will render the system inopera-tive at 35 Fahrenheit or below.
(c) Rain sensor irrigation shut-off switches are required to be installed and maintained on all new residential and commercial irrigation systems and set to render the irrigation system inoperative at  inch of moisture or more.
(d) Be rendered inoperative by or at the direction of the residential and commercial irrigation sys-tem owner or operator pending repairs if damaged in a manner that results in leakage or exces-sive discharge of water from broken components.
(e) Residential and commercial irrigation systems shall be installed per the manufacturer's instruc-tions.
DIVISION V. OUTDOOR WATERING RESTRICTIONS
Section 725. Restriction on Outdoor Watering of Landscape.
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses:
(a) Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, in-cluding, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; produc-ing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A.  1-3-3;
(b) Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable ordinances and state guidelines;
(c) Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A.  31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations;
(d) Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the environ-mental protection division of the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed wastewater;
Section 725 Restriction on Outdoor Watering of Landscape. City of Duluth UDC
7-28
(e) Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation;
(f) Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses;
(g) Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container;
(h) Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property;
(i) Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation;
(j) Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas;
(k) Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or
(l) Hydroseeding.
8-i
Article 8. Environmental Protection
Article 8 sets out the minimum requirements and standards for the protection of the natural environment within Duluth, includ-ing restrictions on the use of land near certain rivers and streams, within water supply watersheds, within groundwater recharge ar-eas susceptible to pollution, and in wetlands, in order to:
1. Protect the drinking water quality of the rivers, streams, res-ervoirs and aquifers that supply water to the residents of the city, the county and the state; and
2. Protect the natural habitat of animal and plant life relative to water resources; and
3. Limit the potentially damaging effects of flooding.
Table of Contents Page
DIVISION I. STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION. ............................................................................................8-1
Section 801. Definitions Related to Stream Buffer Protection. .................................................................8-1
Section 802. Applicability. .......................................................................................................................8-3
802.01 Grandfather Provisions. ............................................................................................................................... 8-3
802.02 Exemptions................................................................................................................................................... 8-3
Section 803. Land Development Requirements........................................................................................8-4
803.01 Buffer and Setback Requirements. .............................................................................................................. 8-4
803.02 Variance Procedures. ................................................................................................................................... 8-5
Section 804. Special Buffer Regulations and Requirements. .....................................................................8-7
804.01 Special Provisions. ........................................................................................................................................ 8-7
804.02 Chattahoochee Corridor. ............................................................................................................................. 8-7
804.03 Exemptions................................................................................................................................................... 8-8
Section 805. Responsibility. ....................................................................................................................8-9
Section 806. Inspection. ..........................................................................................................................8-9
Section 807. Violations, Enforcement and Penalties. ...............................................................................8-9
807.01 Enforcement Procedures. ............................................................................................................................ 8-9
807.02 Legal Penalties and/or Remedies. .............................................................................................................. 8-11
807.03 Petition. ...................................................................................................................................................... 8-11
Section 808. Administrative Appeal and Judicial Review. ....................................................................... 8-11
808.01 Administration. .......................................................................................................................................... 8-11
808.02 Administrative Appeal. ............................................................................................................................... 8-11
808.03 Judicial Review. .......................................................................................................................................... 8-11
DIVISION II. CHATTAHOOCHEE RIVER TRIBUTARY PROTECTION............................................................. 8-12
Section 809. Regulations Adopted by Reference. ................................................................................... 8-12
Table of Contents Continued City of Duluth UDC
8-ii
DIVISION III. WETLANDS PROTECTION. .................................................................................................. 8-12
Section 810. Purpose. ........................................................................................................................... 8-12
Section 811. Definitions Relating to Wetlands Protection. ..................................................................... 8-12
Section 812. Establishment of the Wetlands Protection District. ............................................................ 8-13
Section 813. Protection Criteria. ........................................................................................................... 8-13
Section 814. Allowed Uses. ................................................................................................................... 8-13
Section 815. Prohibited Uses. ............................................................................................................... 8-13
Section 816. Administration and Enforcement Procedures. .................................................................... 8-14
816.01 Site Plans. .................................................................................................................................................. 8-14
816.02 Activities to Comply with Site Plan. ........................................................................................................... 8-14
816.03 Exemptions to Site Plan Requirements. .................................................................................................... 8-14
816.04 Review Procedures. ................................................................................................................................... 8-14
816.05 Duration of Permit Validity........................................................................................................................ 8-15
816.06 Penalties. ................................................................................................................................................... 8-15
816.07 Suspension, Revocation............................................................................................................................. 8-15
816.08 Judicial Review. ......................................................................................................................................... 8-15
816.09 Amendments. ............................................................................................................................................ 8-16
DIVISION IV. WATER SUPPLY WATERSHEDS. .......................................................................................... 8-16
Section 817. Purpose. ........................................................................................................................... 8-16
Section 818. Definitions Related to Water Supply Watersheds. .............................................................. 8-16
Section 819. Establishment of a Water Supply Watershed District. ........................................................ 8-17
Section 820. Protection Criteria. ........................................................................................................... 8-17
820.01 Regulations. ............................................................................................................................................... 8-17
820.02 Exemptions. ............................................................................................................................................... 8-18
Section 821. Administration and Enforcement. ...................................................................................... 8-18
821.01 Site Plans. .................................................................................................................................................. 8-18
821.02 Activities to Comply with Site Plan. ........................................................................................................... 8-19
821.03 Exemptions to Site Plan Requirements. .................................................................................................... 8-19
821.04 Review Procedures. ................................................................................................................................... 8-19
821.05 Duration of Permit Validity........................................................................................................................ 8-19
821.06 Penalties. ................................................................................................................................................... 8-19
821.07 Suspension, Revocation............................................................................................................................. 8-20
821.08 Judicial Review. ......................................................................................................................................... 8-20
DIVISION V. GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREAS. .................................................................................. 8-20
Section 822. Purpose. ........................................................................................................................... 8-20
Section 823. Definitions Related to Groundwater Recharge Areas. ......................................................... 8-21
Section 824. Establishment of the Groundwater Recharge Area Protection District. ............................... 8-21
Section 825. Protection Criteria. ........................................................................................................... 8-21
City of Duluth UDC Table of Contents Continued
8-iii
Section 826. Exemptions. ...................................................................................................................... 8-22
Section 827. Administration and Enforcement Procedures. .................................................................... 8-22
827.01 Site Plans. ................................................................................................................................................... 8-22
827.02 Activities to Comply with Site Plan. ........................................................................................................... 8-23
827.03 Exemptions to Site Plan Requirements. ..................................................................................................... 8-23
827.04 Review Procedures. .................................................................................................................................... 8-23
827.05 Duration of Permit Validity. ....................................................................................................................... 8-23
827.06 Penalties. .................................................................................................................................................... 8-24
827.07 Suspension, Revocation. ............................................................................................................................ 8-24
827.08 Judicial Review. .......................................................................................................................................... 8-24
DIVISION VI. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ............................................................................................. 8-25
Section 828. Findings. ........................................................................................................................... 8-25
Section 829. Purpose and Intent. .......................................................................................................... 8-25
Section 830. Definitions Related to Floodplain Management. ................................................................ 8-26 Section 831. Applicability. ..................................................................................................................... 8-30 Section 832. Designation and Duties of Division Administrator. ............................................................. 8-30 832.02 Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator ...................................................................................... 8-30 Section 833. Basis for Area of Special Flood Hazard-Flood Area Maps and Studies. ................................. 8-31 Section 834. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. .................................................................................. 8-32
Section 835. Permit Procedures and Requirements ............................................................................... 8-32 835.01 Permit Application Requirements. ............................................................................................................. 8-32 835.02 Floodplain Management Plan Requirements. ........................................................................................... 8-32 835.03 Construction Stage Submittal Requirements. ............................................................................................ 8-33 Section 836. Standards for Development............................................................................................... 8-34 836.01 Definition of Floodplain Boundaries. ......................................................................................................... 8-34 836.02 Definition of Floodway Boundaries. ........................................................................................................... 8-34 836.03 General Standards. ..................................................................................................................................... 8-34 836.04 Engineering Study Requirements for Floodplain Encroachments. ............................................................ 8-35 836.05 Floodway Encroachments. ......................................................................................................................... 8-36 836.06 Maintenance Requirements. ..................................................................................................................... 8-36
Section 837. Provisions for Flood Damage Reduction. ............................................................................ 8-36 837.01 General Standards. ..................................................................................................................................... 8-36 837.02 Building Standards for Structures and Buildings within the Future-Conditions Floodplain. ...................... 8-38 837.03 Building Standards for Structures and Buildings Authorized Adjacent to the Future-Conditions Floodplain. 8-40 837.04 Building Standards for Residential Single-Lot Developments on Streams without Established Base Flood Elevations and/or Floodway (A-Zones).......................................................................................................................... 8-40 837.05 Building Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO-zones). .................................................................. 8-41 837.06 Standards for Subdivisions. ........................................................................................................................ 8-41
Table of Contents Continued City of Duluth UDC
8-iv
BLANK PAGE
8-1
Article 8. Environmental Protection
DIVISION I. STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION.
Section 801. Definitions Related to Stream Buffer Protection.
Buffer. The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of a stream in its existing or enhanced state of vegetation (established by section 803.01(a) herein).
Chattahoochee Corridor. All land within 2,000 feet of the banks of the Chattahoochee River, including any impoundments thereon, or within the floodplain, whichever is greater, from directly below Buford Dam downstream to the downstream limits of Fulton and Douglas counties, including the entire bed of the river and any improvements and all islands therein.
Department. The Planning and Development Department. Director. The Director of the Planning and Development Department or the directors designee.
Floodplain. Those lands subject to flooding, which would have at least a 1% probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the currently adopted land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood.
Flowing Stream. Any stream that is portrayed on the most current United States Geologic Survey 7.5 minute quadrangle for the affected area.
Impervious Cover or Impervious Surface. Any paved, hardened or structural surface, including but not limited to , buildings, dams, decks, driveways, parking areas, patios, streets, swimming pools, tennis courts, walkways, and other structures.
Impervious Surface. Materials that do not allow for water penetration such as concrete and asphalt.
Land Development:
(1) (verb) All activities associated with the conversion of land or the expansion or replacement of an existing use to any new use intended for human operation, occupancy or habitation, other than for agricultural purposes devoted strictly to the cultivation of the land, dairying or animal husbandry. Such activities include land disturbance (clearing and grubbing the land of vegetation and stumps, and grading) and the construction of improvements such as but not limited to streets, driveways or parking areas, water or sewer mains, storm water drain-age facilities, sidewalks or other structures permanently placed on or in the property.
(2) (noun) Where appropriate to the context, the term development also may be used to denote a specific subdivision or project which is a single entity or intended to be constructed as in interrelated whole, whether simultaneously or in phases.
Land Development Activity. Those actions or activities that comprise, facilitate or result in land devel-opment.
Land Disturbance. Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, clearing and grubbing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices.
Section 801 Definitions Related to Stream Buffer Protection. City of Duluth UDC
8-2
Land Disturbance Activity. Those actions or activities that comprise, facilitate or result in land disturb-ance.
Lot or Parcel. A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon.
Metropolitan River Protection Act. A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et seq., which ad-dresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins.
Perennial Stream. A watercourse having a source, terminus, banks and channel through which water flows on a continuous basis as depicted on the most recent United States Geological Survey 7.5-minute quadrangle map (scale 1:24,000). Permit. The permit issued by the Planning and Development Department required for undertaking land development activity.
Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, mu-nicipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, interstate body or any other legal entity.
Pervious Surface. Materials that do allow for water penetration such as mulch, crushed stone, elevated boardwalks with spacing between boards, and specially formulated pervious concrete designed to al-low for water penetration.
Protection Area, or Stream Protection Area. With respect to a stream, the combined areas of all re-quired buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream.
Riparian. Belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment.
Setback. With respect to a stream, the area established by Section 803.01(b) extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream.
State Waters. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia that are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation.
Stream. Any stream, beginning at:
(1) The location where the normal stream flow has wrested the vegetation. The normal stream flow is any flow that consists solely of base flow or consists of both base flow and direct runoff during any period of the year. Base flow results from the groundwater that enters the stream channel through the soil. This includes spring flows into streams. Direct runoff is the water entering stream channels promptly after rainfall or snow melts; or
(2) A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 20 acres or more; or
(3) Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 20 acres, the Planning and Development Department may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream.
Stream Bank. The confining cut of a stream channel.
Stream Channel. The portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream.
Stream Protection Area. See Protection Area.
City of Duluth UDC Section 802 Applicability.
8-3
Trail, Multi-use. A hard surface (concrete, asphalt, boardwalk, etc.) transportation structure specifi-cally constructed for alternative transportation such as walking, biking, roller blading, etc. and not in-tended to transport motorized vehicles such as cars, trucks, motorcycles, etc.
Utility. A public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, storm water systems and railroads or other utilities identified by Planning and Development Department.
Watercourse. Any natural or artificial waterway, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently, having a definite channel, bed and bank, and includes any area adjacent thereto which is subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater.
Watershed. The land area that drains into a particular stream.
Section 802. Applicability.
Division I of this Article shall apply to all land development activity, including subdividing and platting activities, on property containing a stream protection area as defined in Section 801 of this Code Division. These require-ments are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations.
802.01 Grandfather Provisions.
Division I of this Article shall not apply to the following activities, when such activities were lawfully established prior to the effective date of this Code Division or its predecessor ordinance:
(a) Work consisting of the repair, maintenance or replacement within the same disturbed area of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use.
(b) Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new develop-ment or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer re-quirements.
(c) Any lawful land development activity that was under construction, has a valid permit, or has sub-mitted a valid and complete application for a permit.
(d) Any lawful land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a Planned Development that has been conceptually approved.
802.02 Exemptions.
The following specific activities are exempt from Section 803, however any activity within a state wa-ters buffer must meet State requirements:
(a) Activities for the purpose of building one of the following:
(1) A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route including but not limited to bike paths and pedestrian trails, or utility line;
(2) Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures;
(3) Land development necessary to provide access to a property;
(4) Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks;
Section 803 Land Development Requirements. City of Duluth UDC
8-4
(5) Unpaved foot trails and paths;
(6) Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used;
(7) Stormwater outfalls to the stream, by pipe or channel, necessary to protect the buffer from erosion caused by high flow velocities due to steep slopes.
(b) Public sewer line installation in easements running parallel with the stream where necessary, ex-cept that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance within a state waters buffer must meet State requirements. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection 802.02(a), above.
(c) Land development activities within a dedicated transportation right-of-way existing at the time the requirements of this Code Division first took effect under the predecessor ordinance, or which are permitted under the terms of this Code Division.
(d) Within an easement of any utility existing at the time the requirements of this Code Division first took effect under the predecessor ordinance or approved under the terms of this Code Division, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures.
(e) Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is per-formed under this subsection, the person performing it shall report such work to the Planning and Development Department on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within 10 business days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the Planning and Development Department to be reasona-bly necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area.
(f) Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land dis-turbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer.
(g) Pervious surface multi-use trails no more than 12 feet in width and activities related to construc-tion of a multi-use trail no more than 12 feet in width, provided the trail complies with the re-quirements of the Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control section in Article 10 of this Development Code.
(h) Detention/water quality ponds provided said ponds comply with all other local, state and federal requirements including but limited to the Floodplain Management section of this Article, the , the Soil Erosion, Sedimentation Pollution Control section of Article 10 of this Development Code, and U.S Army Corp of Engineers wetlands regulations in this Article.
Section 803. Land Development Requirements.
803.01 Buffer and Setback Requirements.
All land development activity subject to this Code Division shall meet the following requirements:
City of Duluth UDC Section 803 Land Development Requirements.
8-5
(a) An undisturbed buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. The land forming the bank is also considered part of the buffer for purposes of this Code Division.
(b) An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undis-turbed buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback.
(c) No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback.
Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to Section 803.02 herein.
803.02 Variance Procedures.
Variance requests from the requirements of this Code Division shall be submitted on an application form as prescribed by the Planning and Development Director or the directors designee, along with such fees as shall be established by the Mayor and City Council. The Planning and Development Direc-tor or the directors designee shall coordinate the review of each variance request with all other af-fected City of Duluth departments and shall forward such comments or recommendations as may be received to the Zoning Board of Appeals for action in their normal course of business. The review must include a recommendation from the Planning and Development Department.
This section describes how to apply for a variance from this Code Division, however any activity within a state waters buffer must meet State requirements.
(a) Variances may be grantedin accordance with the following provisions:
(1) The project involves the construction of one single family home for residential use by the owner of the subject property on a parcel that was platted prior to the effective date of this Code Division, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this Code Division, and the Planning and Development Depart-ment finds and determines that the requirements of this Code Division prohibit the other-wise lawful use of the property by the owner, the Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a vari-ance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance requires mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. The Zoning Board of Appeals is authorized to use a consent agenda to fulfill the terms of this Subsection.
(2) Except as provided above, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall grant no variance from any pro-vision of this Code Division without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the Board. The Planning and Development Department shall follow the Public Hearing, or notice, re-quirements for a variance to be heard by the Zoning Board of Appeals as provided in the Procedures and Permits Article of this UDC.
No application or reapplication for a variance affecting the same stream segment on a prop-erty shall be heard within 12 months from the date of last action by the Zoning Board of Appeals unless such 12-month period is waived by the Zoning Board of Appeals, and in no case may such application or reapplication be reconsidered in less than six months from the date of last action by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Section 803 Land Development Requirements. City of Duluth UDC
8-6
(b) Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of this Code Division, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property.
(c) Variances will be considered only in the following cases:
(1) The applicant provides evidence that impacts to the buffer have been avoided or minimized to the fullest extent practicable; and
(2) The project involves the construction or repair of a structure that, by its nature, must be located within the buffer. Such structures include dams and detention/retention ponds; or
(3) Paved recreational foot trails and viewing areas, providing that impacts to the buffer are minimal; or
(4) The proposed land disturbing activity within the buffer will receive a permit from the United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) under Section 404 of the federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendment of 1972, 33 U.S.C. Section 1344, and the Corps of Engineers has received a mitigation plan to be implemented as a condition of such a permit. In addition, land disturbing activities in the buffer that are outside the USACEs jurisdiction must be mit-igated; or
(5) The buffer intrusion is mitigated using the procedure established in the Gwinnett County Stormwater Design Manual; or
(6) A valid and complete application for rezoning of the property is submitted prior to the effec-tive date of this Code Division and approval of the rezoning by the Board of Commissioners occurs after the effective date of this Code Division application, and the variance request is consistent with the intent of this Code Division factoring into account the property owner's reliance on standards in effect at the time of the rezoning.
(d) At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information:
(1) A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey;
(2) A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical char-acteristics of the property;
(3) A dated site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated;
(4) Documentation that impacts to the buffer have been avoided or minimized to the fullest extent practicable;
(5) A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion;
(6) A stormwater management site plan, if applicable;
(7) Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed;
(8) A description of the project, with details of the buffer disturbance, including estimated length of time for the disturbance and justification for why the disturbance is necessary;
City of Duluth UDC Section 804 Special Buffer Regulations and Requirements.
8-7
(9) Any other reasonable information related to the project that the Planning and Development Department may deem necessary to effectively evaluate the variance request;
(10) A copy of the permit application, supporting documentation, and proposed mitigation plan as submitted to the United States Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendment of 1972, 33 U.S.C. Section 1344, if applicable;
(11) A copy of the permit application, supporting documentation, and proposed mitigation plan as submitted to the Georgia Environmental Protection Division for a variance from the state waters buffer; and
(12) A buffer mitigation plan in accordance with the procedure outlined in the Gwinnett County Storm Water Design Manual.
(e) The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance:
(1) The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property;
(2) The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries as deter-mined from field inspection;
(3) The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; and,
(4) Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion;
(5) The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance;
(6) Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the envi-ronment;
(7) The value of mitigation activities as calculated in accordance with the Gwinnett County Stormwater Design Manual.
Section 804. Special Buffer Regulations and Requirements.
804.01 Special Provisions.
(a) In addition to the provisions of this Code Division, the following requirements shall apply. Which-ever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence.
(b) The grandfather provisions and variances sections of this Code Division do not apply to this Sec-tion 804. However, applicable exemptions are given below.
804.02 Chattahoochee Corridor.
(a) Vegetation shall be left in its natural state, and impervious surfaces shall not be permitted, for a distance of 50 horizontal feet as measured from both banks of the Chattahoochee River and its impoundments, and for a distance of 35 horizontal feet as measured from both banks of all other flowing stream channels within the Chattahoochee Corridor, except for footpaths, designated public access areas, river or stream crossings by transportation facilities, public water supply in-take structures, public wastewater treatment plant outfalls and utility line crossings.
(b) Subject and in addition to the restrictions set forth in 804.02(a) herein, impervious surfaces and structures shall not be permitted within, on or over any land that is 150 horizontal feet or less from either bank of the Chattahoochee River and its impoundments, except for footpaths, desig-
Section 804 Special Buffer Regulations and Requirements. City of Duluth UDC
8-8
nated public access areas, river or stream crossings by transportation facilities, public water sup-ply intake structures, public wastewater treatment plant outfalls and water supply and sewerage manholes that are designed and built at grade, unless it is determined by the Atlanta Regional Commission, after consideration by a Committee of the Atlanta Regional Commission as author-ized by the Atlanta Regional Commission, and based in part upon the affidavit of, and substantial evidence submitted by, a registered professional engineer qualified in water quality and hydrol-ogy that the impervious surfaces and structures will not be harmful to the water and land re-sources of the Chattahoochee Corridor, will not significantly impede the natural flow of flood wa-ters and will not result in significant land erosion, stream bank erosion, siltation or water pollu-tion.
(c) Not including the impervious surfaces and structures that are excepted above, any impervious surfaces or structures that, in the judgment of the Atlanta Regional Commission, must legally be permitted within, on or over any land that is 150 horizontal feet or less from either bank of the Chattahoochee River and its impoundments on lots of record as of March 16, 1973 for the portion of the Chattahoochee Corridor between Buford Dam and the downstream limit of the City of At-lanta water intake, which were designated by the local governing authority for a single-family detached residential use, shall meet the following standard:
(1) For each 1-foot incursion into the 150-foot impervious surface buffer, 1 foot of natural veg-etation shall be added to the 50-foot natural vegetation buffer.
(2) In the event that the Atlanta Regional Commission determines that legal, physical, biological or hydrologic conditions on the site prevent the addition of all the required natural vegeta-tion, substitute measures satisfactory to the Atlanta Regional Commission shall be taken to provide an equivalent level of land and water resource protection.
(d) See also the Procedures and Permits Article for applicable standards required under the Metro-politan River Protection Act.
804.03 Exemptions.
The following specific activities are exempt from Section 804.02; however, any activity within a state waters buffer must meet State requirements:
(a) Pervious surface multi-use trails no more than 12 feet in width and activities related to construc-tion of a multi-use trail no more than 12 feet width, provided the trail complies with the require-ments of the Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control section of Article 10 of this Code.
(b) Detention/water quality ponds provided said ponds comply with all other local, state and federal requirements including but limited to the Flood Damage Prevention section of this Article, the Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control section of Article 10 of this Development Code, and U.S Army Corp of Engineers wetlands regulations in this Article.
(c) Additional Information Requirements for Development on Buffer Zone Properties.
Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following:
(1) A Site Plan Showing:
a. The location of all streams on the property;
b. Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property;
c. Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than 2-foot contour intervals;
City of Duluth UDC Section 805 Responsibility.
8-9
d. Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and,
e. Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed im-pervious cover within the setback;
(2) A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and, (3) Any other documentation that the Planning and Development Department may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the buffer zone requirements are addressed in the approval process.
(d) All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval.
Section 805. Responsibility.
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this Code Division shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon City of Duluth, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property.
Section 806. Inspection. (a) The Planning and Development Department may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection fol-lowing completion of the work. The permittee shall assist representatives of either department in making such inspections. The Director of the Planning and Development Department shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as he or she may reasonably deem necessary to carry out the duties as prescribed in this Code Division, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area.
(b) No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties.
Section 807. Violations, Enforcement and Penalties.
Any action or inaction that violates the provisions of this Code Division or the requirements of an approved plan or permit shall be subject to the enforcement actions or penalties outlined herein. Any such action or inaction that is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and also may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the enforcement actions or penalties described herein shall not prevent such equitable relief.
807.01 Enforcement Procedures.
The following are the enforcement procedures authorized by Code Division. In the event the owner or responsible person fails to correct the violations after the deadline contained in the Notice of Violation, the Director of the Planning and Development Department is authorized to take or impose any one or more of the additional actions contained herein.
(a) Notices of Violation.
Enforcement shall begin with the issuance of a written Notice of Violation to the owner or respon-sible person by the Director of the Planning and Development Department. The notice may be
Section 807 Violations, Enforcement and Penalties. City of Duluth UDC
8-10
delivered personally or sent by first class mail. The Notice of Violation shall contain at least the following information:
(1) The name and address of the owner or responsible person;
(2) The location or address of the site upon which the violation is occurring;
(3) Description of the nature of the violation;
(4) Description of the remedial actions or measures necessary to bring an action or inaction into compliance with a permit, approved plan or this Code Division;
(5) The deadline or completion date of any such remedial actions or measures; and
(6) A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the owner or responsi-ble person to whom the Notice of Violation is directed.
(b) Stop Work Orders. The Director of the Planning and Development Department is authorized to issue Stop Work Or-ders to an owner or responsible person. Stop Work Orders are effective immediately and shall remain in effect until the necessary corrective actions or remedial measures as set forth in the Notice of Violation have occurred. Stop Work Orders may be withdrawn or modified by the Direc-tor of the Planning and Development Department or the directors designee in order to enable an owner or responsible person to take necessary remedial actions or measures to correct the viola-tions.
(c) Refusal to Issue Certificates of Occupancy or Completion. The Director of the Planning and Development Department is authorized to refuse to issue Certif-icates of Occupancy or Completion for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on a site until the owner or responsible person has taken the remedial actions or measures as set forth in the Notice of Violation or has otherwise corrected the violations de-scribed therein.
(d) Suspension, Revocation, or Modification of Permit. The Director of the Planning and Development Department is authorized to suspend, revoke or modify a permit that was issued authorizing land disturbing activities or development. The Direc-tor of the Planning and Development Department is authorized to reinstate a suspended, revoked or modified permit after the owner or responsible person has taken the remedial actions or measures stated in the Notice of Violation or has otherwise corrected the violations described therein. The Director of the Planning and Development Department is also authorized to reinstate such permit, which may include conditions as the Director of the Planning and Development De-partment may deem necessary, to enable the owner or responsible person to take the necessary remedial actions or measures to correct the violations.
(e) Refusal to Approve Final Subdivision Plats. The Director of the Planning and Development Department is authorized to refuse to approve Final Plats until the owner or responsible person has taken the remedial actions or measures set forth in the Notice of Violation or has otherwise corrected the violations described therein.
City of Duluth UDC Section 808 Administrative Appeal and Judicial Review.
8-11
(f) Issuance of Citations or Summons to Court. The Director of the Planning and Development Department is authorized to issue a citation or summons to the owner or responsible person requiring such person to appear in a court of com-petent jurisdiction to answer charges for violations of this Code Division.
807.02 Legal Penalties and/or Remedies.
(a) Fine and/or Sentence.
Any person convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this Code Division shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the City and shall be punished either by a fine not less than $100 per day and not greater than $1,000 per day, or by a sentence of imprisonment not to exceed 60 days in jail, or both a fine and jail or work alternate. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
(b) Other Legal Remedies.
In any case in which a violation of this Code Division has occurred, the City, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may petition for a restraining order, injunction, abatement, or take any other appropriate legal action or proceeding through a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate such unlawful use or activity.
807.03 Petition.
In any case in which any land is, or is proposed to be, used or activities are undertaken in violation of this Code Division or any amendment thereto adopted by the Mayor and City Council in addition to other remedies provided by law, may petition for a restraining order, injunction, abatement, or take any other appropriate legal action or proceeding through a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate such unlawful use or activity.
Section 808. Administrative Appeal and Judicial Review.
808.01 Administration. This Code Division shall be administered, interpreted, and enforced by the Director of the Planning and Development Department.
808.02 Administrative Appeal. Appeals of the interpretation by Director of the Department of the Planning and Development Depart-ment shall first be submitted in writing (on a form provided by the Planning and Development Depart-ment) to either director who shall review the request in a timely manner and receive comments from other affected departments. Such appeal shall be made within 15 days after the decision to be ap-pealed. The appeal thereupon shall be forwarded to the Board of Appeals for action in their normal course of business.
808.03 Judicial Review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the Director of the Department of Planning and Devel-opment Department, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal certi-orari to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County.
Section 809 Regulations Adopted by Reference. City of Duluth UDC
8-12
DIVISION II. CHATTAHOOCHEE RIVER TRIBUTARY PROTECTION.
Section 809. Regulations Adopted by Reference.
The Chattahoochee River Tributary Protection Ordinance adopted by the City on April 8, 1985, is incorporated herein by reference as if fully set out in this Code. Copies of such ordinance are on file and available for inspection in the offices of the City.
DIVISION III. WETLANDS PROTECTION.
Section 810. Purpose.
(a) The wetlands in the City of Duluth are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soils limitations. In their natural state, wet-lands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource edu-cation; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise man-agement of forested wetlands is essential to the economic wellbeing of many communities within the State of Georgia.
(b) Nationally, a considerable number of these important natural resources have been lost or im-paired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare.
(c) The purpose of this Code Division is to promote wetlands protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as deter-mined through a permitting process.
Section 811. Definitions Relating to Wetlands Protection.
Wetlands. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of veg-etation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation.
Generalized Wetlands Map. The current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory maps for the City of Duluth, Georgia.
Jurisdictional Wetland. An area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
Jurisdictional Wetland Determination. A delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C.  1344, as amended.
Regulated Activity. Any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the dis-charge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S. excepting those activities exempted in Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act.
City of Duluth UDC Section 812 Establishment of the Wetlands Protection District.
8-13
Section 812. Establishment of the Wetlands Protection District.
(a) The Wetlands Protection District is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Duluth, Georgia that are mapped as wetland areas by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory Maps. This map shall be referred to as the Gen-eralized Wetlands Map and is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Arti-cle, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto.
(b) The Generalized Wetlands Map does not represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within City of Duluth and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this Code Division does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements.
Section 813. Protection Criteria.
Requirement for Local Permit or Permission. No regulated activity will be permitted within the Wetlands Protec-tion District without written permission or a permit from the City of Duluth. If the area proposed for development is located within 50 feet of a Wetlands Protection District boundary, as determined by the City of Duluth Planning and Development Director using the Generalized Wetlands Map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the Corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site, the local permit or permission will not be granted until a Section 404 Permit or Letter of Permission is issued.
Section 814. Allowed Uses.
The following uses shall be allowed as of right within the Wetlands Protection District to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein. [The ac-tivities listed in this section are exempted from Section 404 regulations provided they do not have impacts on a navigable waterway that would necessitate acquisition of an individual 404 permit. How-ever, under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, a permit may be required in some circumstances.]
(a) Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of Georgia or of the Unites States in such a way that would require an individual 404 Permit.
(b) Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing.
(c) Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Geor-gia Forestry Commission and as specified in Section 404 of the Clean Water Act.
(d) The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture.
(e) The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural Best Management Practices are followed.
(f) Education, scientific research, and nature trails.
Section 815. Prohibited Uses.
The following uses are not permitted within the Wetlands Protection District.
(a) Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants; and
Section 816 Administration and Enforcement Procedures. City of Duluth UDC
8-14
(b) Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills.
Section 816. Administration and Enforcement Procedures.
816.01 Site Plans.
Application for a local development permit within the Groundwater Recharge Areas shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of 1 inch = 50 feet, with the following information:
(a) A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill in-volved, cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross-sectional drawings.
(b) A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant.
(c) Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 50 feet.
(d) The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body.
(e) Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 50 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to 2%.
(f) Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials.
(g) All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology.
816.02 Activities to Comply with Site Plan.
All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the de-velopment, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the Director of the Planning and Development Department. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other in-frastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement.
816.03 Exemptions to Site Plan Requirements.
The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans.
(a) Single-family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels.
(b) Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development.
(c) Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single family residences.
816.04 Review Procedures. The application shall be made to the City of Duluth Planning and Development Department and will be reviewed within 15 days. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by City of Duluth Planning and Development Department. Filing fees up to the larger of $500 or $1,000 per acre may be required to evaluate the application. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants
City of Duluth UDC Section 816 Administration and Enforcement Procedures.
8-15
who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation, and wetland boundary de-terminations, as deemed necessary by the Director of the Planning and Development Department. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions, or disap-proval) by the Director of the Planning and Development Department. The applicant will receive writ-ten notification of the findings of the Director of the Planning and Development Department. If the review process is not completed within 30 days, the application is considered to be approved. Deci-sions of the Director of the Planning and Development Department may be appealed to the City Coun-cil.
816.05 Duration of Permit Validity.
(a) If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 6 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire.
(b) If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 6 months after the date that work ceased.
(c) Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the Director of the Planning and Development Department.
816.06 Penalties.
(a) When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this section, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the Director of the Planning and Development Department.
(b) When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this section, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the Director of the Planning and Development Department. (c) If the Director of the Planning and Development Department discovers a violation of this Code Division that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended, the City Council shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the landowner.
816.07 Suspension, Revocation. The Director of the Planning and Development Department may suspend or revoke a permit if he finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The Director of the Planning and Development Department shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located.
816.08 Judicial Review.
(a) Jurisdiction.
All final decisions of the City of Duluth concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit shall be reviewable in the Gwinnett County Superior Court.
(b) Alternative Actions.
Section 817 Purpose. City of Duluth UDC
8-16
Based on these proceedings and the decision of the Gwinnett County Superior Court, the City Council or its designee may, within the time specified by the Gwinnett County Superior Court, elect to:
(1) Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land;
(2) Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or
(3) Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the City Council.
816.09 Amendments.
These regulations and the Pollution Susceptibility Map may from time to time be amended in accord-ance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information becomes avail-able.
DIVISION IV. WATER SUPPLY WATERSHEDS.
Section 817. Purpose.
(a) In order to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the City of Duluth and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be assured. The ability of natural systems to filter stormwater runoff can be threat-ened by unrestricted development. Land-disturbing activities associated with development can increase erosion and sedimentation that threatens the storage capacity of reservoirs. In addition, stormwater runoff, particularly from impervious surfaces, can introduce toxins, nutrients and sed-iment into drinking water supplies, making water treatment more complicated and expensive and rendering waters resources unusable for recreation. Industrial land uses that involve the manu-facture, use, transport, and storage of hazardous or toxic waste materials result in the potential risk of contamination of nearby public drinking water supplies.
(b) The purpose of this Code Division is to establish measures to protect the quality and quantity of the present and future water supply of the City of Duluth; to minimize the transport of pollutants and sediment to the water supply; and to maintain the yield of the water supply watershed. This Code Division shall apply to all existing and proposed water supply watersheds within the City of Duluth.
Section 818. Definitions Related to Water Supply Watersheds.
Buffer. A natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances, such as trails and picnic areas, located adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed.
Corridor. All land within the buffer areas established adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed and within other setback areas specified in this Code Division.
Impervious Surface. A man-made structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of storm water into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, or patios.
Large Water Supply Watershed. A watershed containing 100 square miles or more of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake.
City of Duluth UDC Section 819 Establishment of a Water Supply Watershed District.
8-17
Perennial Stream. A stream that flows throughout the whole year as indicated on a USGS Quad map.
Utility. Public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government.
Water Supply Watershed. The area of land upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake.
Section 819. Establishment of a Water Supply Watershed District.
(a) The Chattahoochee Water Supply Watershed District is hereby designated and shall comprise the land that drains to the Chattahoochee River. The boundaries of these overlays are defined by the ridgelines of the respective watershed and the boundary of a radius of 7 miles upstream of the respective public water supply intakes or reservoirs. This overlay shall be further delineated and defined on the Water Supply Watershed Protection District Overlay Map of the City of Duluth. The Map is hereby incorporated into and made a part of this Code Division by reference.
(b) The following water supply watershed district is hereby defined and the boundaries shall be iden-tified on the Water Supply Watershed District Overlay Map.
(c) The Chattahoochee River is a large water supply watershed. Intakes for the Atlanta-Fulton Water Resources and the DeKalb County Water System are located on this river within a 7-mile radius upstream from the City of Duluth. This water supply watershed does not contain a reservoir within the City of Duluth.
Section 820. Protection Criteria.
820.01 Regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to the Chattahoochee River Water Supply Watershed identified on the Adopted Map as a large water supply watershed without a reservoir within the City of Duluth.
(a) New facilities, located within 7 miles of a water supply intake or water supply reservoir, which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements or the requirements of the Standard Fire Prevention Code.
(b) The corridors of all perennial streams outside a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake must be protected by the following criteria:
(1) A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 50 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks.
(2) No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 75-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks.
(3) Septic tanks and septic tank drain fields are prohibited in the 75-foot setback area as de-scribed in subparagraph 820.01(b)(2) above.
(c) The impervious surface area of any development, including all public and private structures, util-ities, or facilities, of the entire water supply watershed shall be limited to 25%, or existing use, whichever is greater.
Section 821 Administration and Enforcement. City of Duluth UDC
8-18
(d) New facilities which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements or the require-ments of the Standard Fire Prevention Code.
820.02 Exemptions.
The following uses shall be exempted:
(a) Land uses existing prior to the adoption of this Code Division.
(b) Mining activities permitted by the Department of Natural Resources under the Surface Mining Act.
(c) Utilities from the stream corridor buffer and setback area provisions in accordance with the fol-lowing conditions if the utilities to be located in the buffer or setback areas cannot feasibly be located outside these areas:
(1) The utilities shall be located as far from the stream bank as reasonably possible.
(2) The installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such to protect the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as best as reasonably possible.
(3) The utilities shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream.
(d) Specific forestry and agricultural activities in the stream corridor buffer and setback areas in ac-cordance with the following conditions.
(1) The activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission or the Georgia Department of Agriculture.
(2) The activity shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream.
Section 821. Administration and Enforcement.
821.01 Site Plans.
Application for a local development permit within the Chattahoochee River Water Supply Watershed shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of 1 inch = 50 feet, with the following information:
(a) A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill in-volved, cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross-sectional drawings.
(b) A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant.
(c) Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 50 feet.
(d) The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body.
(e) Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 50 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to 2%.
(f) Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials.
City of Duluth UDC Section 821 Administration and Enforcement.
8-19
(g) All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology.
821.02 Activities to Comply with Site Plan.
All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the de-velopment, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the Director of the Planning and Development Department. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other in-frastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement.
821.03 Exemptions to Site Plan Requirements.
The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans.
(a) Single family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels.
(b) Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development.
(c) Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single family residences.
821.04 Review Procedures. The application shall be made to the City of Duluth Planning and Development Department and will be reviewed within 15 days. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by City of Duluth Planning and Development Department. Filing fees up to the larger of $500 or $1,000 per acre may be required to evaluate the application. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation, and wetland boundary de-terminations, as deemed necessary by the Director of the Planning and Development Department. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions, or disap-proval) by the Director of the Planning and Development Department. The applicant will receive writ-ten notification of the findings of the Director of the Planning and Development Department. If the review process is not completed within 30 days, the application is considered to be approved. Deci-sions of the Director of the Planning and Development Department may be appealed to the City Coun-cil.
821.05 Duration of Permit Validity.
(a) If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 6 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire.
(b) If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 6 months after the date that work ceased.
(c) Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the Director of the Planning and Development Department.
821.06 Penalties.
(a) When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this section, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the Director of License and Permits and/or the Director of the Planning and Development Department.
(b) When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this section, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore
Section 822 Purpose. City of Duluth UDC
8-20
vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the Director of the Planning and Development Department. (c) If the Director of the Planning and Development Department discovers a violation of this Code Division that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended, the City Council shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the landowner.
821.07 Suspension, Revocation. The Director of the Planning and Development Department may suspend or revoke a permit if he finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The Director of the Planning and Development Department shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located.
821.08 Judicial Review.
(a) Jurisdiction.
All final decisions of the City of Duluth concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit shall be reviewable in the Gwinnett County Superior Court.
(b) Alternative Actions.
Based on these proceedings and the decision of the Gwinnett County Superior Court, the City Council or its designee may, within the time specified by the Gwinnett County Superior Court, elect to:
(1) Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land;
(2) Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or
(3) Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the City Council.
DIVISION V. GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREAS.
Section 822. Purpose.
(a) In order to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the City of Duluth and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be ensured. For this reason, it is necessary to protect the subsurface water re-sources that City of Duluth and surrounding communities rely on as sources of public water.
(b) Groundwater resources are contained within underground reservoirs known as aquifers. These aquifers are zones of rock beneath the earths surface capable of containing or producing water from a well. They occupy vast regions of the subsurface and are replenished by infiltration of sur-face water runoff in zones of the surface known as groundwater recharge areas. Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when unrestricted development occurs within significant ground-water recharge areas. It is, therefore, necessary to manage land use within groundwater recharge areas in order to ensure that pollution threats are minimized.
City of Duluth UDC Section 823 Definitions Related to Groundwater Recharge Areas.
8-21
Section 823. Definitions Related to Groundwater Recharge Areas.
Aquifer. Any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or pro-ducing water from a well.
Drastic. The standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeo-logic settings described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600-2-87-035. (Note: the DRASTIC methodology is the most widely used technique for evaluating pollution susceptibility).
Pollution Susceptibility. The relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, dis-charges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities in the recharge area.
Pollution Susceptibility Map. The relative vulnerability to pollution prepared by the Department of Natural Resources, using the DRASTIC methodology. (Georgia Department of Natural Resources Hy-drologic Atlas 20: Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia.)
Recharge Area. Any portion of the earths surface, where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer.
Significant Recharge Areas. Those areas mapped by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition.
Section 824. Establishment of the Groundwater Recharge Area Protection District.
(a) The Groundwater Recharge Area District is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Duluth, Georgia that are mapped as significant recharge areas by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition. Said map is hereby adopted and made a part of this Article.
(b) Determination of Pollution Susceptibility.
(1) Each recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based on the Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map, Hydrologic Atlas 20, 1992 edition. Said map is hereby adopted and made a part of this Code Division. (2) A copy of both maps can be found in the offices of the Planning and Development Depart-ment.
Section 825. Protection Criteria.
(a) No construction may proceed on a building or manufactured home to be served by a septic tank unless the Gwinnett County Environment Health Department first approves the proposed septic tank installations as meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Human Resources Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (hereinafter DHR Manual), and Section 825(b) and Section 825(c), below.
(b) New homes served by a septic tank/drain field system shall be on lots having minimum size limi-tations as follows, based on application of Table MT-1 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-1). The minimums set forth in Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors, as set forth in Sections A-F of the DHR Manual.
(1) 150% of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area;
Section 826 Exemptions. City of Duluth UDC
8-22
(2) 125% of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area;
(3) 110% of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area.
(c) New manufactured home parks served by septic tank/drain field systems shall have lots or spaces having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-2 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-2). The minimums set forth in Table MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors, as set forth in Sections A-F of the DHR Manual.
(1) 150% of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area;
(2) 125% of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area;
(3) 110% of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area.
(d) New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within a high pollution sus-ceptibility area; a medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed 15 acre-feet; or a low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50 acre-feet. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of com-pacted clay having a thickness of one-foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 x 10-7cm/sec or other criteria established by the Natural Resource and Conservation Service.
(e) New above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of 660 gal-lons, shall have secondary containment for 110% of the volume of such tanks or 110% of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal requirements.
(f) New facilities that handle hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and local fire code requirements.
(g) Permanent storm water infiltration basins shall not be constructed in areas having high pollution susceptibility.
Section 826. Exemptions.
Any lot of record approved prior to the adoption of this Code Division is exempt from the minimum lot size re-quirements contained in Section 825(b) and Section 825(c) of this Article.
Section 827. Administration and Enforcement Procedures.
827.01 Site Plans.
Application for a local development permit within the jurisdiction of the City of Duluth shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of 1 inch = 50 feet, with the following information:
(a) A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill in-volved, cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross-sectional drawings.
City of Duluth UDC Section 827 Administration and Enforcement Procedures.
8-23
(b) A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant.
(c) Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 50 feet.
(d) The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body.
(e) Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 50 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to 2%.
(f) Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials.
(g) All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology.
827.02 Activities to Comply with Site Plan.
All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform to the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of storm water runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the Director of the Planning and Development Department. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other in-frastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement.
827.03 Exemptions to Site Plan Requirements.
The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans.
(a) Single family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels.
(b) Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development.
(c) Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single family residences.
827.04 Review Procedures. The application shall be made to the City of Duluth Planning and Development Department and will be reviewed within 15 days. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by City of Duluth Planning and Development Department. Filing fees up to the largest of $500 or $1,000 per acre may be required to evaluate the application. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation, and wetland boundary de-terminations, as deemed necessary by the Director of the Planning and Development Department. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions, or disap-proval) by the Director of the Planning and Development Department. The applicant will receive writ-ten notification of the findings of the Director of the Planning and Development Department. If the review process is not completed within 30 days, the application is considered to be approved. Deci-sions of the Director of the Planning and Development Department may be appealed to the City Coun-cil.
827.05 Duration of Permit Validity.
(a) If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 6 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire.
Section 827 Administration and Enforcement Procedures. City of Duluth UDC
8-24
(b) If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 6 months after the date that work ceased.
(c) Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the Director of the Planning and Development Department.
827.06 Penalties.
(a) When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this section, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the Director of the Planning and Development Department.
(b) When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this section, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the Director of the Planning and Development Department. (c) If the Director of the Planning and Development Department discovers a violation of this Code Division that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended, the City Council shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the landowner.
827.07 Suspension, Revocation. The Director of the Planning and Development Department may suspend or revoke a permit if he finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The Director of the Planning and Development Department shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located.
827.08 Judicial Review.
(a) Jurisdiction.
All final decisions of the City of Duluth concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit shall be reviewable in the Gwinnett County Superior Court.
(b) Alternative Actions.
Based on these proceedings and the decision of the City of Gwinnett County Superior Court, the City Council or its designee may, within the time specified by the Gwinnett County Superior Court, elect to:
(1) Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land;
(2) Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or
(3) Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the City Council.
(c) Amendments.
City of Duluth UDC Section 828 Findings.
8-25
These regulations and the Pollution Susceptibility Map may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information becomes available.
DIVISION VI. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Section 828. Findings. It is hereby determined that: (a) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. (b) Flood hazard areas can serve important stormwater management, water quality, streambank pro-tection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological purposes when perma-nently protected as undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas. (c) Effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can: (1) Protect human life and health; (2) Minimize damage to private property; (3) Minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; and (4) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flood-ing and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. (d) Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A.  36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city does ordain this Code Division and establishes this set of floodplain management and flood hazard reduction pol-icies for the purpose of regulating the use of flood hazard areas. It is determined that the regula-tion of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property.
Section 829. Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this Division VI of this Article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood condi-tions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and en-vironmental protection by provisions designed to: (a) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; (b) Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; (c) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion;
Section 830 Definitions Related to Floodplain Management. City of Duluth UDC
8-26
(d) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; (e) Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and, (f) Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor pro-tection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas.
Section 830. Definitions Related to Floodplain Management.
Addition (to an existing building). Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. Appeal. A request for a review of the Director of the Planning and Development Departments inter-pretation of any provision of this Code Division.
Area of future-conditions flood hazard. The land area that would be inundated by the 1%-annual-chance flood based on future-conditions hydrology (100-year future-conditions flood).
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from 1 to 3 feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evi-dent.
Area of special flood hazard. The land subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the future-conditions flood elevation, and all other flood prone areas as referenced in Section 833. All streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated.
Accessory Structure or Facility. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the primary structure.
Base Flood. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the one hundred-year flood.
Base Flood Elevation or BFE. The highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood.
Basement. That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Building. Any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage.
Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated Building. A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event.
City of Duluth UDC Section 830 Definitions Related to Floodplain Management.
8-27
Existing Construction. Any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before Decem-ber 17, 1975.
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before December 17, 1975.
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be af-fixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Flood or Flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Hazard Boundary Map or FHBM. An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insur-ance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A.
Flood Insurance Rate Map or FIRM. An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study or FIS. The official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood.
Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to flooding.
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
Floodway or Regulatory Floodway. The channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas of the floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumu-latively increasing the base flood elevation more than 1 foot.
Functionally Dependent Use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water.
Future Conditions Flood. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood.
Future-Conditions Flood Elevation. The flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood eleva-tion. The future-conditions flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood.
Future-Conditions Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood.
Section 830 Definitions Related to Floodplain Management. City of Duluth UDC
8-28
Future-Conditions Hydrology. The flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projec-tions, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or pro-jected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation.
Highest Adjacent Grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building.
Historic Structure. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meet-ing the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the inte-rior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by com-munities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
(5) By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior, or
(6) Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs.
Lowest Floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Article.
Manufactured Home. A building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.
Mean Sea Level. The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this Article the term is synony-mous with national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) and/or the North American vertical datum (NAVD) of 1988.
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). As corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a refer-ence for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.
New Construction. Any structure (see definition in this Section) for which the "start of construction" commenced after December 17, 1975 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure.
New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after December 17, 1975.
City of Duluth UDC Section 830 Definitions Related to Floodplain Management.
8-29
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. A vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.
Owner. The legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. Permit. The permit issued by the Planning and Development Department to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity.
Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Repetitive Loss. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals, or exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Site. The parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located.
Start of Construction. The date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent con-struction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it in-clude the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, foot-ings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occu-pied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are not exempt from any Article requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank.
Subdivision. The division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway.
Substantial Damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the struc-ture before the damage occurred.
Section 831 Applicability. City of Duluth UDC
8-30
Substantial Improvement. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means:
(1) The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or
(2) In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.
(3) This term includes structures, which have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage re-gardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceil-ing, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project.
Substantially Improved. Existing manufactured home park or subdivision is where the repair, recon-struction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.
Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this Article which permits construction in a man-ner otherwise prohibited by this Article.
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certifi-cate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. Section 831. Applicability. Division VI of this Article shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the city. Section 832. Designation and Duties of Division Administrator. 832.01 Designation of Division Administrator. The Planning and Development Director is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this Code Division. 832.02 Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator Duties of the Planning and Development Director shall include, but shall not be limited to: (a) Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this Article have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; (b) Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334, be provided and maintained on file;
City of Duluth UDC Section 833 Basis for Area of Special Flood Hazard-Flood Area Maps and Studies.
8-31
(c) When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the Director of the Planning and Development Department shall require the applicant to obtain, review and rea-sonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of Section 836 and Section 837; (d) Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; (e) Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed; (f) When flood-proofing is utilized for a non-residential structure, the Director of the Planning and Development Department shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered profes-sional engineer or architect; (g) Notify affected adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); (h) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Director of the Planning and Development Department shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this Article. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; and, (i) All records pertaining to the provisions of this Article shall be maintained in the office of the Di-rector of the Planning and Development Department and shall be open for public inspection (j) Coordinate all FIRM revisions with GA DNR and FEMA; and. (k) Review variance applications and make recommendations to the (appointed board). Section 833. Basis for Area of Special Flood Hazard-Flood Area Maps and Studies. For the purposes of this Code Division, the following are adopted by reference: (a) The flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 29, 2006, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference. For those land areas acquired by the City through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for Gwinnett County, dated September 29, 2006, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference. (b) Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or de-lineation of the one hundred-year floodplain and flood-prone areas include: (1) Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; or (2) Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the Planning and Development Department.
Section 834 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. City of Duluth UDC
8-32
(c) Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood ele-vation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas include: (1) Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; or (2) Any future-conditions flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the state, which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the Duluth Planning and Development Department. (d) The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the office of the Planning and Development Department. Section 834. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this Article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be in-creased by manmade or natural causes. This Article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Article or any administrative decision lawfully made there under.
Section 835. Permit Procedures and Requirements 835.01 Permit Application Requirements. (a) No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this Code Section prior to com-mencing the proposed activity. (b) Unless specifically excluded by this Article, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the Duluth Planning and Development Department a permit application on a form provided by the Planning and Development Department for that purpose. (c) No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this Code Division. 835.02 Floodplain Management Plan Requirements. (a) An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard located on the site will be required to include a floodplain management / flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: (1) Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: a. Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; b. For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and twenty-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or 1-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; c. Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; d. Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities;
City of Duluth UDC Section 835 Permit Procedures and Requirements
8-33
e. Proposed grading plan; f. Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; g. Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; h. If applicable, the location of the floodway; and i. Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. (2) Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: a. Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; c. Certification that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure meets the crite-ria in 837.02(b); d. For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 837.01(e). e. Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). (3) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; (4) Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre-and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood eleva-tions, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; (5) Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development in-cluding but not limited to permits required by Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; and (6) All appropriate certifications required under this Code Division. (b) The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 835.03 Construction Stage Submittal Requirements. (a) Certification Required. (1) For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain manage-ment/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the Director of the Planning and Development Department a certified as-built elevation certificate or flood-proofing certificate for nonresidential construction including the lowest floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood-proofing is completed.
Section 836 Standards for Development. City of Duluth UDC
8-34
(2) A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. (3) Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. (4) When flood-proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, required certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and cer-tified by same using the FEMA Floodproofing Certificate. This certification shall also include the design and operation/maintenance plan to assure continued viability of the floodproof-ing measures. (5) Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. (b) Review of Certification Data. (1) The Director of Planning and Development Department shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. (2) Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. (3) Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. Section 836. Standards for Development. 836.01 Definition of Floodplain Boundaries. (a) Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations when-ever available. (b) For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the Planning and Development Department. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the Planning and Development Department, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the Planning and Development Department. 836.02 Definition of Floodway Boundaries. (a) The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. (b) For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the Planning and Development Department. (c) If floodway data is not available from the Planning and Development Department, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the Planning and Development Department. 836.03 General Standards. (a) No development shall be allowed within any Area of Special Flood Hazard or any future-conditions floodplain that could result in any of the following: (1) Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot;
City of Duluth UDC Section 836 Standards for Development.
8-35
(2) Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; (3) Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or, (4) Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. (b) Any development within any Area of Special Flood Hazard or any future-conditions floodplain al-lowed under Subsection (a) above shall also meet the following conditions: (1) Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table ele-vation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such exca-vation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; (2) Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2%; (3) Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; (4) Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow charac-teristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of 836.04. (5) Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from flood waters; and (6) Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a condi-tional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the Planning and Development Department using the community consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built sur-veys for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 836.04 Engineering Study Requirements for Floodplain Encroachments. An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of 836.04 apply. This study shall be prepared by a currently regis-tered professional engineer in the State of Georgia and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the Planning and Development Department prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include:
Section 837 Provisions for Flood Damage Reduction. City of Duluth UDC
8-36
(a) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; (b) Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the Planning and De-velopment Department. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS re-sults and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; (c) Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing ex-isting and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-condi-tions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; (d) The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 836.05 Floodway Encroachments. Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, flood-ways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore the following provisions shall apply: (a) Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in (b) below. (b) Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and, (c) If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroach-ment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the Planning and Development De-partment until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by Planning and Development Department. 836.06 Maintenance Requirements. (a) The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. (b) The Planning and Development Department may direct the property owner (at no cost to city) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not per-formed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the Planning and Development Department.
Section 837. Provisions for Flood Damage Reduction. 837.01 General Standards. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions apply:
City of Duluth UDC Section 837 Provisions for Flood Damage Reduction.
8-37
(a) New construction of principal buildings (residential or non-residential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all re-quirements of Sections 836.03, 836.04 and 836.05 have been met; (b) New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; (c) New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; (d) New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; (e) Elevated Buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood resistant enclosure. The en-closure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. (1) Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engi-neer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: a. Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than 1 square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above grade; and, c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. (2) So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this Article, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equip-ment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and, (3) The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. (f) All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located 3 feet above the base flood elevation or 1 foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during con-ditions of flooding; (g) Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state require-ments for resisting wind forces; (h) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; (i) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infil-tration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; (j) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding; and,
Section 837 Provisions for Flood Damage Reduction. City of Duluth UDC
8-38
(k) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of Code Division, shall be undertaken only if the non- conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. (l) If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevation cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence. (m) All proposed development shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facili-ties per the requirements of (jurisdiction) to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (n) Other public utilities such as gas and electric systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or public safety hazards from them, during flooding. (o) When only a portion of a proposed structure is located within a flood zone or the future conditions floodplain, the entire structure shall meet the requirements of this Code Division. (p) Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, shall be reasonably safe from flooding: (1) All such proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area; (2) All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and (3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 837.02 Building Standards for Structures and Buildings within the Future-Conditions Floodplain. The following provisions, in addition to those in Section 837.01, shall apply: (a) Residential Buildings.
(1) New Construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all require-ments of Sections 836.03, 836.04 and 836.05 have been met. If all of the requirements of Sections 836.03, 836.04 and 836.05 have been met, all new construction shall have the low-est floor, including basement, elevated no lower than 3 feet above the base flood elevation or 1 foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foun-dation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 837.01(e).
(2) Substantial Improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal structure or manufac-tured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than 3 feet above the base flood elevation or 1 foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, which-ever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, open-ings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 837.01(e). (b) Nonresidential Buildings.
(1) New Construction. New construction of principal non-residential structures shall not be al-lowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of Sections
City of Duluth UDC Section 837 Provisions for Flood Damage Reduction.
8-39
836.03, 836.04 and 836.05 have been met. If all of the requirements of Sections 836.03, 836.04 and 836.05 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than 1 foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perim-eter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of 837.01(e)(1). New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of Sections 836.03, 836.04 and 836.05 have been met. New construction that has met all of the requirements of Sections 836.03, 836.04 and 836.05 may be floodproofed in lieu of ele-vation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to 1 foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such cer-tification to the Planning and Development Director using the FEMA Floodproofing Certifi-cate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan.
(2) Substantial Improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal non-residential struc-ture located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the Planning and Development Director to be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant util-ity and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to 1 foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoy-ancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and meth-ods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the Planning and Development Di-rector using the FEMA Floodproofing Certificate along with the design and operation/mainte-nance plan.
(c) Accessory Structures and Facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be con-structed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with Sec-tion 837.01(e) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the struc-ture.
(d) Standards for Recreational Vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: (1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for high-way use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security de-vices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or (2) The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for residential buildingssubstan-tial improvements, subsection (a)(2), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. (e) Standards for Manufactured Homes.
Section 837 Provisions for Flood Damage Reduction. City of Duluth UDC
8-40
(1) New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of Sections 836.03, 836.04 and 836.05 have been met. If all of the requirements of Sections 836.03, 836.04 and 836.05 have been met, all new construction and substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor, including base-ment, elevated no lower than 3 feet above the base flood elevation or 1 foot above the fu-ture-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, opening sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 837.01(e)(1). (2) Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: a. The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than 3 feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or 1 foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or b. The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. (3) All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of Section 837.01(g). 837.03 Building Standards for Structures and Buildings Authorized Adjacent to the Future-Conditions Flood-plain.
(a) Residential Buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residen-tial building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least 3 feet above the base flood elevation or 1 foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 837.01(e)(1).
(b) Nonresidential Buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal non-residential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the build-ing, shall be at least 1 foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 837.01(e)(1). Non-residential buildings may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. 837.04 Building Standards for Residential Single-Lot Developments on Streams without Established Base Flood Elevations and/or Floodway (A-Zones). (a) For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), the Planning and Development Director shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this Article.
City of Duluth UDC Section 837 Provisions for Flood Damage Reduction.
8-41
(b) If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: (1) No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. (2) In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than 3 feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unim-peded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with Section 837.01(e). 837.05 Building Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO-zones). Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of 1 to 3 feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: (a) New and all substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than 1 foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least 3 feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded move-ments of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of 837.01(e). (b) New and substantial improvements of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus 1 foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A reg-istered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construc-tion are in accordance with accepted standards of practice and shall provide such certification to the Director of the Planning and Development Department using the FEMA Floodproofing Certif-icate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan; and, (c) Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed struc-ture. 837.06 Standards for Subdivisions. (a) All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and Areas of Future-condi-tions Flood hazard therein and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood ele-vation data; (b) All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the fu-ture-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for res-idential structures will not be required; (c) All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with Section 835.02; (d) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
Section 837 Provisions for Flood Damage Reduction. City of Duluth UDC
8-42
(e) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood wa-ters, and discharges from the systems into flood waters; and, All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the city to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards.
9-i
Article 9. Project Design and Construction Standards
Article 9 sets out the minimum requirements and standards for construction of subdivisions and other land development pro-jects, including general principals of design and layout, and re-quirements for such public facilities as streets and utilities.
Table of Contents Page
DIVISION I. PROJECT DESIGN. ................................................................................................................9-1
Section 901. General Design Standards. ..................................................................................................9-1
901.01 Suitability of the Land. ................................................................................................................................. 9-1
Section 902. Unsuitable Land Must Be Included in Buildable Lots. .............................................................9-1
902.01 Exceptions. ................................................................................................................................................... 9-1
902.02 Offers of Land Dedication. ........................................................................................................................... 9-1
Section 903. Zoning and Other Regulations. ............................................................................................9-1
903.01 Zoning Requirements ................................................................................................................................... 9-1
903.02 Required Public Improvements. ................................................................................................................... 9-2
903.03 Survey Monuments. ..................................................................................................................................... 9-2
903.04 Standard Drawings. ...................................................................................................................................... 9-2
Section 904. Access Requirements. .........................................................................................................9-3
904.01 Access. .......................................................................................................................................................... 9-3
Section 905. Streets. ...............................................................................................................................9-4
905.01 Complete Streets Standards. ....................................................................................................................... 9-4
905.02 Dedication of Street Right-of-Way. ............................................................................................................... 9-4
905.03 Street Improvements. ................................................................................................................................... 9-4
905.04 Minimum Right of Way and Pavement Widths. ........................................................................................... 9-5
Table 9-A: Minimum Right-of-Way and Roadway Widths for New Streets and Widening ........................ 9-5
905.05 Street Rights-of-Way. ................................................................................................................................... 9-7
905.06 Project Access Improvements. ..................................................................................................................... 9-8
905.07 New Streets. ................................................................................................................................................. 9-9
905.08 Substandard Streets. .................................................................................................................................... 9-9
905.09 Improvements along State Highways. ........................................................................................................ 9-10
Section 906. General Layout Requirements. .......................................................................................... 9-10
906.01 Conformance. ............................................................................................................................................. 9-10
906.02 Local Streets and Minor Collectors. ........................................................................................................... 9-10
906.03 Cul-de-sac Streets. ..................................................................................................................................... 9-10
906.04 Other Dead End Streets .............................................................................................................................. 9-11
906.05 Service Roads. ............................................................................................................................................ 9-11
906.06 Half-Streets. ............................................................................................................................................... 9-11
906.07 Reserve Strips. ............................................................................................................................................ 9-12
Table of Contents Continued City of Duluth UDC
9-ii
906.08 Alleys. ........................................................................................................................................................ 9-12
906.09 Street Jogs. ................................................................................................................................................ 9-12
Section 907. Traffic Control Devices. ..................................................................................................... 9-12
907.01 Traffic Control Signs. .................................................................................................................................. 9-12
907.02 Street Name Signs. .................................................................................................................................... 9-12
907.03 Traffic Signals and Signs. ............................................................................................................................ 9-12
907.04 Striping Requirements. .............................................................................................................................. 9-12
907.05 Payment of Fees. ....................................................................................................................................... 9-13
907.06 Street Lights. .............................................................................................................................................. 9-13
Section 908. Sidewalks. ........................................................................................................................ 9-14
908.01 Where Required. ....................................................................................................................................... 9-14
908.02 Location Requirements. ............................................................................................................................ 9-14
Section 909. Performance Guidelines. ................................................................................................... 9-15
909.01 General. ..................................................................................................................................................... 9-15
909.02 Lots. ........................................................................................................................................................... 9-15
909.03 Blocks. ....................................................................................................................................................... 9-16
909.04 Access. ....................................................................................................................................................... 9-16
909.05 Roadway Design. ....................................................................................................................................... 9-16
Table 9-B: Minimum Design Speeds and Maximum Grades .................................................................... 9-17
Table 9-C: Constant (K) Values for Vertical Curves .................................................................................... 9-17
Table 9-D: Horizontal Curves ..................................................................................................................... 9-18
Table 9-E: Tangents ................................................................................................................................... 9-19
909.06 Street Intersections. .................................................................................................................................. 9-20
Table 9-F: Approach Distances at Major Intersections ............................................................................ 9-21
Table 9-G: Intersection Radii .................................................................................................................... 9-21
909.07 Driveway Intersections. ............................................................................................................................. 9-23
DIVISION II. PROJECT CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS .............................................................................. 9-25
Section 910. Specifications. ................................................................................................................... 9-25
910.01 Sub-Grade Preparation for All Streets. ...................................................................................................... 9-25
Section 911. Project Access Improvement Standards. ............................................................................ 9-25
Section 912. New Local and Minor Collector Streets. ............................................................................. 9-26
912.01 Local and Minor Collector Streets within a Residential Subdivision. ........................................................ 9-26
912.02 Local Residential-Rural Streets. ................................................................................................................. 9-27
912.03 Nonresidential Subdivision or Development Streets. ................................................................................ 9-27
Section 913. New Major Thoroughfares. ............................................................................................... 9-28
Table 9-H: Construction Standards for Major Thoroughfares ................................................................... 9-28
913.01 Curb and Gutter......................................................................................................................................... 9-28
913.02 Construction Methods. .............................................................................................................................. 9-29
913.03 Underground Utilities. ............................................................................................................................... 9-29
Section 914. Sidewalks. ........................................................................................................................ 9-29
914.01 Construction Standards. ............................................................................................................................ 9-29
914.02 Installation Deadlines. ............................................................................................................................... 9-30
City of Duluth UDC Table of Contents Continued
9-iii
914.03 Sidewalk Curb and Ramp Design and Construction Standards. ................................................................. 9-30
914.04 Damage Repair. .......................................................................................................................................... 9-30
Section 915. Utilities and Easements. .................................................................................................... 9-31
915.01 Placement of Utilities ................................................................................................................................. 9-31
915.02 Water System and Fire Hydrants. .............................................................................................................. 9-31
915.03 Sanitary Sewer Disposal. ............................................................................................................................ 9-31
915.04 Easements. ................................................................................................................................................. 9-32
Table 9-I: Easements for Storm Drain Pipes ............................................................................................... 9-32
915.05 Right-of-Way Protection. ........................................................................................................................... 9-33
Section 916. Street Cuts. ....................................................................................................................... 9-38
Table of Contents Continued City of Duluth UDC
9-iv
BLANK PAGE
9-1
Article 9. Project Design and Construction Standards
DIVISION I. PROJECT DESIGN.
Section 901. General Design Standards.
901.01 Suitability of the Land.
Land subject to flooding, improper drainage or erosion, and any land deemed to be un-suitable for development due to steep slope, unsuitable soils or subsurface conditions, etc., shall not be subjected to development for any uses as may continue such conditions or increase danger to health, safety, life, and property, unless steps are taken to eliminate or abate these conditions.
Section 902. Unsuitable Land Must Be Included in Buildable Lots.
Land within a proposed subdivision or development which is unsuitable for development shall be incorporated into the buildable lot as excess land. Lots which do not comply with the requirements of Article 2 and other requirements of this Development Code are prohibited.
902.01 Exceptions.
The creation of an unbuildable lot in a proposed subdivision for the exclusive purpose of sub-division identification signage or subdivision entrance landscape features is authorized only un-der the following circumstances (modification applications from the circumstances of this ex-ception shall not be accepted):
(a) The lot shall be located at an entrance to the subdivision as an island in the right-of-way of a local or minor collector street;
(b) A mandatory homeowners association shall be required for the subdivision for owner-ship and maintenance of the lot as common area;
(c) The lot shall meet the requirements of Article 2 and other zoning requirements of this De-velopment Code or as may be approved by a variance;
(d) Right-of-way of a minimum width of 6 feet from back of curb shall be provided adjacent to the perimeter of the lot; and
(e) Landscape plantings within the right-of-way shall not extend more than 3 feet above the street grade.
902.02 Offers of Land Dedication.
Whenever a developer proposes the dedication of land to public use, and the Planning and De-velopment Director or the appropriate agency finds that such land use neither required nor is it suitable for public use, the Planning and Development Director shall require the rearrangement of lots to include such land in private ownership.
Section 903. Zoning and Other Regulations.
903.01 Zoning Requirements
Section 903 Zoning and Other Regulations. City of Duluth UDC
9-2
(a) Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions required herein and those contained in Article 2 of this Development Code, building codes, or other official regulations, the most restrictive shall apply.
(b) In those instances where the required right-of-way width or roadway improvements have been established as a condition of zoning approval, the requirements of the zoning condi-tion shall control whether more or less restrictive than the requirements of this Article.
(c) Building setback lines shall at least conform to the minimum yard requirements of Arti-cle 2. Building setback lines along all public streets shall be no less than the front yard set-back required on the property by the applicable zoning district in Article 2.
903.02 Required Public Improvements.
(a) General Requirements.
Every developer of lands within the jurisdiction of this Article shall provide the public im-provements included in this Article, as shall be appropriate to serve the project, in accord-ance with Article and other pertinent codes, ordinances, and regulations of the City of Du-luth. Said improvements and associated land shall be provided at no cost to the City of Duluth, and shall be dedicated or otherwise transferred, as required, to the public in perpe-tuity and without covenant or reservation, except as otherwise provided herein.
(b) Lots.
(1) Lots shall at least conform to requirements of Article 2 of this Development Code.
(2) Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be required for residential subdivisions along major thoroughfares where internal access can be provided. A no-access easement of at least 10 feet in width, across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting the major thoroughfare. Said no-access ease-ment shall be planted with a single line of shrubs or trees, or contain a solid or decora-tive fence, or contain such other landscaping treatment or grade changes which will produce a partial screening effect, as may be proposed by the developer.
(3) In no-access easements along minor collectors or local streets, planting or other screen-ing treatments shall be at the sole option of the developer.
903.03 Survey Monuments.
(a) All corners shall be marked with an iron rebar or pin, at least  inch in diameter and 18 inches long and driven into the ground so as to extend no less than one inch above the fin-ished grade.
(b) On subdivisions containing floodplains, flood elevation references shall be set in accordance with the requirements of the Flood Damage Prevention section of the Environmental Pro-tection Article of this Development Code.
903.04 Standard Drawings.
(a) The Planning and Development Department shall maintain a file for consultation and dis-tribution a set of Standard Drawings illustrating details of construction and design of streets, storm water drainage facilities, site improvements and other elements related to the development of land in accordance with these Regulations and under the jurisdiction of the Department.
City of Duluth UDC Section 904 Access Requirements.
9-3
(b) The Standard Drawings shall illustrate minimum acceptable standards for land develop-ment activities authorized under these Regulations, but shall not supersede more restrictive prudent design requirements or good engineering practice as applied to specific situations on a case- by-case basis.
(c) The Standard Drawings shall be treated as though a part of this Development Code for ap-plication to the minimum standards for design and construction of improvements required herein and subject to modification and appeal provisions of this Code.
Section 904. Access Requirements.
904.01 Access.
(a) When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and to provide access to those areas not presently served by streets.
(b) No subdivision shall be designed so as to completely eliminate street access to adjoining parcels of land. Every development shall be designed to facilitate access to adjoining properties which are developed or anticipated to be developed in a manner substan-tially similar to the subject property. Locations of interparcel access shall be as required by and subject to the approval of the Planning and Development Department.
(c) Any lot required to provide minimum frontage by the zoning district in which the lot is located shall provide vehicular access directly from a public street along the frontage or along any other property line which abuts a public street, except as provided in Section 904.01(e).
(d) Private streets as may be approved under the provisions of this Code shall be construct-ed to the roadway construction standards of the City of Duluth, as contained herein.
(e) Vehicular access easements may be provided from a public street indirectly via easement in any one or more of the following circumstances:
(1) The property is not required to provide a minimum frontage by the applicable zoning district, provided that the easement shall be in a location and the access driveway shall have a width and alignment acceptable to the Fire Services Division and the Depart-ment.
(2) The property is a buildable lot of record, as defined herein, but does not meet the minimum frontage requirement of the applicable zoning district. The property must be served by an exclusive access easement which shall be limited to the provision of access to only one principal use or structure.
(3) The access easement serves a single-family residence on a lot which is otherwise a buildable lot of record, and which is sharing a common driveway with no more than one other single-family residence.
(4) The access easement was lawfully established as such under the code, ordinances, or regulations of the City of Duluth prior to the adoption of these Development Regulations.
(5) The access easement coincides with a private roadway approved under the codes, ordinances, or regulations of the City of Duluth. All new private roadways must be
Section 905 Streets. City of Duluth UDC
9-4
constructed to the roadway standards of this Article, and their ownership and maintenance responsibility by private parties must be clearly established on the Final Plat of the development.
(6) The access easement serves a buildable lot of record which meets the minimum frontage requirements of this Development Code, but at which point the access is not achieved.
Section 905. Streets.
905.01 Complete Streets Standards.
The purpose of this Section is to assure that new roadway construction and existing roadway improvement projects on City of Duluth roadways include consideration for adequate infra-structure, where appropriate and feasible, for bicyclists, pedestrians, users of public transit of all ages and abilities, vehicular and the physically disabled.
(a) Requirements. An array of facilities and amenities that are recognized as contributing to Complete Streets, including, but not limited to: street and sidewalk lighting, pedestrian and bicycle safety improvements, access improvements for freight; access improvements in ac-cordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act; and street amenities shall be provided where practical.
(1) New roadway projects shall accommodate users of all abilities of the transportation system, including pedestrians, bicyclists, users of mass transit, people with disabilities, the elderly, motorists, emergency responders, and adjacent land users.
(2) New roadway projects shall make use of the latest and best design standards, policies, and guidelines.
(3) Complete Streets solutions shall be developed to fit within the context(s) of the com-munity and those solutions shall be flexible so that the needs of the corridor can be met.
(4) New roadway projects shall identify anticipated phases and key milestones of project development.
(b) Exemptions
(1) Ordinary maintenance activities designed to keep assets in serviceable condition;
(2) Areas that involve a roadway that bicyclists and pedestrians are prohibited by law from using efforts should be made to accommodate bicyclists and pedestrians else-where;
(3) There are extreme topographic or natural resource constraints;
(4) A reasonable and equivalent alternative already exists for certain users.
905.02 Dedication of Street Right-of-Way.
Right-of-Way for all Public Project streets, existing and proposed, shall be dedicated in accord-ance with the street classifications as shown on the Planning and Development Department webpage or as otherwise required by the City Council.
905.03 Street Improvements.
City of Duluth UDC Section 905 Streets.
9-5
Streets, whether existing or new, shall be constructed or improved under those circumstances and to the standards as established in this Article. Roadway improvements shall be in accord-ance with the street classifications as shown in the Comprehensive Plan, the Planning and Development Department web page, or Development Code, as applicable, or as otherwise required by the City Council.
905.04 Minimum Right of Way and Pavement Widths.
(a) Minimum widths for new construction (new streets or widening sections) shall be as shown on the following Table 9-A (unless a modification is granted by the Planning and De-velopment Director). Table 9-A: Minimum Right-of-Way and Roadway Widths for New Streets and Widening Street Category Minimum Right-of-Way(1) Minimum Roadway(2)
Principal Arterial
120-150 feet
6 thru lanes with median
Major Arterial
100-120 feet
4-6 lanes with median
Minor Arterial
80-100 feet
52-66 feet  4 thru lanes with median
Major Collector
80 feet
52 feet
Minor Collector
60-80 feet
28 feet
Local Street
Non-residential
Non-residential Cul-de-sac
60 feet(3)
60 foot radius
32 feet
50 foot radius
Local Street
Residential Urban
Residential Urban Cul-de-sac
50 feet
50 foot radius
27 feet
40 foot radius
Local Street
Residential Rural(4)
Residential Rural Cul-de-sac
60 feet(5)
60 feet radius(5)
24 feet
40 foot radius
(1) The greater the right-of-way width shall apply under circumstances as described in Section 905.05(c).
(2) Roadway width dimensions are back-of-curb to back-of-curb except when noted.
(3) Utility easement shall be provided in allocation and size as required by the Gwinnett County Department of Public Utilities.
(4) Subdivisions zoned RA-200.
(5) May be reduced to 50 if curb, gutter, and pipe drainage system is provided.
(6) Measured to edge of pavement. Curb and Gutter is not required in subdivision zoned RA-200. Roadway width may be reduced to 23 feet if curb and gutter is provided (27 feet total width).
(b) Exceptions.
Section 905 Streets. City of Duluth UDC
9-6
(1) Conservation Subdivisions. New local streets in Conservation Subdivisions shall be as follows:
a. Entrance Streets: At least 46 feet.
b. Other Interior Streets: At least 44 feet.
c. Right-of-way Radii: At least 45 feet for cul-de-sac or eyebrow turnarounds.
d. Alleys: No minimum if not to be dedicated to the City; at least 20 feet if to be dedicated to the City.
e. Pavement Width of New Interior Local Streets:
1. Entrance Streets: At least 24 feet (measured to back of curb)
2. Other Interior Streets: At least 22 feet (measured to back of curb).
3. Curb and Gutter: At least 1  feet.
4. Right-of-way Radii: At least 40 feet for cul-de-sac or eyebrow turnarounds (measured to back of curb).
5. Alleys: At least 12 feet (concrete or asphalt), with or without curb, if not to be dedicated to the City; at least 12 feet if surfaced with asphalt (which in-cludes 1 foot of concrete curbs) and at least 12 feet if surfaced with con-crete (with or without curb).
(2) Planned Unit Developments, New Local Residential Streets. New local residential streets in the PUD District shall be as follows:
a. Right-of-Way Width:
1. Interior Streets: At least 44 feet.
2. Right-of-Way Radii: At least 50 feet for cul-de-sac or eyebrow turna-rounds.
3. Alleys: At least 15-foot easement if not to be dedicated to the City; at least 15 feet of right-of-way if to be dedicated to the City.
b. Pavement Width:
1. Interior Streets: At least 24 feet (measured to back of curb).
2. Right-of-Way Radii: At least 40 feet for cul-de-sac or eyebrow turnarounds (measured to back of curb).
3. Alleys: At least 12 feet (concrete or asphalt), with or without curb, if not to be dedicated to the City; at least 12 feet if surfaced with asphalt (which in-cludes 1 foot concrete curbs) and at least 12 feet if surfaced with concrete (with or without curb).
c. Additional Pavement and Right-of-Way Width:
1. Additional Travel Lanes: At least 10 feet of pavement width.
2. On-Street Parallel Parking: At least 9 feet of pavement width.
City of Duluth UDC Section 905 Streets.
9-7
3. Right-of-Way: Additional right-of-way shall be provided to accommodate additional travel lanes, on-street parallel parking, sidewalks and under-ground utilities.
(3) Planned Unit Developments, New Local Non-Residential Streets. New local non-residential streets in the PUD District shall be as follows:
a. Right-of-Way Width:
1. Interior Streets: At least 48 feet
2. Right-of-Way Radii: At least 55 feet for cul-de-sac or eyebrow turna-rounds.
3. Alleys: At least 15-foot easement if not to be dedicated to the City; at least 15 feet of right-of-way if to be dedicated to the City.
b. Pavement Width:
1. Interior Streets: At least 26 feet (measured to back of curb).
2. Right-of-Way Radii: At least 45 feet for cul-de-sac or eyebrow turnarounds (measured to back of curb).
3. Alleys: At least 10 feet (concrete or asphalt), with or without curb, if not to be dedicated to the City; at least 12 feet if surfaced with asphalt (which in-cludes 1 foot concrete curbs) and at least 10 feet if surfaced with concrete (with or without curb).
c. Additional Pavement and Right-of-Way Width:
1. Additional Travel Lanes: At least 11 feet of pavement width.
2. On-Street Parallel Parking: At least 9 feet of pavement width.
3. On-Street Angled Parking: At least 18 feet of pavement width.
4. Right-of-Way: Additional right-of-way shall be provided to accommodate additional travel lanes, on-street parallel parking, on-street angled parking, sidewalks and underground utilities.
905.05 Street Rights-of-Way.
(a) The minimum width of rights-of-way shall be dedicated based upon the street classification as shown in the Comprehensive Plan or on the Planning and Development Department web page and as contained in this Article.
(b) Additional street right-of-way width may be required to be dedicated at intersections or other locations fronting the property where turning lanes, storage lanes, medians or rea-lignments are required for traffic safety and minimum right-of- way standards would be in-adequate to accommodate the improvements.
(c) If a new street or thoroughfare is proposed by the Comprehensive Plan, Gwinnett County or the State of Georgia to adjoin or traverse the property, permits shall not be issued until the Planning and Development Department has submitted the project to the City Council for review in order to seek a determination if the City of Duluth should acquire right- of-way or if a study of alternate routes should be undertaken. The review period by the City
Section 905 Streets. City of Duluth UDC
9-8
of Duluth shall not exceed 90 days from the date of permit application. If, after the 90 day review, the City Council is unable to reach a decision, there shall not be any further delay of a requested permit for this situation.
905.06 Project Access Improvements.
(a) Single Family Detached, Single Family Attached, and Duplex Residential Subdivisions.
(1) When property fronting on an existing or proposed City road is to be developed or re-developed as a single family detached or duplex subdivision and the City street will provides access to the property, Project Access Improvements to the City street (de-celeration lanes, turn lanes, etc.) shall be provided by the developer as required here-in.
(2) A deceleration lane shall be required to be provided at each subdivision street en-trance that is provided street access to a Minor Collector Street or Major Thorough-fare. In the event a street has an existing or proposed median, and the developer de-sires to construct a median break to serve the subdivision, a left turn lane leading to the median break shall be required to be provided by the developer and shall meet the standards contained herein.
(3) Deceleration lanes shall have a length of 250 feet, with an additional 50 foot taper length, a pavement width of 12 feet (exclusive of curb and gutter) and shall be provid-ed with curb and gutter. Additional right-of-way to accommodate the deceleration lane and an 11 foot shoulder shall be dedicated by the developer to the City of Duluth and/or Gwinnett County at no cost. Associated drainage improvements as deemed necessary by the construction of the deceleration land shall also be required.
(4) Other Project Access Improvements may be required by the Department upon the recommendation of the Gwinnett County Department of Transportation in order to ensure adequate site access, pedestrian access, convenience and safety to the motor-ing public.
(5) The developer shall be responsible for the relocation of public or private utilities and drainage structures as may be occasioned by the required roadway improvements.
(b) Multi-Family and Nonresidential Developments.
(1) When property fronting on an existing or proposed City, County or State road-way is to be developed or redeveloped for, multi-family or nonresidential uses and the City, County or State road will provide access to the property, access improve-ments to the City road (deceleration lanes, turn lanes, etc.) shall be provided by the developer.
(2) A deceleration lane shall be required to be provided at each subdivision street en-trance that is provided street access to a Minor Collector Street or Major Thorough-fare. In the event a street has an existing or proposed median, and the developer de-sires to construct a median break to serve the subdivision, a left turn lane leading to the median break shall be required to be provided by the developer and shall meet the standards contained herein.
(3) Deceleration lanes shall have a length of 200 feet, with an additional 50 foot taper length, a pavement width of 12 feet (exclusive of curb and gutter) and shall be provid-
City of Duluth UDC Section 905 Streets.
9-9
ed with curb and gutter. Additional right-of-way to accommodate the deceleration lane and an 11 foot shoulder shall be dedicated by the developer to the City of Duluth and/or Gwinnett County at no cost. Associated drainage improvements as deemed necessary by the construction of the deceleration land shall also be required.
(4) Other Project Access Improvements may be required by the Department upon the recommendation of the Gwinnett County Department of Transportation in order to ensure adequate site access, pedestrian access, convenience and safety to the motor-ing public.
(5) The Developer shall be responsible for the relocation of public or private utilities and drainage structures as may be occasioned by the required roadway improvements.
905.07 New Streets.
(a) New streets, whether to be public or private, shall be designed and constructed at least to standards contained in this Article in accordance with the category of said streets.
(b) In residential subdivisions, a dead end ("stub") street required under Section 906.04 to pro-vide access to an abutting property may be exempted from construction of roadway im-provements and public utilities under the following circumstances:
(1) No lot within the proposed subdivision will gain access from the "stub" street.
(2) A Concept Plan has not been submitted or approved on the neighboring tract.
(3) The "stub" street shall be fully designed as part of the Development Plan. However, the right-of-way shall be only cleared, rough graded in accordance with the approved plans, and all disturbed areas grassed.
(4) Connections for future extension of all public utilities shall be constructed as part of the subdivision. Curb returns shall be constructed as part of the subdivision. Curb returns shall be provided to the future "stub" street roadway location, and curb and gutter shall be installed across the roadway stub at the right-of-way line (extend-ed).
(c) The right-of-way for the "stub" street shall be dedicated as part of the Final Plat. Slope easements or construction easements, if required, shall be shown on the Final Plat.
905.08 Substandard Streets.
(a) In the event that a development has access to a substandard street (i.e., a dirt or gravel road or any street that does not meet the minimum current construction and im-provement standards), the following Project Access Improvements shall be required: If the abutting substandard street provides the primary means of access to the develop-ment and is dirt or gravel or any street that does not meet the minimum current construc-tion and improvement standards, the street shall be upgraded to a standard paved road-way from the project entrance, to the nearest standard paved road along the route of pri-mary access.
(b) Off-site Improvements required under (a), above, shall at a minimum, result in a full-section roadway meeting the requirements of a Local Residential Rural roadway (24 feet pavement edge to pavement edge, with drainage swale ditches as needed). Responsibili-ties shall be as follows:
Section 906 General Layout Requirements. City of Duluth UDC
9-10
(1) The Developer shall design the road and provide the labor, equipment, and materials required for the necessary roadway improvements and necessary drainage improve-ments.
(2) If the City or County desires the roadway to be improved to a greater standard than that for a Local Residential Rural roadway, the governmental entity requiring such shall provide or pay the cost of the additional materials and labor.
(3) All right-of-way required for these off-site improvements shall be acquired by the de-veloper at no expense to the City or County. If the developer is unable to acquire the right-of-way, the Department of Planning & Development will initiate acquisition proceedings, at the expense of the developer, after authorization by the City Council.
905.09 Improvements along State Highways.
(a) For any development which abuts a state highway or other right-of-way controlled by the State of Georgia, improvements to the roadway and the location and design of any street or driveway providing access from the state highway shall comply with the standards and requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation only when more restrictive than the requirements of this Article.
(b) A permit for the proposed access or improvements shall be required to have been ap-proved by the Georgia D.O.T. and incorporated into the construction drawings for the pro-ject prior to issuance of a development permit by the Department.
Section 906. General Layout Requirements.
906.01 Conformance.
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall conform at a minimum to the Comprehensive Plan and this Article.
906.02 Local Streets and Minor Collectors.
(a) Local streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
(b) Minor collectors shall be provided to channel through traffic movements within a devel-opment, where appropriate to the design and a major thoroughfare is not proposed by the Comprehensive Plan.
(c) Minor collectors also may be provided as central routes within large residential subdivi-sions, where appropriate to the design, based on project traffic demands exceeding 2000 trips per day (ADT).
906.03 Cul-de-sac Streets.
(a) Dead end streets designed to have one end permanently closed shall provide a cul-de-sac turnaround and may be no more than 2000 feet in length. Additional length necessitated by topography or property configuration may be approved by the Planning and Develop-ment Director.
(b) The length of a cul-de-sac street shall be measured from the center of the cul-de-sac to the center of the intersection with another street, whether a through street or another cul-de-sac or dead-end street.
City of Duluth UDC Section 906 General Layout Requirements.
9-11
(c) Eyebrow cul-de-sac (half cul-de-sacs) will be allowed only at right-angled" intersections having an interior angle between 80 and 100 degrees.
(d) Cul-de-sacs shall conform to the layout and dimensional requirements as shown in these Standard Drawings.
906.04 Other Dead End Streets
(a) A dead end street shall be provided to the boundary of a subdivision where neces-sary to provide access to a land-locked abutting property, for planned continuity of future circulation, for improved access for public safety vehicles, or for the extension of public water or other utilities to neighboring lands.
(1) Such dead end streets shall be designed so as to allow their reasonable extension, and shall be located so as to be reasonably incorporated into a street design for the neighboring property.
(2) The stub street requirement may be waived by the Planning and Development Di-rector, provided such waiver has received the approval of the Gwinnett County De-partments of Public Safety and Public Utilities.
(b) Dead end streets on abutting property shall be extended into a proposed subdivision and incorporated into the street design of the development. This requirement may be modi-fied by the Director in cases of serious topographical hardship or dissimilar zoning which would create unacceptable land use conflicts between the two developments. This modi-fication may be conflicts between the two developments. This modification may be condi-tioned on the provision of easements necessary for the extension of public utilities, the provision of cul-de-sac or other permanent turnaround on the dead end street, or the re-moval of the dead end street back to its nearest intersection.
(c) Where a dead end street (other than a cul-de-sac) serves more than three lots, the de-veloper shall be required to provide a temporary vehicular turnaround within the right-of-way. This requirement may be waived if extension of the dead end street is approved and under construction prior to its inclusion in a Final Plat.
(d) Where a street dead ends at the property boundary and the street exceeds 1000 feet in length, a permanent cul-de-sac shall be required. In this situation, right-of-way to the property boundary shall be required, but the pavement shall not be extended to the prop-erty boundary beyond the edge of the paved cul-de-sac turnaround. In no case shall a dead end street exceed 2,000 feet in length unless approved by the Planning and Devel-opment Department due to unusual topographic conditions or property configuration.
906.05 Service Roads.
Where a development borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, or limited access high-way right-of-way or major thoroughfare, a public street may be required to be constructed and dedicated within the development approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way.
906.06 Half-Streets.
Half-streets (new boundary streets having one-half of the minimum required right-of-way or pavement width) shall not be allowed nor access to same be permitted should it exist.
Section 907 Traffic Control Devices. City of Duluth UDC
9-12
906.07 Reserve Strips.
Land in private ownership adjacent to public rights-of-way which could control or are intended to control access to streets, alleys, or public lands shall not be permitted unless their control is given to the City under ownership, dedication, or easement conditions approved by the City At-torney or acceptable to the Director. No development shall be designed so as to deny access to abutting properties.
906.08 Alleys.
An alley shall be constructed as though it were a local street pursuant to the standards con-tained in this Article.
906.09 Street Jogs.
(a) Street jogs shall either directly align or have off-sets of a minimum of 125 feet for resi-dential subdivision streets and a minimum of 200 feet for non-residential subdivision streets, as measured between centerlines of said streets, unless approved by the Planning and Development Department due to unusual topographic conditions or property configu-ration.
(b) All major thoroughfares shall provide off-sets as required by the Planning and Develop-ment Department, where alignment is not desirable or feasible, but in no case be space less than 600 feet apart as measured between centerlines of said streets.
Section 907. Traffic Control Devices.
907.01 Traffic Control Signs.
Street signs, traffic control signs, and devices such as striping and signalization, shall be provid-ed by the developer. The developer must apply with Gwinnett County Traffic Engineering for the installation and fabrication of traffic control devices.
907.02 Street Name Signs.
Street name signs shall have a green background with white legends mounted on channelized posts. Alternate post material shall be subject to the review and approval of the Gwinnett County Traffic Engineer. The posts and signs will be furnished and installed by the devel-oper at all street intersections. The developer (or homeowners association in the event an al-ternate signpost is chosen at a later date) shall pay the Countys and/or Citys costs.
907.03 Traffic Signals and Signs.
All traffic signals and signs shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (no decorative traffic control devices will be allowed).
907.04 Striping Requirements.
All newly constructed streets having four or more lanes (including auxiliary lanes) and existing streets being widened with one or more additional lanes shall be striped or the payment of said striping costs shall be required from the Developer by the Planning and Development De-partment prior to the approval of the Development Conformance Certificate for the project. Striping shall be accomplished with paint meeting Georgia DOT standards conforming to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. The developer shall apply the final striping after application of the final topping after receiving approval of the Department.
City of Duluth UDC Section 907 Traffic Control Devices.
9-13
907.05 Payment of Fees.
The developer shall pay Gwinnett County Traffic Engineering for the installation and fabrica-tion of traffic control devices and street name signs prior to approval of the final plat.
907.06 Street Lights.
Street lights shall be provided by the developer in new subdivisions which propose the con-struction of a new street to be dedicated to the City or which propose lot access to existing City streets. All fees, materials, labor, poles, fixtures and any other associated items shall be furnished, paid for and installed by the developer. Street lighting shall be installed and operat-ing prior to approval of the final plat.
(a) This Section shall apply for all developments or phases of development which have not re-ceived a development permit as of the date of adoption of this ordinance.
(b) In all cases, guidelines related to materials, distances between poles, height, and any other relevant specifications shall be adhered to as set forth in The American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting and the power provider for the project.
(c) A street lighting plan shall accompany the preliminary plat and shall be reviewed and ap-proved by the City for compliance with the requirements of the national standard. Prior to approval of the Final Plat, all fees associated with materials, labor, and installation shall be paid to the appropriate power provider for the project and proof of payment shall be provided to the City.
(d) Street lights shall be provided by the owner/developer in any new development where the streets are proposed to be dedicated to the City or which propose lot access to exist-ing City streets.
(1) Location and spacing shall be coordinated with the electric company with jurisdic-tion over the property and shall be installed at the time the streets are constructed.
(2) The City shall take over payment of the monthly energy charges from the own-er/developer once the development is 95% complete based on issued Certificates of Occupancy and after a written request is received from the developer/builder to take over monthly costs.
(3) In a residential development, street lights shall be installed prior to approval of the Final Plat. Electrification of the lights shall occur once the development or phase has achieved 50% completion via issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy (C.O.)
(4) In a non-residential development, street lights are to be installed prior to issuance of a C.O. for the building(s).
(e) All fixtures and poles shall meet the requirements of the City and all maintenance shall be the responsibility of the developer and/or homeowners association. Fixtures shall be mounted a minimum of 16 feet above the ground and each fixture shall have appro-priate arm length to illuminate the street. The City, in addition to other requirements, may require a light to be located at street intersections within the development.
Section 908 Sidewalks. City of Duluth UDC
9-14
Section 908. Sidewalks.
908.01 Where Required.
(a) Sidewalks shall be required along all minor collector streets and major thoroughfares with-in a 1-mile radius of all existing and proposed public school sites, except within (internal to) non-residential subdivisions. Any development located along such route or within the 1-mile radius shall provide sidewalks along its frontage in accordance with this Section.
(b) Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of any new street, any road classified as a Minor Collector or Major Thoroughfare, where the Duluth Sidewalk Master Plan identifies that sidewalks are planned for construction or on streets that the City Council has allotted funds for the installation of sidewalks.
(1) If sidewalks are established along portions of the roadway or on the same side of the street as the new development, the owner/developer must install sidewalks in ac-cordance with Section 914.01 on any new development(s) site in order to connect with existing sidewalks.
(2) The owner/developer may deposit funds into an account held by the City of Duluth designated for sidewalk construction at the discretion of the Director, if sidewalks are under construction or planned for construction to begin within one year. Said funds shall be in the amount of 110% of the cost for construction of the sidewalk on the property proposed for development as calculated by the Department.
(c) Sidewalks may also be required as a condition of zoning, special use approval or by this De-velopment Code. Said sidewalks shall meet the location and construction requirements contained herein, unless otherwise specified in the conditions of approval.
(d) Sidewalks provided voluntarily by a builder or developer shall meet the location and con-struction standards contained herein. Decorative sidewalks may be permitted at the dis-cretion of the Planning and Development Director, however location and size requirements shall be followed as contained herein.
908.02 Location Requirements.
(a) Sidewalks shall be located 24 inches from the back of curb except in Conservation Subdivi-sions, Planned Unit Developments, or subdivisions in which street trees are provided (bridges excepted). Where no curbing exists or future road improvements are anticipated, the sidewalks shall be placed in a location acceptable to the Department. All new side-walks shall match and provide smooth transition to any existing sidewalks.
(b) Sidewalks in Conservation Subdivisions, Planned Unit Developments or in subdivisions in which street trees are provided shall be located at least 6 feet from the back of curb (bridges excepted). The area between the curb and the sidewalk shall consist of grassing or landscaping. Where no curb exists, or if road improvements are proposed for installa-tion by the City, County or State, sidewalks, including appropriate drainage facilities, shall be constructed in a location acceptable to the Department of Planning and Development and/or Georgia Department of Transportation.
(1) Sidewalks shall be required adjacent to the perimeter of eyebrow turnarounds.
(2) Sidewalks shall be required adjacent to perimeter of cul-de-sac turnarounds.
City of Duluth UDC Section 909 Performance Guidelines.
9-15
(3) Where possible, sidewalks shall be woven through existing vegetation, trees, etc. to create a meandering sidewalk.
Section 909. Performance Guidelines.
909.01 General.
(a) Purpose.
The sub-sections enumerated in this Section 909 are guidelines, and are intended to be benchmark indicators of what standards could be acceptable. They are further intended to allow alternate designs which could produce results similar to these performance standards and similar protection to the public. The objective of these performance standards is not to suggest a single methodological standard of acceptance exclusive of all others. Rather they establish what would otherwise be allowed in the absence of an acceptable alternative.
(b) Constraints.
The alternative design solutions are constrained by the requirements of this Article and the grading, detention, and drainage Requirements of Article 10, as well as the purpose and in-tent of this Development Code.
(c) Documentation Required.
In the event that an alternative is suggested by the applicant, studies and reports conducted by professionals currently certified in the State of Georgia will be required to be submit-ted to and approved by the Department. These studies and reports must clearly relate to the desired results and purposes expressed or implied in the applicable performance standard. Once an alternative has been approved by the Department, it shall become a required standard applicable to the specifically approved Permit.
909.02 Lots.
(a) Lots should be designed generally such that they are no more than four times as deep as they are wide at the building setback line, unless exempted by the Planning and Develop-ment Director.
(1) The Department requires notation that a House Location Plan (HLP) is required to be approved prior to issuance of a building permit on all residential lots.
(2) The Department may require notation that a Residential Drainage Plan (RDP) is re-quired to be approved prior to issuance of a building permit on certain lots where ad-ditional (site specific) engineering will be necessary to properly grade the lot or locate the building or other improvements. Such lots include, but are not limited to:
a. A lot containing floodplain where fill or other encroachment into the floodplain is planned or reasonably expected;
b. A lot containing severe topographic features interdicting the building site;
c. A lot containing a drainage easement with a pipe discharge or other facilities, or flow characteristics which may adversely affect the location of a building or oth-er site improvements.
(3) The Planning and Development Department may require notation that a Residential Drainage Study (RDS) is required to be approved prior to issuance of a building permit
Section 909 Performance Guidelines. City of Duluth UDC
9-16
on certain lots where particular attention to site grading will be necessary, but formal engineering is not needed. Such an RDS is conducted in the field where the effect of the site grading must be accomplished with adequate care so as not to create a drain-age problem on neighboring properties.
(b) Side lot lines generally should be at right angles (90 degrees) to straight street lines or ra-dial to curved street lines as much as practical. Side lot lines should be radial to the radius points of all cul-de-sacs. Variations of more than 10 degrees shall require approval of the Department, but shall be approved when appropriate to the reasonable loading pattern of the subdivision, efficient use of the land relative to topographic conditions, or provisions of improved building sites over those which would result without such variation.
(c) Corner lots shall be sufficiently larger so that they have the same width between minimum side setback lines as an interior lot, but in no case shall more than 75 feet between side setback lines on a corner lot be required.
909.03 Blocks.
(a) The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with regard to:
(1) Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated,
(2) Applicable zoning requirements as to lot size and dimensions,
(3) Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of street traffic, and
(4) Limitations and opportunities of topography.
(b) In blocks over 1,000 feet long, the Planning and Development Director may, when existing or proposed pedestrian circulation patterns or public gathering places so justify, require pedestrian ways or pedestrian access easements, as appropriate, through the block.
909.04 Access.
A maximum number of 200 residential dwelling units shall be allowed to be constructed with only one street outlet to an existing public street. If a second access to an existing public road is not available or, if in the opinion of the Planning and Development Director, a sec-ond access could induce non- residential traffic through the development, a single entrance may be allowed if designed with a traffic signal and/or sufficient right-of-way and street im-provements to provide a protected left-turn lane, subject to engineering.
909.05 Roadway Design.
(a) Street Grades and Design Speeds.
(1) Minimum grade for all local and minor collector streets shall be 1.5%. Minimum grades for all major collector and arterial streets shall conform to Georgia D.O.T. practice.
(2) Minimum grade of less than 1.5% on a local street may be approved by the Department, based on adequate engineering designs, where such grades cannot rea-sonably be achieved due to topographical limitations imposed by the land. In such cases, a Record Drawing and such computations as necessary shall be provided after construction to establish that the street will drain in accordance with these Regulations.
City of Duluth UDC Section 909 Performance Guidelines.
9-17
Street sections where unacceptable pooling, excessive spread at catch basins, or other hazardous conditions occur shall be reconstructed or otherwise improved to eliminate such conditions.
(3) Minimum vehicle design speeds and maximum grades allowable in the City of Duluth by street classification shall be as shown in Table 9-B.
Table 9-B: Minimum Design Speeds and Maximum Grades Street Category Maximum Grade Design Speed
Principal Arterial
6%
60 MPH
Major Arterial
8%
50 MPH
Minor Arterial
10%
50 MPH
Major Collector
10%
40 MPH
Minor Collector
10%
30 MPH
Local
15%
20 MPH
Note: Grades between 12% and 14% shall not exceed a length of 150 feet and shall require an "as graded" survey prior to the installation of the curb and utilities. The distance shall be measured as the tangent length between points of curvature.
(4) Maximum grade on any cul-de-sac turnaround shall be 6%.
(b) Vertical Street Alignment.
(1) All changes in street profile grades having algebraic difference greater than 1% shall be connected by a parabolic curve having a minimum length (L) equal to the product of the algebraic difference between the grades in% (A) and the design constant (K) assigned to the street according to its category (i.e., L=KA).
(2) Constant (K) values are shown in the Table 9-C for both desirable and minimum ac-ceptable ("hardship") conditions. In all cases, the "desirable" value shall be used, unless it cannot be achieved due to topographic conditions beyond the developer's control. In such hardship situations, the Department may approve a lesser value to the extent required by the hardship situation, but in no event less than the value shown in Table 9-C as minimum.
Table 9-C: Constant (K) Values for Vertical Curves Street Category Crest Curves Sag Curves Minimum Desirable Minimum Desirable
Principal Arterial
200
320
125
155
Major Arterial
100
170
80
110
Minor Arterial
55
80
55
70
Major Collector
55
80
55
70
Minor Collector
30
30
35
35
Local
10
10
20
20
Section 909 Performance Guidelines. City of Duluth UDC
9-18
(c) Horizontal Street Alignment.
(1) All new streets shall adhere to the following standards governing horizontal curvature and superelevation shown in Table 9-D.
Table 9-D: Horizontal Curves Street Category Minimum Radius (FT) Max Superelevation
Principal Arterial
1333
0.06
Major Arterial
833
0.06
Minor Arterial
560
0.04
Major Collector
560
0.04
Minor Collector
300
0.04*
Local
120
0.00
* No Superelevation will be allowed on Minor Collectors internal to residential subdivisions.
(2) Superelevation for horizontal curves shall be calculated utilizing the following formula:
v = vehicle design speed, (MPH)
e = rate of superelevation (decimal of a 1-foot rise of 2 per foot of road-way)
f = side friction factor, as fol-lows:
R = v2
15 (e + f)
Vehicle Design Speed (v) 30 40 50
Side Friction Factor (f) .16 .15 .14
(3) Widening section along existing streets shall be designed reflecting existing curva-ture and superelevation, if any, unless the existing street has been included in a specif-ic design by the City, County or Georgia D.O.T. which calls for different standards, in which case the project will be coordinated with the overall design.
(4) Superelevation Runoff.
Roadway edge curves shall be provided for tangent runout (bringing edge from a normal crown to centerline elevation) and superelevation runoff (from the end of tangent runout to the point of design superelevation) in accordance with design standards of the Georgia Department of Transportation or other professional engi-neering standards.
(5) Tangents and Compound Curves.
City of Duluth UDC Section 909 Performance Guidelines.
9-19
Between reverse horizontal curves there shall be not less than the minimum centerline tangents shown in Table 9-E unless otherwise specified by the Georgia Department of Transportation. Compound radii curves are prohibited. The "desirable" lengths shall be provided unless the developer can show that hardship due to topography or configuration of the property will not allow these lengths to be achieved, in which case the "minimum" lengths in Table 9-E may be permitted. For compound circular curves, the ratio of the flatter radius to the sharper radius shall not exceed 1.5 to 1.
Table 9-E: Tangents Street Category Minimum Tangent Length (feet) Desirable Tangent Length (feet)
Major Arterial
125
150
Principal Arterial
150
180
Minor Arterial
100
120
Major Collector
100
120
Minor Collector
75
90
Local
50
60
Note: Minimum tangents are based on the distance traveled in 1.7 seconds at the design speed for each category of street. Desirable lengths of tangents are based on the distance traveled in 2.0 seconds at the design speed.
(d) Horizontal and Vertical Clearances.
(1) Horizontal Clearances.
a. A shoulder of no less than 11 feet from the back of curb or edge of pavement, appropriately graded and having gentle slopes of not more than  inch per foot and rounded cross-sectional design shall be maintained along all streets. Beyond the shoulder but within the right-of-way, slopes shall not exceed 1 foot of rise for each 2 feet of horizontal distance on a cut slope, and 1 foot of fall for each 3 feet of horizontal distance on a fill slope.
b. Along all public streets, a clear zone shall be provided for a minimum distance of 6 feet from back of curb or edge of roadway pavement. Nothing may be located above ground level in this clear zone except traffic control and street signs, public utility structures, mail boxes, City approved street trees and City approved land-scaping.
c. At selected locations, such as the outside of a sharp curve, a wider clear zone with greater horizontal clearances provided to any roadside obstruction may be required.
d. The Department of Transportation, in accordance with Georgia Law 32-6- 51, is authorized to remove or direct the removal of any sign, signal, device, or other
Section 909 Performance Guidelines. City of Duluth UDC
9-20
structure erected, placed, or maintained on the right-of-way of a public road which because of its nature, construction, or operation, constitutes a danger to, or interferes with the vision of, divers of motor vehicles.
(2) Vertical Clearances.
Vertical clearance at underpasses shall be at least 14.5 feet over the entire roadway width.
909.06 Street Intersections.
(a) Angle of Intersection.
Intersections shall generally be at right angles and shall not be at an angle of less than 85 degrees unless approved by the Department, nor less than 80 degrees unless the intersec-tion is signalized in which case the angle of the intersection may be reduced subject to the review and approval of Gwinnett County Traffic Engineering.
(b) Maximum Grade.
Street intersections should be designed with a flat grade wherever possible, but in no case should the grade exceed 2% in normal situations (or 4% in topographical hardship situa-tions on local streets).
(c) Intersection Approaches: Horizontal Alignment.
(1) New local streets which approach an intersection with a street of higher classification on a horizontal curve having a centerline radius of less than 240 feet shall provide a tangent section of roadway at least 30 feet in length. Minor collectors intersecting a major thoroughfare on a horizontal curve having a centerline radius of less than 550 feet shall also provide the 30-foot tangent section. The tangent length shall be meas-ured along the centerline of the intersecting from the right-of-way line of the inter-sected street, to the point of tangency with the centerline of the curve section.
(2) New major thoroughfares shall provide tangent sections at intersections with streets of equal or higher classification as needed to provide adequate stopping distances at their design speeds.
(d) Intersection Approaches: Vertical Alignment.
(1) For intersections with local or minor collector streets, a leveling of the street at a grade not exceeding 2% shall be provided but no level approach distance is required for streets approaching at less than 7%, and a minimum 25-foot level approach distance shall be provided for streets approaching at a grade in excess of 7% or more. (See Standard Drawings.)
(2) As a street approaches an intersection with a major thoroughfare, there shall be a suitable leveling of the street at a grade not exceeding 2% and for a distance not less than those shown in Table 9-F.
City of Duluth UDC Section 909 Performance Guidelines.
9-21
Table 9-F: Approach Distances at Major Intersections Approaching Street Category Minimum Approach Distance* (feet)
Principal Arterial
100
Major Arterial
100
Minor Arterial
100
Major collector
75
Minor Collector
75
Local
50
*Distance of the approach is measured from edge of pavement of the intersected street to the point of curvature in the approaching street.
(e) Intersection Radii.
Intersection radii for roadways, measured at back of curb, and right-of-way lines shall be as shown in Table 9-G. For intersecting streets of difference classification, the larger radii shall be provided. In all cases, adequate right-of-way shall be provided to maintain a mini-mum of 11 feet from back-of-curb. Larger radii may be required for streets intersecting at angles less than 90 degrees.
Table 9-G: Intersection Radii Street Category Roadway Radii (feet) Right-of-Way Radii (feet)
Arterial
40
20
Major Collector
40
20
Minor Collector  Residential
25
9
Minor Collector  Non-Residential
40
20
Local  Residential
20
9
Local  Commercial or Office
25
11
Local  Industrial
40
25
Note: Intersecting right-of-way lines may be joined by an arc having the minimum radius shown, or by a miter which cuts across the right-of-way lines connecting the points where the required radius would have otherwise been tangent.
Section 909 Performance Guidelines. City of Duluth UDC
9-22
(f) Islands.
Islands in street intersections shall conform to the design requirements of the standard draw-ings. In no case shall anything in an island extend more than 3 feet above the street grade within the right-of-way, except traffic regulatory devices and other infrastructure erected or approved by the City of Duluth. No island shall be approved which contains less than 100 square feet.
(g) Intersection Corner Sight Distance.
(1) Intersections shall be designed with adequate corner sight distance for each street which approaches a street in an equal or higher street classification (except an intersection of two local streets). Where necessary, backslopes shall be flattened and horizontal or verti-cal curves lengthened to provide the minimum required sight distance.
(2) The minimum corner sight distance from the approaching street shall be equal to or ex-ceed 10 times the regulated speed of the intersecting street, as measured from the center of the approaching street in both directions along the right-of-way line of the intersected street. As an alternative, the minimum corner sight distance requirement may be calculat-ed using AASHTO Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, Chapter 9 (at-grade intersections), latest edition. The sight distance shall provide clear visibility of an ob-ject 4 feet above the intersected street viewed from the centerline of the approaching street, at a height of 3.5 feet above the ground.
(h) Obstructing Visibility at Intersections.
On any corner lot, within an area formed by the lot lines on the street sides of such lot and a line (miter) joining points on such lot lines located at a distance of 20 feet from the point of their in-tersection, the following shall apply:
(1) There shall be no fence, or wall or hedge higher than 3 feet in height above the estab-lished grade of the intersecting streets.
(2) There shall be no obstruction to vision, other than a post, column or tree not exceeding 1 foot in greatest cross-sectional dimension, between a height of 3 feet and a height of 15 feet above the established grade of either of the intersecting streets.
(i) Turning Lanes at Intersections.
Left turning lanes shall be provided on all new internal project streets, classified as a minor col-lector or major thoroughfare, intersecting a major thoroughfare. Such turning lanes may be re-quired at other locations to meet traffic demand and safe operations. Right turning lanes may be required to meet traffic demands or safety concerns. When provided, turning lanes shall meet the following criteria:
(1) Storage length - A minimum of 150 feet of storage length for turning lanes on any arteri-al street shall be required. A minimum of 100 feet of storage length for turning lanes on all collectors shall be required.
(2) Taper Length - The minimum taper length shall be 50 feet.
(3) Left turning lanes from arterial roads shall be subject to longer storage lengths and ta-pers an as determined on a case by case basis.
City of Duluth UDC Section 909 Performance Guidelines.
9-23
909.07 Driveway Intersections.
(a) Angle and Improvements.
Driveways shall generally intersect streets at right angles. The portion of a driveway located with-in a public right-of-way, if any, shall be paved. Driveways providing access to parking lots which contain six or more spaces shall be paved in accordance with the parking lot requirements of the Parking and Loading Requirements Article of this Code.
(b) Driveway Design Standards.
(1) Residential Driveways. Driveways serving single-family detached or duplex residences shall
meet the following requirements:
a. Driveways shall be paved between the street and the principal building.
b. Driveways shall be no less than 10 feet wide at the right-of-way line, no less than 22 feet in length measured from the back the sidewalk or from the back of curb or edge of pavement if there is no sidewalk, and shall provide a radius to the back of curb or edge of pavement of the roadway of no less than 5 feet. Any other driveway curb cuts shall conform to the standards
below.
(2) All driveways and driveway curb cuts on State highways shall conform to Georgia DOT stand-
ards unless City requirements are more restric-
tive.
a. Driveway Detail 1 (32-foot width, 25-foot radius) for:
1. Service Stations;
2. Commercial Sites (over 800,000 square feet);
3. Office/Institutional Complexes (over 100,000 square feet);
4. Apartment/Condominium Complexes (over 200 units);
5. Mobile Home Complexes (over 200 lots).
b. Driveway Detail 2 (28-foot width, 25-foot radius) for:
1. Commercial Sites (80,000 square feet or less);
2. Office/Institutional Complexes (100,000 square feet or less);
3. Apartment/Condominium Complexes (199 units or less);
4. Manufactured Home Developments (199 lots or less).
Measure driveway length beginning at the back of sidewalk (above) or the back of curb (below) if there is no sidewalk.
Section 909 Performance Guidelines. City of Duluth UDC
9-24
c. Driveway Detail 3 (32-foot width, 40-foot radius) for:
1. Industrial Sites
d. Driveway Detail 4 (Optional Design with Island) for:
1. Private Commercial/Office Street Entrances;
2. Private Entrances to Apartment/Condominium Complexes (over 200 units); and
3. Private Entrances to Manufactured Home Developments (over 200 units).
(c) Auxiliary Lanes.
Along any major thoroughfare, a deceleration lane or acceleration lane, larger turning radius, traffic islands, or other devices or designs may be required to avoid specific traffic hazards which would otherwise be created by the proposed driveway location.
(d) Corner Sight Distance.
All driveways approaching a minor collector or major thoroughfare shall provide adequate cor-ner sight distance. The minimum corner sight distance from the driveway shall be equal to or exceed 10 times the regulated speed of the intersected street, as measured from the centerline of the driveway in both directions along the right-of-way line of the intersected street. As an al-ternative, the minimum corner sight distance requirement may be calculated using AASHTO Pol-icy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, Chapter 9 (at-grade intersections), latest edi-tion. The sight distance shall provide clear visibility of an object four feet above the intersected street viewed from the centerline of the driveway at the right-of- way line of the intersected street, at a height of 3.5 feet above the ground.
(e) Separation and Spacing.
All driveways except those serving single family residential units on individual lots, shall meet the following criteria:
(1) Minimum separation from a street intersection: 100 feet from centerline of driveway to nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street. For any driveway on a major thorough-fare having a centerline between 100 feet to 200 feet from the intersecting street right-of-way line, access restrictions, such as right turn only, may be imposed to avoid traffic haz-ards. Greater separation may be required for safe operation of a free right lane, accelera-tion or deceleration lane, etc.
(2) Minimum separation between driveways along the same side of a major thoroughfare: 100 feet between centerlines as measured along the roadway edge or back of curb.
(3) Whenever possible, proposed driveways along one side of a street shall coincide with exist-ing or proposed driveways on the opposite side of the street.
(4) Maximum number of driveways serving a single project: one for each 400 feet of property frontage, or part thereof per street, along a major thoroughfare. This is not meant to be a spacing standard but only an expression of the total number of driveways that will be permitted serving a single project. In some cases, where the safe and efficient movement of traffic will not be adversely impacted, this criteria may be altered by the Director.
City of Duluth UDC Section 910 Specifications.
9-25
DIVISION II. PROJECT CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
Section 910. Specifications.
Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein, all of the materials, methods of construction, and workman-ship for the work covered in reference to street construction shall conform to the latest specifications of the Georgia Department of Transportation (Georgia DOT).
910.01 Sub-Grade Preparation for All Streets.
(a) Sub-grade preparation shall be in accordance with Georgia DOT specifications and this Article.
(b) If any sections of the sub-grade are composed of topsoil, organic, or other unsuitable or unsta-ble material, such material shall be removed and replaced with suitable material and then thor-oughly compacted as specified for fill or stabilized with stone or a geo-textile or geo-grid.
(c) Fill shall be placed in uniform, horizontal layers not more than 8-inch thick (loose meas-urement). Moisture content shall be adjusted as necessary to compact material to 95% of max-imum dry density except for the top 12 inches which shall be compacted to 100% of maximum dry density. Engineered reports shall be submitted to the City before moving forward.
(d) After the earthwork has been completed, all storm drainage, water, and sanitary sewer utilities have been installed within the right-of-way as appropriate, and the backfill in all such ditches thoroughly compacted, the sub-grade shall be brought to the lines, grades, and typical roadway section shown on the plans. Engineered reports shall be submitted to the City before moving forward.
(e) Utility trenches cut in the sub-grade shall be backfilled as specified herein. Compaction tests at the rate of one per 150 feet of trench shall be provided to verify compaction. City approval shall be required.
(f) The sub-grade must pass roll testing prior to placement of the base material. With the approval of the Department, a geo-textile or grid may be used to stabilize a sub-grade that does not pass proofrolling.
(g) When the street is to be used for construction traffic before the paving work is completed, a layer of stone (except crusher run) shall be laid as a traffic surface. This material shall not be used as a part of the base material. It may be worked into the subgrade, or it shall be removed before the base course is set up for paving
(h) Provisions shall be made to drain low points in the road construction when the final paving is de-layed. A break in the berm section is required when the curbing has not been constructed. Af-ter installation, drainage under the curb to side slopes is required, using minimum 4 inch diame-ter pipe sections.
Section 911. Project Access Improvement Standards.
(a) For sections wider than 4 feet, the widening section shall comply with the construction stand-ards for new streets, in accordance with the street's category as shown on the Comprehensive Plan or the Planning and Development Department web page. The base course must pass roll testing prior to paving. If a delay in paving is reasonably expected by the Developer or the Plan-ning and Development Department, the base shall be primed with 0.25 gallon of R.C. 70 per square yard and cured for 7 days before paving.
Section 912 New Local and Minor Collector Streets. City of Duluth UDC
9-26
(b) For sections less than 4 feet wide, 7 inches of Class "A" concrete base (5 inches on local and mi-nor collector streets) and 1 inches of "E" or "F" topping shall be required.
Section 912. New Local and Minor Collector Streets.
912.01 Local and Minor Collector Streets within a Residential Subdivision.
(a) Asphalt Streets (NOTE: Only two-pass streets described below re acceptable for public dedica-tion with the City of Duluth):
The following types of base materials may be used:
(1) Crushed Stone Base
a. Two-Pass Street:
1. The base course shall consist of at least 5 inches of graded aggregate base. After being thoroughly compacted and brought to proper section 2 inches of "B" binder shall be applied.
2. If a delay in paving is reasonably expected by the Developer or the Department, the base shall be primed with 0.25 gallon of R.C. 70 per square yard the same day it is compacted, and cured for 7 days prior to paving.
3. The final 1 inch of type "E" or "F" wearing course shall be applied after 90% of the houses on the street have been built, or prior to the end of the maintenance pe-riod (but after the 11th month), whichever occurs first. Prior to applying wearing course, a tack coat shall be applied to the binder course at a rate of no less than 0.05 gallons per square yard.
4. Type of tack shall be approved by the Planning and Development Department prior to placement.
b. One-Pass Street:
1. The base course shall consist of at least 6 inches of graded aggregate base. After being thoroughly compacted and brought to proper section the final 2 inches of type "E" or "F" wearing course shall be applied.
2. If a delay in paving is reasonably expected by the Developer or the Department, the base shall be primed with 0.25 gallon of R.C. 70 per square yard the same day it is compacted, and cured for 7 days prior to paving.
(2) Soil Cement Base.
a. If the base material (resident soil) is unsatisfactory to the Planning and Develop-ment Department then a soil cement mix design with engineering test results accepta-ble to the Department. The design must come from a geo-technical firm with the re-sults certified by a Professional Engineer registered in the State of Georgia. The tests required for the design are ASTM D558 or AASHTO T134 or ASTM D559 and/or 560 or AASHTO T135 and 136.
b. The minimum base course shall consist of at least 6 inches of suitable soil (high mica content not suitable) stabilized with 10% of Portland Cement by volume (approximate-ly 42.3 pounds per sq. yd.). Depending on whether the street is to be constructed as an on-pass or two-pass street, please refer to Section 912.01, a(1)(a) or Section 912.01, a(1)(b) for the applicable binder and/or paving standards. Where the grade of
City of Duluth UDC Section 912 New Local and Minor Collector Streets.
9-27
the street is 5% or greater, a single surface treatment course must be applied before the binder.
(b) Concrete Streets:
Five inches of 3500 psi concrete is to be applied on a stabilized subgrade, consisting of at least 150 pounds of stone per square yard mixed in 4 inches deep and compacted. The design and construction of the street shall comply with the Portland Cement Association standards.
912.02 Local Residential-Rural Streets.
Where allowed (in subdivisions zoned RA-200 and upgrading off-site substandard streets), Local Residential-Rural Streets do not require curb and gutter. The road base shall be extended 1 foot beyond the edge of pavement, and the shoulders shall extend 8 feet from the edge of pavement to the standard ditch section on each side (see Standard Drawings). Otherwise, the roadway shall comply with the standards for new residential subdivision streets, above.
912.03 Nonresidential Subdivision or Development Streets.
The following standards shall apply to new local and minor collector streets in nonresidential subdi-visions and other nonresidential development projects.
(a) Asphalt Streets (NOTE: Only two-pass streets described below are acceptable for public dedi-cation within the City of Duluth):
The following types of base materials may be used:
(1) Two-Pass Street (Crushed Stone Base):
a. The base course shall consist of at least 7 inches of graded aggregate base. After being thoroughly compacted and brought to proper section, 2 inches of "B" binder shall be applied.
b. If a delay in paving is reasonably expected by the Developer or the Department, the base shall be primed with 0.25 gallon of R.C. 70 per square yard the same day it is compacted, and cured for 7 days prior to paving.
c. The final 1 inch of type "E" or "F" wearing course shall be applied after 90% of the buildings on the street have been built, or prior to the end of the maintenance period (but after the 11th month), whichever occurs first.
d. Prior to applying wearing course, a tack coat shall be applied to the binder course at a rate of no less than 0.05 gallons per square yard. Type of tack shall be approved by the Planning and Development Department prior to placement.
(2) One-Pass Street (Crushed Stone Base):
a. The base course shall consist of at least 8 inches of graded aggregate base. After being thoroughly compacted and brought to proper section the final 2 inches of type "E" or "F" wearing course shall be applied.
b. If a delay in paving is reasonably expected by the Developer or the Department, the base shall be primed with 0.25 gallon of R.C. 70 per square yard the same day it is compacted, and cured of 7 days prior to paving.
Section 913 New Major Thoroughfares. City of Duluth UDC
9-28
(b) Concrete Streets.
(1) Seven inches of Class A 3,500 psi concrete is to be applied to a stabilized subgrade, con-sisting of at least 150 pounds of stone per square yard mixed in four inches deep and compacted.
(2) The design and construction of the street shall comply with the Portland Cement Associa-tion standards.
Section 913. New Major Thoroughfares.
Major thoroughfares abutting residential or non-residential development projects shall be construct-ed in accordance with designs prepared by Gwinnett County or Georgia D.O.T., or, if no design has been prepared, to the following standards as indicated by Table 9-H.
Table 9-H: Construction Standards for Major Thoroughfares Street Category Base (inches) Bender (inches) Topping (inches)
Principal Arterial
10 GAB
5*
1  E or F
Major Arterial
10 GAB
4B
1  E or F
Minor Arterial
10 GAB
3B
1  E or F
Major Collector
10 GAB
3B
1  E or F
Minor Collector
8 GAB
2B
1  E or F
*2  type B binder and 2  asphaltic concrete base.
913.01 Curb and Gutter.
All new streets and Project Access Improvements shall be provided with curb and gutter except in subdivisions zoned R-100, and subdivisions zoned RA-200, where swale ditches may be provided in lieu of curb and gutter. All gutters shall drain smoothly with no areas of ponding.
(a) Residential Curbing.
Residential curbing shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Concrete shall be Class "A" (as defined by Georgia D.O.T.) and have a minimum strength of 3,000 PSI at 28 days.
(2) Typical minimum section shall be 6 x 24 x 12.
(3) Only vertical curbing is permitted.
(b) Industrial or Commercial Curbing.
Industrial or commercial curbing shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Concrete shall be Class "A" (as defined by Georgia D.O.T.) and have a minimum strength of 3,000 PSI at 28 days.
(2) Typical minimum section shall be 8" X 24" X 14".
City of Duluth UDC Section 914 Sidewalks.
9-29
(3) Only vertical curbing is permitted.
(c) Principal and Major Arterials Curbing.
(1) Concrete shall be Class "A" (as defined by Georgia D.O.T.) and have a minimum strength of 3,000 PSI at 28 days.
(2) Typical minimum section shall be 8" X 30" X 14.
(3) Only vertical curbing is permitted.
913.02 Construction Methods.
(a) Curb and gutter shall be set true to line and grade, horizontal be field staked, and finished to the section shown on the plans. Along the Project Access Improvements of a road for which the De-partment of Transportation of the Department of Public Works resurfacing has been scheduled within 1 year of the new construction, the grade of the new gutter shall be placed 1 inch above the Project Access Improvement pavement grade in areas where drainage will not be adversely affected.
(b) Line and grade shall be set by developer's engineer or surveyor on grade less than 2% and greater than 12%, and within 100 feet in both directions from all low points.
(c) One-half inch expansion joints or pre-molded bituminous expansion joint material shall be pro-vided at all structures and radius points and at intervals not to exceed 250 feet in the remaining sections of the curb and gutter.
(d) Inferior workmanship or unprofessional construction methods resulting in unacceptable curb and gutter will be cause for rejection of the finished work.
(e) Disturbed areas along all curbing shall be backfilled, stabilized, and grassed.
913.03 Underground Utilities.
(a) All water and sanitary sewer utilities and storm drain facilities within the curbs shall be in-stalled and the ditches backfilled and thoroughly compacted before any pavement or base is installed.
(b) Once the base has been placed, all further installation of utilities under the roadway shall be bored or otherwise comply with Section 916, Street Cuts.
(c) All utility manholes and valve boxes shall be brought flush to the finished grade within the roadway section.
(d) All utility locations shall adhere to the details found in the Standard Drawings.
Section 914. Sidewalks.
914.01 Construction Standards.
(a) Sidewalks shall be concrete and a minimum of 4 feet wide and 4 inches thick on local streets and a minimum of 5 feet wide and 4 inches thick on minor collector or major thoroughfares.
(b) Concrete shall be Class B (as defined by Georgia DOT) and have a minimum strength of 2,200 psi at 28 days.
(c) Sidewalks located in the public right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the Georgia Department of Transportation (DOT) shall be constructed in compliance with Georgia DOT design standard 9031W.
Section 914 Sidewalks. City of Duluth UDC
9-30
(d) Curb ramps shall be provided at all curb termini and shall be a minimum of 3 feet in width exclu-sive of flared sides.
(e) Expansion joints shall be provided at all property lines (extended) and driveway crossings. Con-trol joints shall be provided every 10 feet.
(f) Disturbed areas resulting from sidewalk construction shall be backfilled, stabilized and grassed.
(g) Cross Slope.
Sidewalks shall be constructed with a cross slope of  inch per foot. Sidewalks shall main-tain this cross slope at driveway crossings or transition the sidewalk to a driveway with ramps and detectable warnings.
(h) Final Stabilization.
Disturbed areas resulting from sidewalk construction shall be backfilled, stabilized and grassed or landscaped.
(i) Georgia DOT Controlled Roads.
Sidewalks located in the right-of-way of roads under the jurisdiction of the Georgia DOT shall be constructed in accordance with Georgia DOT design and construction standards.
914.02 Installation Deadlines.
Sidewalks shall be installed prior to approval of a Final Plat or issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy (C.O.) in accordance with this Section unless a Performance Bond is posted. The cost of a sidewalk installation may be set aside in escrow only when proposed road improvements may impact the lo-cation of the sidewalk.
(a) Sidewalks required on residential building lots shall be installed prior to issuance of a C.O. for each individual dwelling.
(b) Sidewalks required on common or recreation areas shall be installed prior to issuance of a C.O. or Certificate of Completion, as appropriate.
(c) Sidewalks required on other projects shall be installed prior to issuance of a C.O. or Certificate of Completion, as appropriate.
914.03 Sidewalk Curb and Ramp Design and Construction Standards.
(a) Intersection radius curb ramps shall be provided at street intersections.
(b) L-shaped mid- block curb ramps shall be provided to end sidewalks at the radius of the cul-de-sac turnarounds in residential subdivisions.
(c) Straight ramps may be provided at intersections of curbed driveways and at streets without sidewalks.
(d) Curb ramps shall meet the requirements of the Citys Standard Drawings.
914.04 Damage Repair.
Damage to sidewalks and ramps caused by construction or development activity shall be repaired at no cost to the City within 30 days or prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, whichever is ear-lier.
City of Duluth UDC Section 915 Utilities and Easements.
9-31
Section 915. Utilities and Easements.
915.01 Placement of Utilities
(a) All authorized public underground utilities shall be located within the right-of-way of a pub-lic street or within an easement designated for such use. Within public street rights-of- way, placement of the various authorized utilities (power, gas, cable TV, water and sewer) shall con-form to the specific locations designated for such use by the City of Duluth, as illustrated in Standard Drawings.
(b) No other underground utilities, such as private lawn sprinkler systems, yard lighting, etc., shall be installed within a public right-of-way or easement except by authorization of the Depart-ment. Such authorization, if issued, shall require the applicant to assume all repair costs of the applicant's facilities should they be damaged during the course of installation, maintenance or repair of any of the public utilities authorized to occupy said right-of-way or easement.
915.02 Water System and Fire Hydrants.
(a) The developer shall install or have installed a system of water mains connected to a public wa-ter supply system in accordance with the requirements of the authority having jurisdiction.
(b) All water mains, fire hydrants and appurtenances shall be designed in accordance with the pol-icies, standards, plans and specifications of the Gwinnett County Fire Prevention Ordinance and the water system having jurisdiction. Where jurisdiction resides with the Gwinnett County Water System, the public water mains and appurtenances shall be designed by the County Water System upon submittal of the Development Plans for the project.
(c) Within the Gwinnett County Water System jurisdiction, water mains and appurtenances shall be installed after installation of the curbs and gutters and before paving, or after staking of the curb line and submission to the Water System of an as-graded survey of the street profile accompa-nied by a certification executed by the owner as required by the Water System that the sub-grade will not change. Water mains shall be relocated as necessary to meet Water System reg-ulations prior to Approval of Development Conformance, if improperly located to final curb line or grade.
915.03 Sanitary Sewer Disposal.
(a) Connection to an approved sewage disposal system shall be made, which may require the con-struction of an on-site system or the extension of public sanitary sewerage and associated ap-purtenances, as required under the Water Pollution Control Regulations of Gwinnett County or as required by the Gwinnett County Health Department.
(b) No septic tanks or other individual on-site sewage disposal system shall be allowed if public sewer is available. All structures shall connect to public sewer, when such sewer is available, in accordance with the Sewer Regulations of Gwinnett County. Sewer availability shall be deter-mined by the Gwinnett County Water Pollution Control Division.
(c) Communal on-site sewage disposals are prohibited. Privately financed wastewater disposal plants, septic tanks, or other sewage treatment system, serving more than one residence or more than one property, are prohibited. If a property does not use an individual on-site sewage disposal system, it must be connected to a sewer leading to the publicly owned treatment works.
Section 915 Utilities and Easements. City of Duluth UDC
9-32
(d) Lots with septic tanks and tile drain-field sewerage disposal systems shall contain the contiguous area outside of the 100-year floodplain as required by the Gwinnett County Health Department.
(e) The Gwinnett County Health Department may require notation that certain lots must meet additional requirements prior to issuance of a building permit, or otherwise limit development relative to Health Department regulations.
(1) Such lots may include lots upon which adequate depth to water table must be demonstrated during the appropriate season of the year, adequate percolation tests must be performed, limitations upon the number of bedrooms in a dwelling, etc.,
(2) No lot shall be included on a Final Plat which the Health Department is not confi-dent will meet all Health Department regulations at a reasonable cost or within a reasona-ble period of time, except lots proposed to be served by sanitary sewer in subdivision where "dry" sewer has been installed. Such lots shall be noted - "Approval by Water Pol-lution Control for connection to sanitary sewer required prior to issuance of a building permit."
915.04 Easements.
(a) Temporary construction easements and permanent easements for public utilities, drainage or other public facilities shall be dedicated to the City of Duluth and/or Gwinnett County in ac-cordance with City Requirements. All easements shall be stabilized in accordance with the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia.
(b) Drainage easements are required for any part of the drainage system which is designed to carry storm water runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed.
(1) Drainage easements for improved ditches, pipe construction, and detention facilities shall be cleared, opened, and stabilized at the time of development to control surface water run-off (See also the Erosion Control and Stormwater Management Article of this Devel-opment Code).
(2) Run-off slope and sideslopes shall be specified by the Developer's Engineer, according to good engineering practice.
(3) Drainage easements for storm drain pipes that carry water shall be provided according to the minimum requirements found in Table 9-I below, and shall conform to City Standards.
(4) The minimum easement width shall be based on the pipe diameter (span) plus 2 feet, plus two times the pipe invert depth. This value shall be rounded up to the nearest 5 feet. For pipes exceeding 16 feet in depth, a pre-conference should be held with the City to de-termine what additional requirements may be required. Table 9-I: Easements for Storm Drain Pipes Pipe Size (ft) Maximum Pope Invert Depth (Feet) Minimum Easement Width (Feet) 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
1.25
20
20
20
20
20
25
25
30
30
30
35
35
40
1.5
20
20
20
20
20
25
25
30
30
30
35
35
40
2.0
20
20
20
20
20
25
25
30
30
30
35
35
40
City of Duluth UDC Section 915 Utilities and Easements.
9-33
Table 9-I: Easements for Storm Drain Pipes Pipe Size (ft) Maximum Pope Invert Depth (Feet) Minimum Easement Width (Feet)
2.5
20
20
20
20
25
25
25
30
30
35
35
35
40
3.0
20
20
20
20
25
25
25
30
30
35
35
35
40
3.5
NA
20
20
20
25
25
30
30
30
35
35
40
40
4.0
NA
20
20
20
25
25
30
30
30
35
35
40
40
4.5
NA
NA
20
25
25
25
30
30
35
35
35
40
40
5.0
NA
NA
20
25
25
25
30
30
35
35
35
40
40
5.5
NA
NA
NA
25
25
30
30
30
35
35
40
40
40
6.0
NA
NA
NA
25
25
30
30
30
35
35
40
40
40
(c) Permanent sanitary sewer easements shall be no less than 20 feet in width when no other paral-lel utilities are located therein. When warranted, temporary construction easement widths shall be determined by the Gwinnett County Water Pollution Control Division.
(d) A common easement for sanitary sewer and drainage purposes may be allowed if the pipes are parallel and at least 10 feet is provided between pipes (on center). The easement width shall be equal to the width shown in Table 9-I plus the width distance separating the pipes (minimum of 10 feet).
(e) Drainage easements shall be provided where a development is traversed by or contains a wa-ter course, impoundment, detention facility, improved channel, floodplain, natural stream or channel. It shall conform substantially to the flooding limits of the 100 year storm based on ful-ly developed conditions per the Land Use Plan, but shall be no less than 20 feet in width.
(f) Drainage easements off the street right-of-way shall be clearly defined on the Final Plat. The property owner will be required to keep the easement free of obstruction in such a way as to as-sure the maximum designed flow at all times. The property owner shall not alter any drain-age improvements without the prior written approval from the City. No structure shall be con-structed or erected in an easement without the prior written approval from the City. Driveways may cross perpendicular to the easement. Property owners may plant landscaping in an easement that is piped; however, the City is not responsible for replacing the landscape material located in the easement when it is removed to maintain the drainage system.
(g) All drainage, sewer, access or other easements which were required to be cleared shall be fine graded and grassed within 10 days of completing construction work. The use of sediment con-trol measures may be required to protect the area until a comprehensive vegetative cover is ob-tained.
915.05 Right-of-Way Protection.
(a) Rights-of-way Occupancy Registration.
(1) Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this Section is derived, including by lease, sublease or assign-ment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by
Section 915 Utilities and Easements. City of Duluth UDC
9-34
state, federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the department with-in 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this Section is derived.
(2) Following the effective date of the ordinance from which this Section is derived, each utility who seeks to have facilities located in any rights-of-way under the control of city, unless specifically exempted by state, federal law or this Code, shall file a notification of construc-tion with the department.
(b) Registration Procedure.
The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and in-clude, but not be limited to:
(1) The name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the permit registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility to be installed, maintained or repaired in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner.
(2) The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a reg-istration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is avail-able to the city at all times.
(3) A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements.
(4) A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the reg-istration.
(c) Issuance of Written Acceptance of Registration.
(1) If a registration is incomplete, the Planning and Development Director shall notify the regis-trant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the Planning and Development Director shall so notify the utility in writing.
(2) Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining the permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropri-ate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein.
(d) Facilities in Place without Registration.
Beginning one year after the effective date of the ordinance from which this Code Section is de-rived, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service
City of Duluth UDC Section 915 Utilities and Easements.
9-35
agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordi-nance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity.
(e) Notification to City of Construction is Required.
Written notification to the Planning and Development Director from the utility is required prior to any of the following activities:
(1) Before any utility does any work to construct, install, maintain, remove or relocate facilities on, along, over or under the right-of-way in the city; or
(2) Construction adjacent to the rights-of-way in the city that require tree trimming within the rights-of-way.
(f) Notification Procedure.
The written notification shall be submitted on a form provided by the Planning and Develop-ment Director and shall specifically include:
(1) The name and address of the utility;
(2) The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation;
(3) The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work;
(4) The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s);
(5) The projected dates for the work to be started and finished;
(6) The estimated cost of the project;
(7) An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or to any member of the public caused by work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued.
(g) Locate Requests Required.
As provided in O.C.G.A  25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended. No utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility plan-ning the blasting or excavating has given forty-eight (48) hours' notice by submitting a locate re-quest to the utility protection center, beginning the next business day after such notice is pro-vided, excluding hours during days other than business days.
(h) Conditions of Street Occupancy.
Section 915 Utilities and Easements. City of Duluth UDC
9-36
Failure to comply with the terms and conditions set forth in this Article may result in revocation of registration and removal of facilities from the rights-of-way.
(1) The 1988 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards manual, including all references con-tained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except Appendix B (Permit Forms and supporting Documents), promulgated by the State of Geor-gia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time is hereby adopt-ed by reference and incorporated in the Article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this Code Section. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the Planning and Development Director or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this Code Section and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agen-cies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the City of Duluth municipal equivalents
(2) Protection of traffic and roadway. In conformance with city policy, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way, or the right-of-way itself.
(3) Grading. If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the re-quest of the city upon at least ten (10) business days notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation.
(4) Installation of poles and other wire holding structures and relocation. Unless otherwise pro-vided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wire holding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or struc-tures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own ex-pense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners.
(i) Restoration of Property.
A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder or thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the [event] that caused such disturbance or damage. If utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same.
City of Duluth UDC Section 915 Utilities and Easements.
9-37
(j) Discontinuance of Operations, Abandoned and Unused Facilities.
(1) A utility who has discontinued or is discontinuing operation of any facilities in the city shall:
a. Provide information satisfactory to the city that the utility's obligations for its facilities in the rights-of-way under this Code Section and any other provision in the codified ordinances or other laws have been lawfully assumed by another utility;
b. Submit a written proposal to re-use its facilities;
c. Submit a written proposal for abandonment of facilities. Said proposal must be ap-proved by the Planning and Development Director;
d. Remove its entire facilities within a reasonable amount of time and in a manner ac-ceptable to the city; or
e. Submit to the city, in good faith and within a reasonable amount of time, a proposal for transferring ownership of its facilities to the city. If a utility proceeds under this clause, the city may, at its option do one (1) or more of the following:
1. Purchase the facilities;
2. Accept donation of some or all facilities; or
3. Require the utility to post a bond in an amount sufficient to reimburse the city for its reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the facilities.
(2) Facilities of a utility who fails to comply with the above provision shall be deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned facilities are deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nui-sance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prose-cuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise at law or in equity.
(k) Termination of Registration.
(1) The registration statement shall remain in place for one year and renew each subsequent year automatically unless the utility is in default. The Planning and Development Director shall give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has:
a. Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a registration application or any law of the city, state, or federal government;
b. Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this Code Section;
c. Practiced any fraud or deceit upon city; or
d. Made a material misrepresentation of fact in its application for registration.
(2) If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the approval of registration. If the Planning and Development Director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the fol-lowing procedure shall be followed:
a. City shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed ter-mination and shall allow a utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach.
Section 916 Street Cuts. City of Duluth UDC
9-38
b. If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the registration terminated.
(l) Unauthorized Use of Public Rights-of-Way.
(1) No utility shall use the rights-of-way to operate any facilities that have not been authorized by the city in accordance with the terms of this Code Section.
(2) No utility shall place or have placed any facilities in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through the rights-of-way, unless allowed under this Code Section.
(3) Each and every unauthorized use shall be deemed to be a violation and a distinct and sepa-rate offense. Each and every day any violation of this Code Section continues shall consti-tute a distinct and separate offense.
(4) No utility shall fail to comply with the provisions of this Code Section. Each and every failure to comply shall be deemed a distinct and separate offense. Each and every day any viola-tion of this Code Section continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
(m) Other Provisions.
(1) Reservation of Regulatory and Police Powers.
The city by issuing a written approval of registration under this Code Section, does not sur-render or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or which may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and Laws of the United States, State of Georgia, and under the provisions of the city's codified ordi-nances to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility by applying for and being issued a written approval of registration, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce gen-eral ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In par-ticular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities.
(2) Compliance.
No utility shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this Code Section by reason of any failure of city to enforce prompt compliance.
(3) Appeals.
See the Appeals Article of this Development Code.
Section 916. Street Cuts.
(a) All utility construction plans within City right-of-way shall be reviewed and approved by the De-partment before construction begins. Street cuts shall not be allowed unless deemed absolute-ly necessary due to the presence of rock, the need to tap into an existing line beneath the road surface, or other circumstance which makes boring impossible or infeasible.
(b) No City maintained street shall be cut, bored or demolished in any way until a Land Disturbance Permit FOR STREET CUT ONLY is approved by the Planning and Development Department.
City of Duluth UDC Section 916 Street Cuts.
9-39
(1) The pre-requisites for issuing a Land Disturbance Permit as described in the Procedures and Permits Article of this Development Code shall be eliminated unless land disturbance outside the public right-of-way is necessary.
(2) A Maintenance Bond shall be submitted to the Department prior to issuance of a Land Dis-turbance Permit and prior to commencement of work.
(3) Maintenance Bond amounts are as follows:
a. Right-of-Way of street up to 80 feet $500.00
b. Right-of-Way of street 81 feet or more $1,000.00
The Maintenance Bond shall be held for a period of six months from the completion date of the project. The Duluth Department of Public Works shall inspect the street cut prior to releasing the Maintenance Bond. Said street cut shall not be accepted by the City until the Maintenance Bond is released in writing.
(c) If approved, all trenches shall be backfilled and compacted the same day the trench is opened.
(1) Trenches under the paving shall be returned to 95% compaction.
(2) Trenches elsewhere shall be returned to 90% compaction.
(3) See Section 910.01 for trench compaction and test requirements.
(d) All trenches under paving shall be concreted with 8" of Class "A" concrete base and 1 inch of type "E" or "F" wearing course asphalt is to be spread.
(1) The paving cut shall be widened to a minimum of 9" beyond the edges of the trench.
(2) The edges of the paving cut shall be smooth.
(e) All such work shall be coordinated through the Department of Planning and Development, De-partment of Public Works and the Gwinnett County Department of Public Utilities prior to con-struction. Contact the Duluth Police Department at least 48 hours in advance of closure of traf-fic lanes.
City of Duluth UDC
9-40
BLANK PAGE
10-i
Article 10. Erosion Control and Stormwater Management
Article 10 contains the requirements that relate to the impact of rainfall events on the natural and manmade environment, in-cluding the erosion and siltation effects of site grading and land disturbance activities and the control of stormwater flows.
Table of Contents Page
DIVISION I. SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL ............................................. 10-1
Section 1001. Standards Incorporated by Reference. ............................................................................... 10-1
Section 1002. Definitions Related to Soil Erosion, Sedimentation Pollution Control. ................................. 10-1
Section 1003. Exemptions. ...................................................................................................................... 10-4
Section 1004. Minimum Requirements for Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Using BMPs...... 10-6
1004.01 General Provisions. .................................................................................................................................... 10-6
1004.02 Minimum Requirements; BMPs. ................................................................................................................ 10-7
1004.03 Minimum Requirements; Specific. ............................................................................................................. 10-7
Section 1005. Application/Permit Process. ............................................................................................ 10-11
1005.01 General. .................................................................................................................................................... 10-11
1005.02 Application Requirements........................................................................................................................ 10-11
1005.03 Plan Requirements. .................................................................................................................................. 10-13
1005.04 Permits. .................................................................................................................................................... 10-13
Section 1006. Inspection and Enforcement. ........................................................................................... 10-14
Section 1007. Penalties and Incentives. ................................................................................................. 10-15
1007.01 Failure to Obtain a Permit for Land-Disturbing Activity. .......................................................................... 10-15
1007.02 Stop-Work Orders. ................................................................................................................................... 10-15
1007.03 Bond Forfeiture. ....................................................................................................................................... 10-15
1007.04 Monetary Penalties. ................................................................................................................................. 10-16
Section 1008. Education and Certification. ............................................................................................ 10-16
Section 1009. Administrative Appeal and Judicial Review. ..................................................................... 10-17
1009.01 Administrative Remedies. ........................................................................................................................ 10-17
1009.02 Judicial Review. ........................................................................................................................................ 10-17
Section 1010. Liability. .......................................................................................................................... 10-17
DIVISION II. SITE GRADING ................................................................................................................. 10-18
Section 1011. Requirements ................................................................................................................. 10-18
1011.01 Grading Plan ............................................................................................................................................. 10-18
1011.02 Metropolitan River Act ............................................................................................................................. 10-18
1011.03 Embankments .......................................................................................................................................... 10-18
1011.04 Slopes ....................................................................................................................................................... 10-18
1011.05 Soil Stabilization ....................................................................................................................................... 10-18
Table of Contents Continued City of Duluth UDC
10-ii
DIVISION III. STORMWATER CULVERT AND PIPE DRAINAGE SYSTEMS .................................................. 10-19
Section 1012. Purpose .......................................................................................................................... 10-19
Section 1013. Standards Incorporated by Reference. ............................................................................. 10-19
Section 1014. Standard Specifications ................................................................................................... 10-19
1014.01 Allowable Pipe Materials. ........................................................................................................................ 10-19
1014.02 Pipes in Dams. ......................................................................................................................................... 10-20
Section 1015. Pipe Installation .............................................................................................................. 10-20
1015.01 General Installation Requirements. ........................................................................................................ 10-20
1015.02 Bedding, Structural Backfill and Final Backfill. ........................................................................................ 10-20
Section 1016. Stormwater System Design Criteria. ................................................................................ 10-21
1016.01 General Design Criteria. .......................................................................................................................... 10-21
1016.02 Piped Collection System Design Criteria. ................................................................................................ 10-21
1016.03 Culvert Design Criteria............................................................................................................................. 10-22
1016.04 Energy Dissipation Design for Piped Systems and Culverts. .................................................................... 10-22
1016.05 Discharge of Concentrated Flows. ........................................................................................................... 10-23
1016.06 Surface Drainage Design Standards. ....................................................................................................... 10-23
1016.07 Surface Drainage Construction Standards ............................................................................................... 10-23
DIVISION IV. POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ....................................................... 10-24
Section 1017. Purpose and Intent. ........................................................................................................ 10-24
Section 1018. Standards Incorporated by Reference. ............................................................................. 10-24
Section 1019. Definitions Related to Post-Development Stormwater Management. ............................... 10-25
Section 1020. Applicability. ................................................................................................................... 10-28
Section 1021. Post-Development Stormwater Permit Procedures and Requirements. ............................ 10-28
1021.01 Permit Application Requirement. ............................................................................................................ 10-28
1021.02 Stormwater Concept Plan and Consultation Meeting. ............................................................................ 10-29
1021.03 Stormwater Management Plan Requirements. ...................................................................................... 10-30
1021.04 Stormwater Management Inspection and Maintenance Agreements.................................................... 10-34
1021.05 Modifications for Off-Site Facilities. ........................................................................................................ 10-35
Section 1022. Post-Development Stormwater Management Performance Criteria ................................. 10-36
1022.01 Water Quality. ......................................................................................................................................... 10-36
1022.02 Stream Channel Protection. .................................................................................................................... 10-36
1022.03 Overbank Flooding Protection. ............................................................................................................... 10-37
1022.04 Extreme Flooding Protection. .................................................................................................................. 10-37
1022.05 Structural Stormwater Controls. ............................................................................................................. 10-37
1022.06 Stormwater Credits for Nonstructural Measures. ................................................................................... 10-38
1022.07 Drainage System Guidelines. ................................................................................................................... 10-38
1022.08 Dam Design Guidelines............................................................................................................................ 10-39
Section 1023. Construction Inspections of Post-Development Stormwater Management System ........... 10-41
1023.01 Inspections to Ensure Stormwater Management Plan Compliance During Construction. ..................... 10-41
1023.02 Final Inspections and As Built Plans. ....................................................................................................... 10-42
City of Duluth UDC Table of Contents Continued
10-iii
Section 1024. Ongoing Inspection and Maintenance of Stormwater Facilities and Practices. .................. 10-42
1024.01 Long-Term Maintenance Inspection of Stormwater Facilities and Practices. .......................................... 10-42
1024.02 Right-of-Entry for Inspection. .................................................................................................................. 10-43
1024.03 Records of Maintenance Activities. ......................................................................................................... 10-43
1024.04 Failure to Maintain. .................................................................................................................................. 10-43
DIVISION V. ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION ................................................................ 10-43
Section 1025. Purpose and Intent. ........................................................................................................ 10-43
Section 1026. Definitions Related to Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection. .......................................... 10-44
Section 1027. Applicability. ................................................................................................................... 10-46
Section 1028. Illicit Non-Stormwater Discharge and Illicit Connection. ................................................... 10-47
1028.01 Prohibitions. ............................................................................................................................................. 10-47
1028.02 Industrial or Construction Activity Discharges. ........................................................................................ 10-47
1028.03 Access and Inspection of Properties and Facilities. ................................................................................. 10-48
1028.04 Notification of Accidental Discharges and Spills. ..................................................................................... 10-49
1028.05 Violations, Enforcement and Penalties. ................................................................................................... 10-49
1028.06 Enforcement Measures. ........................................................................................................................... 10-50
1028.07 Costs of Abatement of the Violation. ....................................................................................................... 10-51
1028.08 Criminal Penalties. ................................................................................................................................... 10-51
1028.09 Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance. ..................................................................................................... 10-51
1028.10 Remedies Not Exclusive. .......................................................................................................................... 10-51
1028.11 Waiver Circumstances. ............................................................................................................................. 10-51
Table of Contents Continued City of Duluth UDC
10-iv
BLANK PAGE
10-1
Erosion Control and Stormwater Management
DIVISION I. SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL
Section 1001. Standards Incorporated by Reference.
For the proper implementation of the requirements of this ordinance, the City will utilize policy, cri-teria, and information established by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission and with-in the latest edition of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia.
Section 1002. Definitions Related to Soil Erosion, Sedimentation Pollution Control.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of Division I of this Article, unless otherwise specifically stated:
Best Management Practices (BMPs). These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted.
Board (DNR). The Board of Natural Resources.
Certified Personnel. A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission.
Coastal Marshlands. Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. 12-5-282.
Commission (GSWCC). The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC).
CPESC. Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by Enviro-Cert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc.
Cut. A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by ex-cavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excava-tion.
Department (DNR). The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR).
Design Professional. A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, ar-chitecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design Professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure.
Director (DNR). The Director of the Environmental Protection Division or an authorized representa-tive.
District. The 15th Soil and Water Conservation District.
Division (EPD). The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources.
Drainage Structure. A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes.
Section 1002 Definitions Related to Soil Erosion, Sedimentation Pollution Control. City of Duluth UDC
10-2
Erosion. The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity.
Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan. A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimenta-tion Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the State General Permit, best management practices, and requirements in Section 1004.03 of this Code.
Fill. A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation.
Final Stabilization. All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100% of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70% or greater, or landscaped accord-ing to Plan (uniformly covered with landscaping material in planned landscaped areas), or equivalent measures as defined in the Manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction.
Finished Grade. The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design.
Grading. Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition.
Ground Elevation. The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling.
Land-Disturbing Activity. Any activity that may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricul-tural practices as described in Section 1003(e).
Larger Common Plan of Development or Sale. A contiguous area where multiple separate and dis-tinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, plan means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public no-tice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot.
Local Issuing Authority (LIA). The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. 12-7-8.
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA). A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et.seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins.
Natural Ground Surface. The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or fill-ing.
Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU). Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analyti-cal techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspen-sion. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present.
NOI: A Notice of Intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the State General Permit.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1002 Definitions Related to Soil Erosion, Sedimentation Pollution Control.
10-3
NOT. A Notice of Termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the State General Permit.
Operator. The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimen-tation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions.
Outfall. The location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water.
Permit, Land Disturbance. The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this Development Code.
Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, mu-nicipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity.
Phase or Phased. Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site.
Project. The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be dis-turbed.
Properly Designed. Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications con-tained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia (Manual) published by the Geor-gia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the Manual as approved by the Commission up until the date of NOI submittal.
Roadway Drainage Structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water un-der a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side.
Sediment. Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion.
Sedimentation. The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity.
Soil and Water Conservation District Approved Plan. An erosion, sedimentation and pollution con-trol plan approved in writing by the 15th Soil and Water Conservation District.
Stabilization. The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity.
State General Permit. The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amend-
Section 1003 Exemptions. City of Duluth UDC
10-4
ed or reissued in the future pursuant to the states authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30.
State Waters. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage sys-tems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained com-pletely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation.
Structural Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Practices. Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the pur-pose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization struc-tures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia.
Trout Streams. All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 atwww.edp.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self- sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout repro-duction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs.
Vegetative Erosion and Sedimentation Control Measures. Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with:
Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or
Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or
Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass.
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia.
Watercourse. Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, con-duit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or in-termittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent there-to subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater.
Wetlands. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
Section 1003. Exemptions.
Division I of this Article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following:
City of Duluth UDC Section 1003 Exemptions.
10-5
(a) Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968".
(b) Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying;
(c) Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, re-pairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion;
(d) The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one (1) acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturb-ance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre and not otherwise exempted under this para-graph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the mini-mum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family resi-dence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone be-tween the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 hori-zontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the Local Issuing Authority;
(e) Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poul-try; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, in-cluding but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian prod-ucts; farm buildings and farm ponds;
(f) Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohib-ited in a buffer, as established in 1004.03(o) Error! Reference source not found.and Section Er-ror! Reference source not found. of this Article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three (3) years after completion of such for-estry practices;
(g) Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture;
(h) Any project involving less than one (1) acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this ex-emption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of devel-opment or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, State Waters ex-cludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately af-ter rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; pro-
Section 1004 Minimum Requirements for Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Using BMPs. City of Duluth UDC
10-6
vided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one (1) acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded chan-nel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the prop-erty on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the Local Issuing Authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (a),(b),(c),(d),(e),(f),(g),(i),(j) of this Section 1003;
(i) Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Department of Transportation or the State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the Local Issuing Authority, the Lo-cal Issuing Authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same pen-alties as violations by permit holders;
(j) Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or in-strumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility un-der the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable televi-sion system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United states engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permit-tee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the Local Issuing Authority shall enforce compliance with the min-imum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and
(k) Any public water system reservoir.
Section 1004. Minimum Requirements for Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Using BMPs.
1004.01 General Provisions.
Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of Division I of this Article and the NPDES General Permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by Division I of this Article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practic-es. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the mini-mum requirements of Section 1004.02 and Section 1004.03 of this Article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed
City of Duluth UDC Section 1004 Minimum Requirements for Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Using BMPs.
10-7
to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing ac-tivity in accordance with requirements of Division I of this Article and the NPDES General Permit.
1004.02 Minimum Requirements; BMPs.
(a) Best management practices as set forth in Section 1004.02and Section 1004.03of this Article shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the Director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (b) of this subsection or any sub-stantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design and properly designed mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 subsection (b).
(b) A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local Issuing Authority or of any state general permit is-sued by the Division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters sup-porting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accord-ance with guidelines to be issued by the Director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construc-tion is equal to or greater than five (5) acres.
(c) Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a vio-lation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a Local Issuing Authority or of any state general permit issued by the Division pursuant to subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs.
(d) The Director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the Board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur.
(e) The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in Section1004.03(o), Section 1004.03(p) and Section 1004.03(q), in light of O.C.G.A.  12-7-6 (c).
1004.03 Minimum Requirements; Specific.
The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound con-servation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following:
(a) Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion;
Section 1004 Minimum Requirements for Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Using BMPs. City of Duluth UDC
10-8
(b) Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum;
(c) Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practi-cable erosion potential;
(d) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented;
(e) The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practi-cable minimum;
(f) Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable;
(g) Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development;
(h) Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable;
(i) To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq.;
(j) Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills;
(k) Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property;
(l) Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners;
(m) Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a mini-mum;
(n) Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters be-yond the levels specified in Section 1004.02(b) of this Article;
(o) Except as provided in paragraph (p) and (q) of this subsection, there is established a 25 foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vege-tation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the Director de-termines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environ-ment, where otherwise allowed by the Director pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate ero-sion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are imple-mented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a
City of Duluth UDC Section 1004 Minimum Requirements for Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Using BMPs.
10-9
variance is granted by the Director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer:
(1) No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the con-struction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quanti-ty to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a sin-gle-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and
(2) The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they oc-cur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifica-tions and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and
(p) There is established a 50 foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed ; provid-ed, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an av-erage annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25 foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a gen-eral variance promulgated by the Board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the down-stream landowners property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The Director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer:
(1) No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the con-struction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quanti-ty to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a sin-glefamily residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and
(2) The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they oc-cur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifica-
Section 1004 Minimum Requirements for Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Using BMPs. City of Duluth UDC
10-10
tions and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines.
(q) There is established a 25 foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970. And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to Code Section 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to Code Section 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drain-age structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization struc-ture, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condi-tion to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of re-cently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasona-ble period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially re-quire reconstruction.
(1) No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the con-struction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person construct-ing a singlefamily residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and
(2) The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented.
(3) The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are
City of Duluth UDC Section 1005 Application/Permit Process.
10-11
fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to De-cember 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25 foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully imple-mented.
(4) Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a Minor Buffer Impact as defined in 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the Division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities.
(r) Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq. shall prevent any Local Issuing Authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer re-quirements that exceed the minimum requirements in Section 1004.02 and Section 1004.03 of this Article.
(s) The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in Division 1 of this Article or the terms of the permit.
Section 1005. Application/Permit Process.
1005.01 General.
The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review be-fore submittal the general development plans. The Local Issuing Authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult this Development Code, and any other or-dinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdic-tional boundaries of the Local Issuing Authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit.
1005.02 Application Requirements.
(a) No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Du-luth without first obtaining a permit from the City of Duluth to perform such activity and providing a copy of Notice of Intent submitted to EPD if applicable.
(b) The application for a permit shall be submitted to the City of Duluth and must include the ap-plicants erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in Section 1005.03 of this Article. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of Section 1004.02 and Section 1004.03 of this Article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three (3) copies of the applicants erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to crea-tion of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-10.
Section 1005 Application/Permit Process. City of Duluth UDC
10-12
(c) In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the Division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the Division, regardless of the existence of a Local Issuing Authority in the jurisdiction.
(d) Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the Local Issuing Authority shall refer the application and plan to the District for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The District shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the District to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the District review shall be forwarded to the Local Issuing Authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the District, and any variances required by Section 1004.03(o), Section 1004.03(p) and Section 1004.06(q) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per this Section 1005.02(f), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the Local Issuing Authority and the District have entered into an agreement which allows the Local Issuing Authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the District. The Local Issuing Authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised Plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the Local Issuing Authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an ap-proval of the revised Plan submittal.
(e) If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, Division I of this Arti-cle, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the Local Issuing Authority may deny the permit ap-plication.
(f) The Local Issuing Authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of gov-ernment security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with Division I of this Article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the Local Issuing Authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply un-less there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial re-view of any determination or order of the Local Issuing Authority with respect to alleged permit violations.
(1) The City of Duluth shall require the posting of a bond before any permits are granted pur-suant to Division I of this Article.
a. The required bond may be posted in any of the following methods or in a combination of methods: cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or government security.
b. The required bond shall be in the amount of $3,000.00 per acre or portion of an acre disturbed.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1005 Application/Permit Process.
10-13
(2) The procedure for the forfeiture of the required bond for failure to comply with this Divi-sion I of this Article is set forth in Section 1007.03.
1005.03 Plan Requirements.
(a) Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in Section 1004.02 and Section 1004.03 of this Article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design crite-ria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into Division 1 of this Arti-cle. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and State laws. Maps, drawings and sup-portive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Per-sons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or in-spections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification re-quirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the Commission and in consultation with the Division and the Stakeholder Advisory Board cre-ated pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20.
(b) Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate Ero-sion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan Review Checklist established by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted.
1005.04 Permits.
(a) Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the Local Issuing Authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken.
(b) No permit shall be issued by the Local Issuing Authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the District and the Local Issuing Authority has af-firmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with Division I of this Article, any vari-ances required by Section 1004.03(o), Section 1004.03(p) and Section 1004.03(q) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per Section 1004.03(f) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Local Issuing Authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant.
(c) Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same require-ments of Division I of this Article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the Division shall enforce such requirements upon the Local Is-suing Authority.
(d) If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase.
(e) The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the Local Issuing Authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of Division I of this Article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the ap-proved plan of the conditions contained in the permit.
Section 1006 Inspection and Enforcement. City of Duluth UDC
10-14
(f) The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previ-ous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7 (f) (1).
Section 1006. Inspection and Enforcement.
(a) The City of Duluth will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which per-mits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimen-tation. Also, the Local Issuing Authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permit-tees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be respon-sible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary per-mittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provi-sions of Division I of this Article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of Division I of this Article.
(b) The Local Issuing Authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975.
(c) The City of Duluth shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in Division I of this Article, and for this pur-pose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of in-vestigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities.
(d) No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the Local Is-suing Authority, the Commission, the District, or Division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties.
(e) The District or the Commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as Local Issuing Authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 (a). The District or the Commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the countys or municipalitys erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The District or the Commission shall no-tify the Division and request investigation by the Division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found.
(f) The Division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as Local Issuing Authorities pursuant to Code Section 12-7-8 (a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a govern-ing authoritys ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 (a) has not administered or en-forced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement en-
City of Duluth UDC Section 1007 Penalties and Incentives.
10-15
tered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-7 (e), the Division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certifi-cation as a Local Issuing Authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary cor-rective action within 90 days after notification by the Division, the Division shall revoke the cer-tification of the county or municipality as a Local Issuing Authority.
Section 1007. Penalties and Incentives.
1007.01 Failure to Obtain a Permit for Land-Disturbing Activity.
If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as pre-scribed in Division I of this Article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Local Issuing Authority.
1007.02 Stop-Work Orders.
(a) For the first and second violations of the provisions of Division I of this Article, the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activi-ties be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, howev-er, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the Direc-tor or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning;
(b) For a third and each subsequent violation, the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and;
(c) All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred.
(d) When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the Local Issuing Authority or by the Director or his or her Designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the Local Issuing Authority or by the Director or his or her Designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work or-ders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls.
1007.03 Bond Forfeiture.
If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of Division I of this Article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of Section 1005.02(f). The Local Issuing Authority may call
Section 1008 Education and Certification. City of Duluth UDC
10-16
the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabi-lize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance.
(a) A written notice stating that there has been a failure to comply with the approved plan or Divi-sion I of this Article shall be served on that person. The written notice shall contain the follow-ing:
(1) a description of the problem that constitutes a failure to comply,
(2) the measures necessary to achieve compliance and
(3) a specific date and time by which compliance must be obtained.
(b) If compliance has not occurred before the date and time specified in the written notice, the person shall be deemed in violation of Division I of this Article and all remedies under Division I shall be available to the City. The bond required under Section 1005.02(f) shall be deemed for-feited upon failure to comply within the time frame allowed by the written notice.
(c) In order to use the forfeited bond, the City must send written notice to the person stating that the bond has been forfeited by the failure to obtain compliance within the specified time. The notice of bond forfeiture shall include information concerning the appeal of the automatic for-feiture. The notice shall state that an appeal must be filed with the City Manager within ten days of the date of the notice of bond forfeiture. The notice shall state that if an appeal is not filed within ten days of the date of the notice of bond forfeiture, the City will use the bond to obtain compliance with the Citys ordinance.
(d) Any appeal shall be heard in accordance with the procedures of the Appeals Article.
1007.04 Monetary Penalties.
(a) Any person who violates any provisions of Division I of this Article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to Division I of this Article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the Director issued as provided in Division I of this Article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day.
(b) For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of Division I of this Article, notwithstanding any provisions in any City charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation.
(c) Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this ordinance under county ordinances approved under this or-dinance shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation.
Section 1008. Education and Certification.
(a) Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification re-quirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the Division and the stakeholder advisory board created pur-suant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1009 Administrative Appeal and Judicial Review.
10-17
(b) For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activi-ties on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certifica-tion requirements developed by the Commission present on site whenever land-disturbing ac-tivities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit.
(c) Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise re-quiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the require-ments of Division I of this Article.
(d) If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a sub-contractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educa-tional requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph.
Section 1009. Administrative Appeal and Judicial Review.
1009.01 Administrative Remedies.
The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the Local Issuing Au-thority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals within ten days after receipt by the Local Issuing Authori-ty of written notice of appeal.
1009.02 Judicial Review.
Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the Local Issuing Authority, after exhausting his ad-ministrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Gwinnett Coun-ty.
Section 1010. Liability.
(a) Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of Division I of this Article, nor the compli-ance with provisions of Division I of this Article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the Local Issuing Authority or District for damage to any person or property.
(b) The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in Division I of this Article or the terms of the permit.
(c) No provision of Division I of this Article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regula-tions promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any Waters of the State as defined thereby.
Section 1011 Requirements City of Duluth UDC
10-18
DIVISION II. SITE GRADING
Section 1011. Requirements
1011.01 Grading Plan
(a) Grading shall be done in accordance with the lines and grades shown on the approved Grading Plan.
(b) Grading plans shall show existing and proposed contour lines at an interval of no more than 2 feet. Grading plans shall outline the areas which are required to remain undisturbed (i.e., Tree Protection Areas, buffers, etc.) and shall indicate protective fencing or staking to be placed sur-rounding such areas.
(c) Grading for roads and improved ditches shall be shown.
(d) A grading plan showing building pad locations shall be done for residential subdivisions, unless a modification application is approved, having a zoning that requires a lot size of 12,000 square feet or less or a density of 4 units per acre or more. The intent of this regulation is to ensure adequate lot to lot drainage. Granting a modification will not nullify the intent of these regula-tions when the layout has a minimum lot area of 14, 520 square feet and a minimum lot width of 90 feet.
1011.02 Metropolitan River Act
If the property is within the jurisdiction of the Metropolitan River Protection Act, the grading shall be consistent with the River Corridor Certificate approved for the project.
1011.03 Embankments
Embankments shall be placed in uniform layers not to exceed a compacted thickness of 6 inches per layer and shall be compacted to a density of 95% of the maximum laboratory dry weight per cubic foot as determined by AASHTO Method T-99 in all areas where structure, parking lots and drives, streets, and utilities are to be placed. All other embankments are to be compacted to at least 85%.
1011.04 Slopes
(a) The maximum slopes for cut and/or fill shall be 2:1 (2 feet of horizontal run for each foot of rise or fall), except for the following: earthen dam embankments, rock cuts, where certified by a professional geotechnical engineer, or as discussed in Section 1011.05.
(b) Earthen dam embankments shall be 3:1 maximum unless a modification application is ap-proved. The intent of the earthen dam embankment slope regulation is to provide for public safety, soil stability, and dam maintenance considerations. The depth of cut referred to herein shall be the maximum cut or fill that shall be allowed to occur in any one section of cut or fill. The slope of cut or fill shall be uniform throughout for each section of cut or fill unless benching is approved by the Planning and Development Department. When a cut is made in rock that re-quires blasting, the slope may be steeper if presplitting is employed and upon submission of a geotechnical report which substantiates the integrity of the rock in the steeper condition, sub-ject to the review and approval of the Director. (Note: No blasting shall occur unless a permit has been obtained from the Fire Marshals Office.)
1011.05 Soil Stabilization
City of Duluth UDC Section 1012 Purpose
10-19
While most soils in the area can be safely stabilized at a 2:1 slope, some soils exhibit a low shearing resistance and a low cohesiveness. These soils typically are micaceous silts and sandy soils with little or no clay. If the 2:1 slope shows evidence of shearing, non-cohesiveness, sliding, or inability to main-tain compaction, the slope shall be stabilized at 3:1 or by using such mechanical methods as needed (such as retaining walls or "grow mats" stapled in place) to maintain slope, height, and integrity.
DIVISION III. STORMWATER CULVERT AND PIPE DRAINAGE SYSTEMS
Section 1012. Purpose
The purpose of Division III of this Article to establish the standards for stormwater conveyance facilities for the protection of public rights-of-way and adjoining private properties. Stormwater conveyance facilities will be designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, in a manner that maintains the public health, safety, and environment. In order to reduce flooding, promote adequate drainage, and reduce maintenance certain pipe materials are required depending upon usage and location of pipes. Stormwater conveyance systems may include but are not limited to culverts, storm drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, and ditches.
Section 1013. Standards Incorporated by Reference.
The latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual or Gwinnett Countys approved equivalent stormwater management design manual, including any relevant local addenda to these manuals, will be utilized as policy, criteria, and information for the proper implementation of the requirements of this code, including technical specifications and standards. These manuals may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience.
The latest edition of the Standard Specifications Construction of Transportation Systems by the Georgia Department of Transportation, including any relevant local addenda to these standards, is hereby incorporated by reference into Division III of this Article.
Section 1014. Standard Specifications
1014.01 Allowable Pipe Materials.
(a) Reinforced concrete pipe (RCP) is required to be used for stormwater conveyance within the right-of-way or in systems that are intended for dedication to the City of Duluth.
(b) RCP is required when pipe slopes are less than 1%.
(c) RCP is required when conveying waters of the state.
(d) RCP is required for detention ponds/ vault outlet control structures and outlet pipes.
(e) Other pipe materials may be used to convey onsite stormwater runoff on private development projects in accordance with the manufacturers specifications and Professional Engineers de-sign.
(f) RCP shall be a minimum of Class III, and shall be provided in joint lengths not less than 8 feet each. All joints shall be bell and spigot or tongue and groove type, with a rubber gasket con-forming to ASTM C-443. Pipe shall be manufactured in accordance with AASHTO M-170 and/or ASTM C-76. Class of pipe and wall thickness shall be in accordance with 1030-D, Georgia DOT specification, Table No.1.
Section 1015 Pipe Installation City of Duluth UDC
10-20
(g) All stormwater management pipe systems must use watertight joints.
(h) The City may approve an alternative pipe material.
1014.02 Pipes in Dams.
(a) Only Reinforced Concrete Pipe (RCP) shall be used for all dams 9 feet or more in height with an impounding capacity of 20 acre-feet or more unless the Georgia Safe Dams Program requires another material.
Section 1015. Pipe Installation
1015.01 General Installation Requirements.
(a) All stormwater pipes must be installed correctly with adequate pipe bedding, backfill and stormwater joint techniques. Proper installation practices may be found for the following or through information provided by the manufacturer or certifying engineer:
(1) Reinforced Concrete Pipe (RCP)  ASTM C 1479-01
(2) Double Walled High-Density Polyethylene (HDPE)  ASTM D 2321
(3) Corrugated Double Walled Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC)  ASTM D 2321
(4) Corrugated Metal Pipe (CMP)  ASTM A 798
(5) Non-Reinforced Concrete Pipe (NRCP)  ASTM C-14
(b) Prior to approval of a Final Plat or issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, the City may require the submittal of a certification from a mandrel testing agency (or similar) indicating that all in-stalled pipe does not exceed 5% deflection. Video condition assessment may be conducted by the City or required by the City on storm drain installations before approval of the Final Plat or issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. If required, video condition assessment should be done after completion of all activities that may damage the pipe but prior to placement of base, paving or landscaping over or near the pipe. If video condition assessment indicates prob-lems such as pipe deformation, cracking or joint separation, or any structural pipe score higher than a 0 on NASSCOs PACP (Pipeline Assessment and Certification Program) inspection scale, the pipe shall be removed and replaced before approval is granted.
(c) The Applicant for a Development Permit shall sign an affidavit at the time of Development Ap-plication acknowledging that compaction testing, pipe inspection, and bedding and backfill ma-terial analysis (for materials other than Graded Aggregate Base (GAB) or Crusher Run) will be completed by the Applicant and the City prior to approval of the Final Plat or issuance of a Cer-tificate of Occupancy. The applicant will certify that they will correct any identified issues prior to approval of the Final Plat or issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
(d) Applicant will provide a one year warranty on the pipe installation.
1015.02 Bedding, Structural Backfill and Final Backfill.
(a) At the time of Development Application the Applicant for a Development Permit shall specify which pipe materials will be used and will identify the bedding and backfill detail that will be used for each pipe.
(b) Construction Loads and Minimum Covers. When drainage pipe is installed prior to the comple-tion of grading, a minimum of 4 feet of fill shall be provided where needed to adequately pro-
City of Duluth UDC Section 1016 Stormwater System Design Criteria.
10-21
tect the drainage structure during the land development phase, unless the structure itself is de-signed to withstand the anticipated live load during construction.
(c) Junction Boxes and Catch Basins.
(1) Catch basins and drop inlets shall be constructed in accordance with City of Duluth re-quirements. Junction boxes shall be in accordance with GDOT Standards 1011a or 1011ap. All catch basins and junction boxes in non-traffic areas shall have metal manhole frames and lids. In roadways or areas subject to vehicles, manhole castings shall be in accordance with GDOT Standard 1011a.
(2) All junction boxes shall extend to the ground surface. Buried junction boxes are prohibited.
(d) Other Structures. Natural bottom arches and box culverts may be used in accordance with the latest Standard Specifications of the Georgia Department of Transportation.
(e) Storm Sewer As-Builts.
Prior to Final Plat approval or issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, the Applicant for a Devel-opment Permit shall submit a Storm Sewer As-Built. The as-built shall show details of compli-ance with this specification.
Section 1016. Stormwater System Design Criteria.
1016.01 General Design Criteria.
(a) Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, storm drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutters, swales, channels, and ditches, shall be provided for the protection of public rights-of-way and private properties adjoining projects sties and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities which are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the requirements of these regulations.
(b) All stormwater conveyance facility design calculations shall be certified by a registered profes-sional engineer and submitted to the City as part of the Stormwater Management Report out-lined in Section 1021 of this Code Division.
(c) Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual or Gwinnett Countys approved equivalent stormwater management de-sign manual.
(d) Runoff curve numbers used for the SCS Method shall be consistent with those shown in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual or Gwinnett Countys approved equivalent storm-water management design manual.
1016.02 Piped Collection System Design Criteria.
(a) The preliminary design (initial pipe sizing and profile design) of piped collection systems required under Section 1016.01(a) herein shall be based upon conveyance of the peak flows associated with a fully developed 25 -year storm with the hydraulic grade line (HGL) being one foot or more below the top of each structure, gutter line or proposed final ground surface ele-vation, whichever is lowest.
(b) Once the preliminary design of a piped collection system has been prepared, it shall be ana-lyzed for its behavior during conditions of 100-year flow, with the objective of this analysis be-
Section 1016 Stormwater System Design Criteria. City of Duluth UDC
10-22
ing to ascertain the quantities of flow and flow paths followed by flows exceeding the capacity of the system, whether these pond at inlets or flow along the ground's surface.
(c) Based on the analysis of 100-year conditions, the preliminary design shall be revised where necessary to produce a final design for which the likelihood of dwelling flooding, major proper-ty damage, or substantial public access and/or utility interruption shall be less than one chance in 100 years.
(d) The minimum allowable pipe diameter shall be 15 inches.
(e) Catch basins shall be spaced so that the spread in the street for a 10-year design flow shall not exceed 8 feet, as measured from the face of the curb. Gutter spread calculations shall be sub-mitted to the City for review and approval prior to issuance of a Development Permit.
(f) Complete flow, velocity, and hydraulic grade line computations, shall be provided for all por-tions of a piped collection system. Hydraulic grade lines shall be shown on the storm drainage profiles and associated calculations shall be submitted for the 25-year storm with the Devel-opment Plans.
1016.03 Culvert Design Criteria.
(a) Culverts or pipe systems designed to convey water from one side of a public right-of-way to the other shall be designed to pass the fully developed peak flow associated with a 100-year storm with at least 1.5 feet of freeboard between the 100-year ponding elevation and the centerline of the road, without raising the 100-year flood elevation on upstream properties, and in ac-cordance with Floodplain Management Ordinance. Fully developed flows shall be based on the Land Use Plan adopted by the City Council.
(b) The 100-year ponding limits at and upstream of the culvert shall be shown on the Development Plans and on the Final Plat (if applicable).
(c) The minimum allowable culvert diameter shall be 18 inches.
(d) Single barrel or single cell culvert structures should be used whenever feasible, as they are less prone to clogging and require less maintenance than multi-barrel or multi-cell structures.
(e) The maximum velocity in a corrugated metal culvert for the 100-year flow shall be 15 fps (feet per second). Velocities over 10 fps in a pipe of any material shall be considered a special design, with particular attention required to pipe or structure invert protection and to fill slope, stream bed, and stream bank stability being required.
(f) Culvert design is to be in accordance with the methods contained in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual or Gwinnett Countys approved equivalent stormwater management de-sign manual, and shall include a thorough analysis of both inlet and outlet control conditions.
1016.04 Energy Dissipation Design for Piped Systems and Culverts.
(a) The maximum developed condition flow velocity at the project site's downstream property line adjoining another property shall not exceed the maximum pre-developed conditions velocity. Calculations may be required to support this velocity standard on a case-by-case basis.
(b) Energy dissipation devices, such as splash pads, rip-rap, stilling basins, etc., shall be provided at the outlet of every culvert and piped collection system. Velocity protection shall be in accord-ance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual or Gwinnett Countys approved equivalent stormwater management design manual. Velocities for the fully developed 25-year flow shall not exceed the non-erosive velocity as shown in the Georgia Stormwater Manage-
City of Duluth UDC Section 1016 Stormwater System Design Criteria.
10-23
ment Manual or Gwinnett Countys approved equivalent stormwater management design manual for the receiving conveyance. Details and all calculations must be submitted with the Development Plans.
(c) Energy dissipation devices shall be located entirely within the project site, and shall not en-croach upon any required buffer.
(d) When uniform, graded stone rip-rap is used for energy dissipation, ultraviolet resistant filter fabric (200-pound test) shall be used between the stone layers.
1016.05 Discharge of Concentrated Flows.
(a) The discharge of concentrated flows of stormwater into public roadways shall be avoided. In no case shall such concentrated flows, including flows from swales, ditches, draws, drive-ways, or piped systems, exceed the allowable peak flow rates.
(b) In residential subdivisions, the peak flow rate along any property line between lots within 50 feet of the building setback line for either lot shall not exceed two acres, unless contained within a piped drainage system or maintained in a natural watercourse. The stormwater con-veyance shall be in a drainage easement.
1016.06 Surface Drainage Design Standards.
(a) All new proposed channels shall be designed to carry at least the fully developed 25 year storm with freeboard equal to 20% of the design flow depth.
(b) Transition channels shall be provided at the inlet and outlet ends of all culverts and pipe sys-tems, unless otherwise provided herein.
(c) The maximum flow velocity at the project site's downstream property line shall not exceed the pre-developed velocity.
(d) In cases of potential erosion due to irregular channel alignment, extreme velocities, or exces-sive slopes, a paved ditch may be required. However, if, in the opinion of the City, the expected long-term maintenance of a surface drainage system could prove impractical, a pipe design may be required.
(e) The cross-sectional shape of channels shall be as found in the Standard Drawings. "V" shaped cross-sections are not permitted in grassed channels.
(f) If the channel will be affected by backwater from culverts, bridges, other structures or flood-plains, backwater curves shall be shown in profiles of the channel.
(g) All channels, must be capable of conveying flows sufficient to ensure that overflow of the channel would not result in a likelihood of dwelling flooding, property damage or public access and/or utility interruption shall be greater than one chance in 100 years.
(h) Channels shall be designed to carry the fully developed 25-year flow in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual.
1016.07 Surface Drainage Construction Standards
(a) The channel shall be shaped to the dimensions specified on the approved plans and shall be free of overfalls, gullies, or other irregularities.
(b) Channels in fills shall be lined.
Section 1017 Purpose and Intent. City of Duluth UDC
10-24
(c) Protective cover in grassed channels shall be installed immediately after the earthwork is com-pleted.
DIVISION IV. POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section 1017. Purpose and Intent.
(a) The purpose of Division V of this Article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and proce-dures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources.
(b) This Division V seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives:
(1) Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the Citys watersheds and preserve the health of water resources;
(2) Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydro-logic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream tempera-ture, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats;
(3) Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design cri-teria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality;
(4) Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural storm-water control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development storm-water management standards;
(5) Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable;
(6) Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to en-sure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to pub-lic safety; and,
(7) Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up.
Section 1018. Standards Incorporated by Reference.
The latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual or Gwinnett Countys approved equivalent stormwater management design manual, including any relevant local addenda to these manuals, will be utilized as policy, criteria, and information for the proper implementation of the re-quirements of this code, including technical specifications and standards. These manuals may be up-dated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1019 Definitions Related to Post-Development Stormwater Management.
10-25
The latest edition of the Standard Specifications Construction of Transportation Systems by the Georgia Department of Transportation, including any relevant local addenda to these standards, is hereby incorporated by reference into Division V of this Development Code.
Section 1019. Definitions Related to Post-Development Stormwater Management.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of Division V of this Arti-cle, unless otherwise specifically stated:
Applicant. A person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval.
Channel. A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuous-ly or periodically flowing water.
Conservation Easement. An agreement between a land owner and the (local jurisdiction) or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the own-ers land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership.
Detention. The temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge.
Detention Facility. A detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates.
Developer. A person who undertakes land development activities.
Development. A land development or land development project.
Drainage Easement. An easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement.
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan. A plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities.
Extended Detention. The detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater.
Extreme Flood Protection. Measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more.
Flooding. A volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands.
Greenspace or Open Space. Permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state.
Hotspot. An area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated run-off, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater.
Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG). A Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and pro-duce much more runoff.
Section 1019 Definitions Related to Post-Development Stormwater Management. City of Duluth UDC
10-26
Impervious Cover. A surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface.
Industrial Stormwater Permit. A National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit is-sued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with indus-trial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
Infiltration. The process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil.
Jurisdictional Wetland. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
Land Development. Any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, strip-ping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construc-tion, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover.
Land Development Activities. Those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development.
Land Development Project. A discrete land development undertaking.
Inspection and Maintenance Agreement. A written agreement providing for the long-term inspec-tion and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a re-striction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project.
New Development. A land development activity on a previously undeveloped site.
Nonpoint Source Pollution. A form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipita-tion, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practic-es such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
Nonstructural Stormwater Management Practice or Nonstructural Practice. Any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtra-tion areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels.
Off-Site Facility. A stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site.
On-Site Facility. A stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site.
Overbank Flood Protection. Measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the flood-plain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the 2-year through 25-year frequency storm events.
Owner. The legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1019 Definitions Related to Post-Development Stormwater Management.
10-27
Permit. The permit issued by the (local permitting authority) to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity.
Person. Except to the extent exempted from this ordinance, any individual, partnership, firm, associ-ation, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the State, any interstate body or any other legal entity.
Post-development. The time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipat-ed to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require.
Pre-development. The time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commence-ment of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (pre-liminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions.
Project. A land development project.
Redevelopment. A land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution.
Regional Stormwater Management Facility or Regional Facility. Stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced.
Runoff. Stormwater runoff.
Site. The parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development pro-ject is located.
Stormwater Better Site Design. Nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can re-duce a sites impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, re-ducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management.
Stormwater Management. The collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of storm-water runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare.
Stormwater Management Facility. Any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff.
Stormwater Management Measure. Any stormwater management facility or nonstructural storm-water practice.
Stormwater Management Plan. A document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be af-fected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this ordinance.
Stormwater Management System. The entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater man-agement facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site.
Section 1020 Applicability. City of Duluth UDC
10-28
Stormwater Retrofit. A stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site.
Stormwater Runoff. The flow of surface water resulting from precipitation.
Structural Stormwater Control. A structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff.
Subdivision. The division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the lay-out or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway.
Section 1020. Applicability.
(a) This Code Division shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to the activities identified below.
(b) The standards for post-development stormwater management, including submission of a stormwater management plan as defined in Section 1021.02 of this Article, apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria:
(1) New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of 1 acre or more;
(2) Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more;
(3) Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the City En-gineer to be a hotspot land use; or,
(4) Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in items A and B above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of develop-ment, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules.
(c) The following activities are exempt from the post-development stormwater management re-quirements:
(1) Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project;
(2) Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures;
(3) Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activi-ties; and,
(4) Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the City Engineer.
Section 1021. Post-Development Stormwater Permit Procedures and Requirements.
1021.01 Permit Application Requirement.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1021 Post-Development Stormwater Permit Procedures and Requirements.
10-29
(a) No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this Code Division prior to commencing the proposed activity. Unless specifi-cally exempted by this Code Division, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the City of Duluth a permit application on a form provided by the City for that purpose.
(b) Unless otherwise exempted by this Code Division, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered:
(1) Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification, as required, in accordance with Section 1021.02;
(2) Stormwater management plan in accordance with Section 1021.03;
(3) Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with Section 1021.04, if applicable;
(4) Performance bond in accordance with the Procedures and Permits Article of this Develop-ment Code, if applicable; and,
(5) Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with the Procedures and Permits Ar-ticle of this Development Code.
1021.02 Stormwater Concept Plan and Consultation Meeting.
(a) Prior to submitting a stormwater management permit application, a stormwater concept plan meeting with the City Engineer is recommended. This concept plan meeting should occur early in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced.
(b) At the stormwater concept plan meeting, the land owner or developer should be prepared to discuss:
(1) Existing Conditions / Proposed Site Plans.
Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of pre-dominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant veg-etation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces.
(2) Natural Resources Inventory.
A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a dis-cussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. Many of these environmental protection requirements are outlined in Article 9 of this Unified Development Code.
(3) Stormwater Management System Concept Plan.
Section 1021 Post-Development Stormwater Permit Procedures and Requirements. City of Duluth UDC
10-30
A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater man-agement system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; rela-tionship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary lo-cation of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings.
(c) If an applicant proposes to show that the detention requirements may be eliminated for all or a portion of a project, then a stormwater consultation meeting is required prior to the submittal of construction plans. At the stormwater consultation meeting, the land owner or developer shall be prepared to discuss:
(1) Downstream Analysis.
The affected stream must be analyzed downstream from the project to a point where the project area is 10% of the total drainage basin. The analysis must include all culverts, ob-structions, existing and potential erosion problems, elevations of existing improvements, and any other existing modifications to natural conditions. If there are any problems identi-fied downstream that are a result of the development, then the developer shall eliminate the conditions causing the problem. The downstream analysis is further described in Sec-tions 1021.03(c)(6) and 1021.03(c)(7).
(2) Actions to Address Overburdened Conditions.
If the existing downstream conditions are overburdened by the pre-developed flows in the stream, then the developer shall work with the City jointly participate to resolve these problems. The meaning of overburdened shall include but not be limited to situations where 25-year velocities exceed the non-erosive velocity of the stream, habitable struc-tures are shown to be subject to flooding for any frequency up to and including the regulatory flood and stormwater facilities that cannot carry the design storm in accordance with these regulations. The overburdened conditions analysis is further described in Sec-tions 1021.03(c)(6) and 1021.03(c)(7).
1021.03 Stormwater Management Plan Requirements.
(a) The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this Code Division, so that; stormwater runoff hazards are not created and existing runoff-related problems are not exacerbated, either upstream or downstream from or within the boundaries of the property being developed.
(b) This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this Code Division and be pre-pared under the direct supervisory control of a qualified registered Professional. The pre-development and post-development hydrologic analysis, stormwater management system, and post-development downstream analysis must be completed by a Georgia licensed Professional Engineer. Portions of the overall plan may be prepared and stamped by a registered Land Sur-veyor licensed in the state of Georgia as appropriate, such as boundary surveys, contour maps, erosion and sedimentation control plans. The qualified professional shall be responsible for ob-taining all information necessary for the stormwater management plan.
(c) The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this Code Division are met and that opportunities to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development are taken. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and
City of Duluth UDC Section 1021 Post-Development Stormwater Permit Procedures and Requirements.
10-31
supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater man-agement system. The stormwater management plan shall include, at a minimum, the following information:
(1) Common address and legal description of site.
(2) Vicinity map.
(3) Existing Conditions Hydrologic Analysis.
The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and veloci-ties, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin af-fected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water fea-tures; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology.
(4) Existing conditions shall be defined as the conditions of the site at the time of application for a land disturbance permit. The existing conditions include on-site lakes, ponds, and oth-er stormwater management facilities. Pre-development hydrologic analysis shall assume the existing site land use condition to be a natural, forested condition. For redevelopment projects or projects that are expansions to an existing development, the pre-development hydrologic analysis can alternately consider the land use conditions at the time of the ap-plication being routed through existing stormwater management facilities. Adequate in-formation shall be provided in existing hydrologic analysis indicating: the existing land use condition is similar to the permitted land use condition; and the existing stormwater man-agement facilities were maintained and meets the originally permitted design in-tent/criteria.
(5) Post-Development Hydrologic Analysis.
The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and veloc-ities, shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development imper-vious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; calcula-tions for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management perfor-mance criteria in Section 1022Error! Reference source not found.; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calcula-tions for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assump-tions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. The study will compare pre-developed hydrographs with post-developed hydrogaphs for the 2, 5, 10, 25, 50 and 100- year flood frequencies; the compar-ison of peak flows shall include the timing of the hydrographs; hydrographs shall be based on a 24 hour storm; in accordance with the references noted in Section 1018.
(6) Post-development flows, except the 100-year flow, shall be based on on-site upstream are-as as shown in the development plans and existing conditions for off-site upstream areas. The 100-year flow shall be based on on-site upstream areas as shown in the development plans and the off-site upstream areas will be shown as developed per the Citys Compre-
Section 1021 Post-Development Stormwater Permit Procedures and Requirements. City of Duluth UDC
10-32
hensive Land Use Plan with no detention. Flows used to size the outlet structures for stormwater facilities that exceed the 25-year design flow shall be sized as described for cul-verts and pipe systems in Division III of this Article.
(7) If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50% of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in Section 1022 must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site.
(8) Stormwater Management System.
The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include:
a. A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes;
b. A narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appro-priate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydro-logic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs);
c. Documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management perfor-mance criteria in Section 1022; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of over-land flow following the design standards in Division III of this Article; and where appli-cable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan.
(9) Post-Development Downstream Analysis.
a. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results, and sup-porting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows down-stream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project sites boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or water-course immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is 10% of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The study will compare pre-developed hydrographs with post-developed hydrogaphs for the 2, 5, 10, 25, 50 and 100- year flood frequencies; the comparison of peak flows shall include the timing of the hydrographs; hydrographs shall be based on a 24 hour storm; in accord-ance with the references noted in Section 1018.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1021 Post-Development Stormwater Permit Procedures and Requirements.
10-33
b. The analysis must include all culverts, obstructions, existing, and potential erosion problems, elevations of existing improvements, existing drainage complaints, and any other existing modifications to natural conditions. The downstream water courses and receiving conveyance shall be analyzed to ensure that the channel velocities do not exceed values recommended and that the pipe system does not exceed current design criteria outlined in Division III of this Article.
c. If the existing downstream conditions are overburdened by the pre-developed flows in the stream then the developer shall work with the City jointly participate to resolve the problem. The meaning of overburdened shall include but not be limited to situa-tions where 25-year velocities exceed the non-erosive velocity of the stream, habitable structures are shown to be subject to flooding for any frequency up to and including the regulatory flood and stormwater facilities that cannot carry the design storm in ac-cordance with this Article. If there are any problems identified downstream that are a result of the development, then the developer shall eliminate the conditions causing the problem.
(10) Construction-Phase Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan.
An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with Division I of this Article shall be submitted. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construc-tion and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls.
(11) Landscaping and Open Space Plan.
A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegeta-tion that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and prac-tices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information neces-sary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construc-tion; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved.
(12) Operations and Maintenance Plan.
Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a storm-water management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan.
(13) Maintenance Access Easements.
The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management fa-cilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection
Section 1021 Post-Development Stormwater Permit Procedures and Requirements. City of Duluth UDC
10-34
and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent ba-sis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements ex-ist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the proper-ty.
(14) In a non-residential subdivision or project, an easement at least 20 feet in width shall be required so as to provide access to all structural stormwater facilities from a public street. In a residential subdivision, an easement, at least 30 feet in width shall be required so as to provide access to all structural stormwater facilities from a public street.
(15) The access easements must be cleared, grubbed and graded so that it can be utilized by rubber-tired construction vehicles. The minimum drive width shall be 15 feet. The drive shall be grassed or paved. The maximum slope shall be 20% (5H:1V). Access easements may be combined with drainage easements containing an open channel; however, the com-bined easement shall be a minimum of 30 feet in width and shall be wide enough for the drainage channel and the drive.
(16) Inspection and Maintenance Agreements.
Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City of Engineer as provided in Section 1021.04, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent own-ers of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance with Section 1021.04.
(17) Evidence of Acquisition of Applicable Local and Non-local Permits.
The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the City that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan.
1021.04 Stormwater Management Inspection and Maintenance Agreements.
(a) Prior to the issuance of any permit for any land development activity that requires a storm-water management facility or practice, the applicant or owner of the site must execute an in-spection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable. The in-spections and maintenance agreement and/or conservation easement shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. The only exception to this requirement is if the on-site storm-water management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City. The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the City Engineer prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval.
(b) The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by the City, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These ar-rangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently respon-sible for its inspection and maintenance.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1021 Post-Development Stormwater Permit Procedures and Requirements.
10-35
(c) If stormwater management facilities are located in a residential subdivision project, a mandato-ry property owners associated shall be established for its ownership and maintenance. Each facility shall be located on a single lot within the development and owned by the property owners association. The lot shall include the required access easements for maintenance out-lined in Sections 1021.03(c)(11), 1021.03(c)(12) , and1021.03(c)(13). The association bylaws shall be recorded concurrently with the recording of the final subdivision plat. If the residential subdivision project uses an off-site stormwater facility, a mandatory property owners associa-tion shall be established for facility maintenance. If the commercial property receives permis-sion to use an off-site stormwater management facility (Section 1021.05) or a stormwater management facility serves more than one property owner, the owners shall enter into a maintenance agreement that is acceptable to the City.
(d) As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof.
(e) In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in Section 1024 of this Article.
(f) The City, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any ex-isting or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this Article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance.
1021.05 Modifications for Off-Site Facilities.
(a) The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for storm-water management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be lo-cated on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity re-sponsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facili-ty. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility.
(b) A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the City, compliant with Section 1021.03, which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. Where an existing re-gional detention facility is proposed for a development project, the developer shall provide a copy of the original as-built study that demonstrates the capacity of the pond. If the last ap-proved certification and record drawings for the facility was over 18 months prior to the pro-posed developments submittal, the engineer shall provide one of the following:
(1) A new survey, drawing and certification showing that the outlet structure is constructed as approved and the flood storage and water quality volume of the facility is equal to or greater than the volume required when the facility was approved.
(2) Construction plans and calculations. These must show that the outlet structure will function as designed and the flood storage and water quality volume of the facility will be equal to
Section 1022 Post-Development Stormwater Management Performance Criteria City of Duluth UDC
10-36
or greater than the volume to meet current standards once the proposed maintenance has been performed.
(3) A new record survey, drawing, study and certification. This must show that the facility meets the development requirements when the facility was approved.
(c) In order to use an off-site stormwater facility to meet the criteria in this Code Division, the ap-plicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City Engineer that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas:
(1) Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property;
(2) Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures;
(3) Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation;
(4) Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or
(5) Water quality impairment in violation of State water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations.
Section 1022. Post-Development Stormwater Management Performance Criteria
The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for this ordinance.
1022.01 Water Quality.
All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if:
(a) It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual;
(b) Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and,
(c) Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the City Engineer are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, non-structural practices and pollution prevention practices.
1022.02 Stream Channel Protection.
(a) Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches:
(1) Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer;
(2) 24-hour extended detention storage of the 1-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event;
(3) Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control.
(b) The 1022.02(a) requirement may be adjusted or waived by the City Engineer for sites that dis-charge directly into larger streams, rivers, wetlands, or lakes, or to a man-made channel or con-veyance system where the reduction in these flows will not have an impact on upstream or downstream streambank or channel integrity. This waiver shall be discussed at the stormwater management consultation meeting.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1022 Post-Development Stormwater Management Performance Criteria
10-37
1022.03 Overbank Flooding Protection.
(a) Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenu-ating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the 1-year, 24-hour storm under Section 1022.02 is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the 2-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided.
(b) This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the City Engineer for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions.
1022.04 Extreme Flooding Protection.
(a) Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely convey-ing the 100-year, 24 hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated.
(b) This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the (local permitting authority) for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development condi-tions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions.
1022.05 Structural Stormwater Controls.
(a) All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the ap-propriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual.
(b) All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended func-tion.
(c) For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, litera-ture reviews, or other means and receive approval from the City Engineer before being includ-ed in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the City Engineer may impose additional requirements deemed neces-sary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question.
(d) Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the fac-tors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. Additional stormwater facility siting criteria includes:
(1) Structural stormwater facilities, to the greatest extent feasible, shall be located so as to minimize the amount of flow generated on-site which by-passes the facility.
(2) No portion of any structural stormwater facility shall disturb any required (as opposed to voluntary) buffer, landscape strip, or tree protection area, except that natural bottom de-tention ponds and their appurtenant structures, which require no grading and removal of trees, may encroach into a required construction buffer.
Section 1022 Post-Development Stormwater Management Performance Criteria City of Duluth UDC
10-38
(3) The 100-year ponding limits of a stormwater management facility shall not encroach upon a public right-of-way.
(4) Stormwater management facilities may be located within utility easements or rights-of-way, or encroach upon utility easements or rights-of-way, upon receipt by the City Engineer of written permission from both the property and utility owners.
(5) Stormwater management facilities may be constructed within recreation areas required under Article 8, if the following criteria are met:
1. Ownership of the area will be held by a Qualified Property Owners Association, Homeowners Association or other private parties.
2. Permanent structures, such as buildings and swimming pools, will not be con-structed within the boundaries of the stormwater management facility.
3. Stormwater management facilities within recreation areas will be approved only if the design of the area includes recreation amenities such ball fields, tennis courts, grassed open play areas or other similar improvements. The intent is to provide recreation facilities with stormwater management as a secondary fea-ture.
4. Permanent stormwater management features shall not interfere with the intend-ed used of the recreation amenity, (i.e., a drainage swale shall not traverse a ball field, an inlet structure shall not be in a tennis court, etc.).
1022.06 Stormwater Credits for Nonstructural Measures.
(a) The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under Section1022.01.
(b) The applicant may, if approved by the City, take credit for the use of stormwater better site de-sign practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement.
(1) For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identi-fy the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied.
(2) The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for ap-plying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual.
1022.07 Drainage System Guidelines.
(a) Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, storm-water drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, chan-nels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public right-of-ways.
(b) Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual;
(2) All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and,
City of Duluth UDC Section 1022 Post-Development Stormwater Management Performance Criteria
10-39
(3) Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual.
(4) Contain conveyance within a drainage easement in accordance with Article 9, Division II, Section 915.
1022.08 Dam Design Guidelines.
(a) Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable.
(b) Any developer or owner who propose the construction of a new Category I or Category II Dam (as classified by the Georgia Safe Dams Act), shall meet with the City of Duluth prior to submit-ting a request for a Development Permit.
(c) New Dams Which Become Subject to the Requirements of the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety.
Dams proposed to be 25 feet or more in height or proposed to have an impounding capacity of 100 acre-feet or more at maximum water storage elevation shall be subject to the following:
(1) The developer of any new dam in which development exists within the proposed breach zone shall be subject to the requirements of the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety adopted by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. The developer shall ob-tain necessary approvals and permits from the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources for the project and the dam prior to securing a Development Permit from the Department. The developer of any new dam as to which de-velopment does not exist within the proposed breach zone shall submit construction plans to the City of Duluth for review of the project and the dam prior to securing a Development Permit from the Department.
(2) If the developer elects to construct the new dam in accordance with the design standards for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety, then new development shall be permitted within the dam breach zone. However, the dam shall meet the design standards for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety if development currently exists or is proposed in the dam breach zone.
(3) If the developer elects not to construct the new dam to the design standards for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety, then a dam breach analysis for the dam shall be submitted along with the construction plans for review prior to securing a Development Permit from the Department. The design engineer shall utilize the computer model entitled "DAMBRK" for the dam breach analysis.
(4) Should the new dam not meet the design standards for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety, then only the following uses and structures shall be permitted within the dam breach easement:
a. Agriculture which requires no structures for human habitation within the dam breach zone including forestry, livestock raising, and agricultural and forestry access roads.
b. Fences.
c. Signs in accordance with the Sign Regulations Article of this Development Code.
d. Roads, driveways and parking areas.
Section 1022 Post-Development Stormwater Management Performance Criteria City of Duluth UDC
10-40
e. Utility poles, towers, pipelines, water treatment outfalls and facilities, or other similar facilities and structures.
(5) For any new dam that is proposed not to meet the design for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety, the developer shall obtain a dam breach easement, recorded with the Clerk of Superior Court, from any offsite property owner where it is proposed for the dam breach zone to extend off the property where the dam is being constructed. The de-veloper shall also cause a dam breach easement to be recorded upon the property being developed.
(6) Prior to recording of a Final Plat or issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, as appropriate, an as-built certification from a registered professional engineer shall be submitted to the Department. The certification shall state that the dam is constructed in accordance with the provisions of these regulations as well as the authorized construction plans. If the pro-ject is for the development of a subdivision, the developer shall also establish a legal entity, acceptable to the City of Duluth, such as a mandatory Property Owners Association, at time of recording of the Final Plat, responsible for the maintenance of the dam and its im-poundment.
(d) New Dams Subject to Regulation by the City of Duluth.
Dams proposed to be 9 feet or more in height, but less than 25 feet in height, in combination with an impounding capacity proposed to be 20 acre-feet or more at maximum water storage elevation, but less than 100 acre-feet, shall be subject to the following:
(1) If the developer elects not to construct the new dam to the design standards for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety, then a dam breach analysis for the dam shall be submitted with the construction plans for review and authorization prior to securing a De-velopment Permit from the Department. The design engineer shall utilize the computer model entitled "DAMBRK" for the dam breach analysis.
(2) Should the new dam not meet the design standards for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety, then only the following uses and structures shall be permitted within the dam breach zone:
a. Agriculture which requires no structures for human habitation within the dam breach zone including forestry, livestock raising, and agricultural and forestry access roads.
b. Fences.
c. Outdoor advertising signs in accordance with the Duluth Zoning Ordinance.
d. Roads, driveways and parking areas.
e. Utility poles, towers, pipelines, water treatment outfalls and facilities, or similar facili-ties and structures.
(3) If the developer elects to construct the new dam in accordance with the design standards for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety, then new development shall be permitted within the dam breach zone. However, the dam shall meet the design standards for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety if development currently exists or is proposed in the dam breach zone.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1023 Construction Inspections of Post-Development Stormwater Management System
10-41
(4) Construction plans for new dams defined herein shall be submitted to the City of Duluth for review for the project and the dam prior to securing a Development Permit from the De-partment.
(5) For any dam that is proposed not to meet the design standards for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety, the developer shall obtain a dam breach easement, recorded with the Clerk of Superior Court, from any offsite property owner where it is proposed for the dam breach zone to extend off the property where the dam is being constructed. The developer shall also cause a dam breach easement to be recorded upon the property being developed.
(6) Prior to recording of a Final Plat or issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, as appropriate, an as-built certification from a registered professional engineer shall be submitted to the Department. The certification shall state that the dam is constructed in accordance with the provisions of these regulations as well as the authorized construction plans. If the pro-ject is for the development of a subdivision, the developer shall also establish a legal entity, acceptable to the City of Duluth, such as a mandatory Property Owners Association, at time of recording of the Final Plat, responsible for the maintenance of the dam and its im-poundment.
(e) Existing Dams.
Existing dams that are located on a project site and will remain after construction is completed, shall comply with the provisions of this Article and all referenced Articles as if they were new dams.
(f) Existing Category II Dams.
When an existing Category II dam may be reclassified to a Category I dam because of a proposed development downstream of the dam, the following shall be provided by the developer for re-view by the Georgia Safe Dams Program:
(1) Location of the Category II dam and the proposed development; and
(2) A surveyed cross-section of the stream valley at the location of the proposed development including finished floor elevations; and
(3) A dam breach analysis using the Dambreak computer model to establish the height of the floodwave in the downstream floodplain. The Dambreak modeling shall be completed in accordance with the Safe Dams Program Quality Assurance Program and by a qualified reg-istered engineer.
Section 1023. Construction Inspections of Post-Development Stormwater Management System
1023.01 Inspections to Ensure Stormwater Management Plan Compliance During Construction.
(a) Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the City Engineer or their designee. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved storm-water management plan for establishing compliance.
(b) All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following infor-mation:
(1) The date and location of the inspection;
(2) Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan;
Section 1024 Ongoing Inspection and Maintenance of Stormwater Facilities and Practices. City of Duluth UDC
10-42
(3) Variations from the approved construction specifications; and,
(4) Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater manage-ment plan.
(c) If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the viola-tion and the required corrective actions.
1023.02 Final Inspections and As Built Plans.
(a) Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the appli-cant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan.
(b) All applicants are required to submit actual as built plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a Professional Engineer.
(c) The submittal shall include a certified record survey prepared by a land surveyor currently reg-istered in the state of Georgia. The record drawing and certification shall be submitted to the City at least one week prior to the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy or Final Plat approv-al (as appropriate to the project).
(d) A final inspection by the City Engineer is required before the release of the Final Plat or any per-formance securities can occur.
Section 1024. Ongoing Inspection and Maintenance of Stormwater Facilities and Practices.
1024.01 Long-Term Maintenance Inspection of Stormwater Facilities and Practices.
(a) Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspec-tions to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the require-ments of the maintenance agreement (Section 1021.04), the stormwater management plan and this Code Division.
(b) A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the re-sponsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement fol-lowing the issuance of the final plat. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the City shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan as specified in the inspec-tion and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City Engineer, may correct the violation as provided in Sec-tion 1024.04.
(c) Inspection programs by the City Engineer may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to:
(1) routine inspections;
(2) random inspections;
(3) inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations;
City of Duluth UDC Section 1025 Purpose and Intent.
10-43
(4) and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws.
(d) Inspections may include, but are not limited to:
(1) reviewing maintenance and repair records;
(2) sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities;
(3) and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices.
1024.02 Right-of-Entry for Inspection.
The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the City Engineer to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This in-cludes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this ordinance is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nui-sance or correction of a violation of this ordinance.
1024.03 Records of Maintenance Activities.
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the City Engineer.
1024.04 Failure to Maintain.
If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City Engineer, after thirty (30) days written notice (except, that in the event the viola-tion constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, a 24 hour notice shall be suffi-cient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The City Engineer may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the proper-ty, and may be placed on the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary man-ner for such taxes.
DIVISION V. ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION
Section 1025. Purpose and Intent.
(a) The purpose of this Division VI of this Article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through: the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the city separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law; establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new de-velopment and redevelopment; and establishing methods for controlling the introduction of non-stormwater discharges into the city separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources.
Section 1026 Definitions Related to Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection. City of Duluth UDC
10-44
(b) The objectives of Division VI of this Article are to:
(1) Comply with all state department of natural resources (DNR) and federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) stormwater regulations developed pursuant to the Clean Water Act;
(2) Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the city separate storm sewer system;
(3) Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the city separate storm sewer system;
(4) Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources;
(5) Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydro-logic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream tempera-ture, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats;
(6) Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural storm-water control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development storm-water management standards;
(7) Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable; and
(8) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and en-forcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this Code Division.
Section 1026. Definitions Related to Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection.
For the purposes of Division VI of this Article, the following terms, phrases and words, and their derivates, shall have the meaning given herein:
Accidental discharge. A discharge prohibited by this article that occurs by chance and without plan-ning or thought prior to occurrence.
Clean Water Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.  1251 et seq.), and any subse-quent amendments thereto.
Construction activity. Activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturb-ance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
Conveyance. An aboveground or underground natural or manmade drainage feature, that provides for the collection and movement of stormwater, and shall include but not be limited to concrete or metal pipes, ditches, depressions, swales, roads with drainage systems, highways, city streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, drainage channels, reservoirs, rights-of-way, storm drains, culverts, street gutters, oil/water separa-tors, modular pavements and other similar drainage structures.
City Separate Storm Sewer System. Any conveyance or system of conveyances which is:
Owned or maintained by the City;
City of Duluth UDC Section 1026 Definitions Related to Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection.
10-45
Not a combined sewer; and
Not part of a publicly owned treatment works.
Department. Unless otherwise specified, the city department responsible for stormwater manage-ment activities and implementation of the provisions of this article.
Director. Either the director of the city department responsible for stormwater management activi-ties and implementation of the provisions of this article or any of that person's duly authorized rep-resentatives.
Discharge. The direct or indirect release of water, fluid, materials or other matter to a conveyance or surface that drains to a conveyance.
Illicit Discharge. Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the city separate storm sewer system.
Illegal Connection. Shall mean any of the following:
Any pipe, open channel, drain or other conduit, whether natural or manmade, which is used exclu-sively to drain a non-stormwater discharge to the City's separate storm sewer system; or
Any pipe, open channel, drain or other conduit, whether natural or manmade, that was designed, in-stalled or redirected for the purpose of draining a non-stormwater discharge into the City's separate storm sewer system; or
Any pipe, open channel, drain or other conduit, whether natural or manmade, which is connected to the city separate storm sewer system and which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equiva-lent records and approved by the city regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or other conduit, whether natural or manmade, was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevail-ing at the time the connection was made, or has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the city or any other authorized enforcement agency. "Illegal connection" expressly includes, without limitation, those connections made in the past.
Industrial Activity. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, section 122.26(b)(14).
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit. A permit issued by the state EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC  1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an indi-vidual, group, or general area-wide basis.
Non-stormwater. Any surface flow, runoff, drainage, or discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater and which may include pollutants, but that excludes:
Water from those sources described in section 3.1(2)(a) and 3.1.(2)(b) of this article; and /or
Any discharge permitted under NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered un-der the authority of the state and the federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other appli-cable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the city separate storm sewer system.
Person. Shall mean, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public
Section 1027 Applicability. City of Duluth UDC
10-46
or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, city or other political subdivision of the state, any in-terstate body or any other legal entity.
Pollutant. Shall mean anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cook-ing grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or aban-doned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pes-ticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; process waste water and wash water; sew-age, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and resi-dues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or of-fensive matter of any kind.
Pollution. The manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, thermal and radiological integrity of water.
Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved in-cluding adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
Procedure. Shall mean a procedure adopted by the department, by and through the director, to im-plement a regulation or regulations adopted under this article, or to carry out other responsibilities as may be required by this Code or other codes, ordinances or resolutions of the city or other agen-cies.
State Waters. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage sys-tems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person.
Stormwater. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, but which also includes:
(b) Water from those sources described in section 3.1(2)(a) and 3.1(2)(b) of this Code; and /or
(c) Any discharge permitted under NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and adminis-tered under the authority of the state and the federal Environmental Protection Agency, pro-vided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the city separate storm sewer system.
Stormwater Management Design Manual. The most recent version of the Gwinnett County, Georgia Stormwater Design Manual.
Structural Stormwater Control. A structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow.
Stormwater Variance. The modification of the minimum stormwater requirements for specific cir-cumstances where strict adherence of the requirements would result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of this Code Division.
Section 1027. Applicability.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1028 Illicit Non-Stormwater Discharge and Illicit Connection.
10-47
Division VI of this Article shall apply throughout the incorporated area of the City of Duluth. The City may enter into agreements other municipalities, to carry out the purpose of this Code Division. These agreements may include, but are not limited to, enforcement of provisions, resolution of disputes, and cooperative monitoring and management of the separate storm sewer system and management programs.
Section 1028. Illicit Non-Stormwater Discharge and Illicit Connection.
1028.01 Prohibitions.
(a) Prohibition of Illicit Discharges.
(1) It shall be a violation of this Code Division for any person to throw, drain, or otherwise dis-charge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the city separate storm sewer system anything other than stormwater.
(2) Discharges from the following sources are exempt from the prohibition provision in subsec-tion (1) above:
a. Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants.
b. Discharges or flows from fire fighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the City as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
(b) Prohibition of Illegal Connections.
(1) It shall be a violation of this Code Division for any person to construct, connect, use, main-tain, or suffer or allow the continued existence of any illegal connection to the city separate storm sewer system.
(2) Illegal connections must be disconnected. The department may require that illegal connec-tions be disconnected and redirected if necessary, to an approved on-site sewage man-agement system or the sanitary sewer system. Such redirected connections must be ap-proved by the agency responsible for administering and operating those systems.
(3) The department may require any underground or above ground pipe, drain or other con-duit, that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be con-nected to the city's separate storm sewer system, to be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice from the department. Such notice will speci-fy a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sani-tary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the department. Failure to comply with the terms of the written notice mentioned within this subsection shall constitute a violation of this Code Di-vision.
1028.02 Industrial or Construction Activity Discharges.
Section 1028 Illicit Non-Stormwater Discharge and Illicit Connection. City of Duluth UDC
10-48
(a) Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
(b) Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the City prior to allowing discharges to the city separate storm sewer system.
1028.03 Access and Inspection of Properties and Facilities.
(a) Access and Inspection.
(1) If a property or facility has security measures in force, which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the neces-sary arrangements to allow access to the Director or his designee.
(2) The owner or operator shall allow the Director or his designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, investigation, observation, monitoring, meas-urement, recording, enforcement, sampling and testing, photography and videotaping for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of this article. The owner or opera-tor shall allow the Director or his designee to examine and copy any records that are re-quired under the conditions of an NPDES permit. The Director or his designee shall duly no-tify the owner of said property or the representative on site, except in the case of an emer-gency.
(3) The Director or his designee shall have the right to set up on any premises, property or fa-cility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the department to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of discharges.
(4) The Director or his designee may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the department. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own ex-pense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accu-racy. Measurements, tests and analyses performed shall be completed in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136, unless the Director approves another method.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the premises, property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or op-erator at the written or oral request of the Director or his designee and shall not be re-placed. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Director or his designee access to a facility, property or premises shall constitute a violation of this Code Division.
(7) If the Director or his designee has been refused access to any part of a premises, property or facility from which stormwater is or would likely be discharged, and the Director or his designee is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this Code Division, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine in-spection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this Code Division or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the department may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(b) Schedule.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1028 Illicit Non-Stormwater Discharge and Illicit Connection.
10-49
The Director or his designee may determine inspection schedules necessary to enforce the pro-visions of this Code Division.
1028.04 Notification of Accidental Discharges and Spills.
(a) Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, ac-tivity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of non-stormwater from that facility or op-eration which is resulting or may result in a discharge of that non-stormwater into the city sep-arate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge.
(b) Said person shall notify the department by phone, facsimile or in person within 24 hours of dis-covering the discharge. Such notification shall detail the nature, quantity and time of occur-rence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the department within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill.
(c) In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified.
(d) Failure to provide notification of a release or discharge as provided above is a violation of this Code Division.
1028.05 Violations, Enforcement and Penalties.
(a) Violations.
(1) It shall be a violation of this Code Division for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Code Division. Any person, who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this Code Division, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this Section 1117. Each day of noncompliance is considered a separate offense. The department may institute appropriate action or proceedings at law or equity for the enforcement of this Code Division. Any court of competent jurisdiction may have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, and other appro-priate forms of remedy or relief. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the department from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, in-cluding application for injunctive relief.
(2) In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the department has the right but not the duty, to enter upon the subject private property or premises, without giving prior notice, and take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The department is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in Section 1107.05.
(b) Notice of Violation.
Section 1028 Illicit Non-Stormwater Discharge and Illicit Connection. City of Duluth UDC
10-50
Whenever the department finds that a violation of this Code Division has occurred, the depart-ment may order compliance by written notice of violation.
(1) The notice of violation shall contain:
a. The name and address of the alleged violator;
b. The address when available or a description of the building, structure, premises or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred;
c. A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
d. A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this arti-cle and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action;
e. A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the per-son to whom the notice of violation is directed; and
f. A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the department by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation.
(2) Such notice of violation may require without limitation:
a. The performance of monitoring, analysis, and reporting;
b. The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections;
c. That violations of this article shall cease and desist;
d. The abatement of non-stormwater discharges, the remediation of land or the effects of pollution, and the restoration of any affected property to its unaffected condition;
e. Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and,
f. The implementation of pollution prevention practices; and
g. The development and provision to the department of written remediation or action plan's; and
h. The development and provision to the department of documents showing the location and discharge points of conveyances, pipes, channels, or drains; and
i. Any other actions that will lead to the remedy of a condition of violation of this Code Division.
(c) Appeal of Notice of Violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the Director or his designee. The notice of appeal must be received by the department within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the Director shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the Director shall be fi-nal.
1028.06 Enforcement Measures.
(a) If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within three days of the decision of the Director uphold-ing the decision of the Director or his designee, then, in addition to any other remedies that may be available, representatives of the department or its contractors may enter upon the sub-
City of Duluth UDC Section 1028 Illicit Non-Stormwater Discharge and Illicit Connection.
10-51
ject private premises, property or facility, where they are then authorized to take any and all actions or measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. Such measures or actions shall include but not be limited to repairs, maintenance, containment, cleanup and remediation.
(b) It shall be a violation of this Code Division for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises, property or facility to refuse to allow the department or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth in Section 1117.04(a).
1028.07 Costs of Abatement of the Violation.
Within ten working days after abatement of the violation by the department or its contractors, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the as-sessment within ten working days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Code Division shall become liable to the City by reason of such violation.
1028.08 Criminal Penalties.
For violations of this Code Division, the department may issue a citation to the alleged violator re-quiring such person to appear in a court of competent jurisdiction to answer charges for such viola-tion. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $2,500.00 or imprison-ment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense.
1028.09 Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code Division is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law.
1028.10 Remedies Not Exclusive.
(a) The remedies listed in this Code Division are not exclusive of any other remedies available un-der any applicable federal, state or local law and the department may seek cumulative reme-dies.
(b) The department may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this Code Division, including sampling and monitoring expenses. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of a notice requiring payment of such costs, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a spe-cial assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.
1028.11 Waiver Circumstances.
(a) Standards for Approval.
The Director or his designee may grant a waiver from the requirements of this Code Division if exceptional circumstances applicable to a site or premises exist such that strict adherence to the provisions of this Code Division will result in unnecessary hardship and will not fulfill the intent
Section 1028 Illicit Non-Stormwater Discharge and Illicit Connection. City of Duluth UDC
10-52
of the Code Division. Specifically, such waivers may be granted in such individual cases of un-necessary hardship upon a finding by the Director or his designee that:
(1) There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular site in ques-tion; and
(2) The waiver is the minimum necessary, considering the impact on upstream and down-stream properties; and
(3) The application of the Code Division to this particular site would create an unnecessary hardship; and
(4) Such conditions are peculiar to the particular site involved; and
(5) Such conditions are not the result of any actions of the site owner; and
(6) Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good nor impair the purposes or intent of this Code Division; and
(7) No variance may be granted for a site for any discharge that is prohibited by this Code Divi-sion or which would result in a deterioration of quality of stormwater from a site greater than would otherwise be allowed if no variance were involved.
(b) Waiver Procedures.
(1) A written request for a waiver shall be required and shall state the specific waiver sought and the reasons, with supporting data, that a waiver should be granted. The request shall include all information necessary to evaluate the proposed wavier.
(2) The Director or his designee will conduct a review of the request for a waiver within 30 working days of receiving the request.
City of Duluth UDC
10-1
BLANK PAGE
11-i
Article 11. Procedures and Permits
Article 11 describes the process through which a rezoning or special use may be approved on a property, the approval process for construction of subdivisions and other land development projects, and the approval pro-cess for other permits required by this Development Code.
Table of Contents Page
Section 1101. OverviewZoning and Land Development. ....................................................................... 11-1
1101.01 Application Intake and Processing. ............................................................................................................ 11-1
1101.02 Zoning Changes (Rezoning or Special Use Approval). ................................................................................ 11-1
1101.03 Subdivisions. .............................................................................................................................................. 11-1
1101.04 Multi-family and Nonresidential Projects. ................................................................................................. 11-3
DIVISION I. ZONING AND SPECIAL USES. .............................................................................................. 11-3
Section 1102. Zoning and Special Uses, in General. .................................................................................. 11-3
1102.01 Authority. ................................................................................................................................................... 11-3
1102.02 Initiation of Map Amendments and Special Use Approvals. ...................................................................... 11-3
Section 1103. Zoning or Special Use Approval Process. ............................................................................ 11-4
1103.01 Filing of Applications. ................................................................................................................................. 11-4
1103.02 Pre-Application Conference. ...................................................................................................................... 11-4
1103.03 Planning Commission Meeting................................................................................................................... 11-5
1103.04 City Council Public Hearing; Notice. ........................................................................................................... 11-5
1103.05 Special Public Hearing; Drug Dependence Treatment Facilities. ............................................................... 11-5
Section 1104. Public Hearing Procedures and Standards for Approval. ..................................................... 11-6
1104.01 Public Hearing. ........................................................................................................................................... 11-6
1104.02 Standards Governing the Exercise of Zoning Power. ................................................................................. 11-7
1104.03 Conditional Approval. ................................................................................................................................ 11-7
1104.04 Change in Conditions of Approval. ............................................................................................................. 11-8
Section 1105. Special Use Considerations. ............................................................................................... 11-8
Section 1106. Withdrawal. ...................................................................................................................... 11-9
Section 1107. Applications for a Map Amendment or Special Use Approval. .......................................... 11-10
1107.01 Application Form and Documents. .......................................................................................................... 11-10
1107.02 Plans and Other Documents Showing Proposed Use Required. .............................................................. 11-11
1107.03 Sketch Plan Standards. ............................................................................................................................. 11-11
Section 1108. Refiling Restrictions after Denial of an Application. .......................................................... 11-12
Section 1109. Timely Implementation Required. ................................................................................... 11-13
DIVISION II. PERMITS REQUIRED FOR DEVELOPMENT OR CONSTRUCTION. .......................................... 11-13
Section 1110. Authorization Required for Land Disturbance or Development Activities. ......................... 11-13
Table of Contents Continued City of Duluth UDC
11-ii
1110.01 Permit Required; Exemptions. ................................................................................................................. 11-13
1110.02 Plan Review and Approval. ...................................................................................................................... 11-13
1110.03 Chattahoochee River Corridor Certificate. ............................................................................................... 11-13
1110.04 Proposed Development in Special Flood Hazard Areas. ......................................................................... 11-14
1110.05 Interdepartmental Review and Approval. ................................................................................................ 11-14
1110.06 Activities Limited to Permit Authorization. .............................................................................................. 11-14
1110.07 Developer's Responsibility for Compliance. ............................................................................................. 11-14
Section 1111. Land Disturbance Permits. ............................................................................................... 11-14
1111.01 Clearing Permit, Clearing and Grubbing Permit, and Grading Permit. ...................................................... 11-14
1111.02 Development Permit. ............................................................................................................................... 11-15
Section 1112. Approval to Remove Trees. ............................................................................................. 11-16
1112.01 Tree Removal Approval Required for Development Activity. ................................................................. 11-18
1112.02 Application Requirements for Tree Removal. ......................................................................................... 11-19
1112.03 Tree Survey Plan and Inventory. ............................................................................................................. 11-20
1112.04 Tree Survey Inspection. ........................................................................................................................... 11-20
1112.05 Tree Removal Permit. .............................................................................................................................. 11-20
Section 1113. Building Permits. ............................................................................................................. 11-20
1113.01 Applicable Codes. .................................................................................................................................... 11-20
1113.02 Health Department: On-Site Sewage Disposal. ....................................................................................... 11-21
1113.03 Single-Family and Duplex Residences. ..................................................................................................... 11-21
1113.04 Swimming Pools. ...................................................................................................................................... 11-21
1113.05 Multi-Family and Nonresidential Structures. ........................................................................................... 11-21
1113.06 Issuance on Buildable Lots of Record; Exceptions. ................................................................................... 11-22
DIVISION III. PLAN AND PLAT SPECIFICATIONS. .................................................................................... 11-23
Section 1114. Concept Plan Specifications. ............................................................................................ 11-23
1114.02 Concept Plan Specifications; General. ..................................................................................................... 11-23
1114.03 The Concept Plan shall contain the following: .......................................................................................... 11-23
Section 1115. Subdivision Development Plans. ...................................................................................... 11-24
1115.01 Subdivision Development Plans; General................................................................................................ 11-24
1115.02 Preliminary Subdivision Plats. ................................................................................................................. 11-25
1115.03 Final Plat Specifications. .......................................................................................................................... 11-28
1115.04 House Location Plan (HLP). ...................................................................................................................... 11-33
1115.05 Residential Drainage Plan (RDP) or Study (RDS). ..................................................................................... 11-35
Section 1116. Site Development Plans. .................................................................................................. 11-36
1116.01 Site Development Plans; General. ........................................................................................................... 11-36
1116.02 Project Boundary Data. ............................................................................................................................ 11-36
1116.03 The Site Plan shall contain the following (on one or more sheets): .......................................................... 11-37
1116.04 Other Plans Required. ............................................................................................................................. 11-38
1116.05 Encroachments. ....................................................................................................................................... 11-41
1116.06 Public Notice  Drainage. ........................................................................................................................ 11-41
Section 1117. Tree Protection Plan Specifications. ................................................................................. 11-41
Section 1118. Buffer and Landscape Plan Specifications. ........................................................................ 11-41
City of Duluth UDC Table of Contents Continued
11-iii
Section 1119. Digital Submission Requirements: As-Built Data and Final Plats. ....................................... 11-41
1119.01 Digital submissions. .................................................................................................................................. 11-41
DIVISION IV. PROCEDURES. ................................................................................................................. 11-41
Section 1120. Subdivision Review Procedures. ....................................................................................... 11-41
1120.01 Pre-Application Conference. .................................................................................................................... 11-41
1120.02 Concept Plan Approval. ............................................................................................................................ 11-42
1120.03 Development Plans Approval for Subdivisions. ......................................................................................... 11-42
1120.04 Final Plat Approval. ................................................................................................................................... 11-43
1120.05 Recordation of Approved Final Plat. ........................................................................................................ 11-44
1120.06 Revised Final Plat. .................................................................................................................................... 11-44
Section 1121. Non-Subdivision Review Procedures. ............................................................................... 11-45
1121.01 Pre-Application Conference. .................................................................................................................... 11-45
1121.02 Concept Plan Approval. ............................................................................................................................ 11-45
1121.03 Site Development Plans Approval. ............................................................................................................ 11-46
1121.04 Certificate of Development Conformance Approval Process. ................................................................... 11-47
Section 1122. Assignment of Names and Address. .................................................................................. 11-47
1122.01 Subdivision or Development Names. ........................................................................................................ 11-47
1122.02 Street Names. ........................................................................................................................................... 11-47
1122.03 Street Address Assignments. .................................................................................................................... 11-48
Section 1123. Developments of Regional Impact. .................................................................................. 11-49
1123.01 Types of Approvals Covered..................................................................................................................... 11-49
1123.02 Thresholds for Regional Review. .............................................................................................................. 11-49
1123.03 Process for DRI review. ............................................................................................................................ 11-49
Section 1124. Payment of Fees. ............................................................................................................ 11-50
DIVISION V. DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES AND COMPLETION. ................................................................ 11-50
Section 1125. Initiation of Development Activities. ................................................................................ 11-50
1125.01 Initial Activities Required. ......................................................................................................................... 11-50
1125.02 Tree Protection Areas. .............................................................................................................................. 11-51
1125.03 Development Inspections. ........................................................................................................................ 11-51
1125.04 Responsibility for Quality and Design. ...................................................................................................... 11-52
1125.05 Stop Work Orders. .................................................................................................................................... 11-52
1125.06 Stabilization for Erosion Control. .............................................................................................................. 11-52
Section 1126. Field changes. ................................................................................................................. 11-52
1126.01 Field Change; Defined. ............................................................................................................................. 11-52
1126.02 Field Change; Approval. ........................................................................................................................... 11-53
1126.03 Emergency Field Change Requests. ......................................................................................................... 11-54
Section 1127. Approval of Development Conformance. ......................................................................... 11-54
1127.01 Pre-requisite to Final Plat or Certificate of Occupancy Approval. ........................................................... 11-54
1127.02 Submission Requirements........................................................................................................................ 11-54
1127.03 Approval ................................................................................................................................................... 11-55
Section 1128. Project Closeout and Continuing Maintenance. ................................................................ 11-55
Table of Contents Continued City of Duluth UDC
11-iv
1128.01 Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement. .................................................................... 11-55
Section 1129. Maintenance Warranty. .................................................................................................. 11-55
1129.01 Maintenance Surety Required................................................................................................................. 11-55
1129.02 Maintenance Period. ............................................................................................................................... 11-56
1129.03 Maintenance Surety Standards. .............................................................................................................. 11-56
1129.04 Letter of Credit for Maintenance Surety. ................................................................................................ 11-56
1129.05 Staged or Phased Developments............................................................................................................. 11-57
1129.06 Release of Maintenance Warranty. ......................................................................................................... 11-57
Section 1130. Performance Guarantee. ................................................................................................. 11-58
1130.01 Posting Performance Guarantee. ............................................................................................................ 11-58
1130.02 Cost of Improvements. ............................................................................................................................ 11-58
1130.03 Restrictions Pending Completion of Improvements. .............................................................................. 11-58
1130.04 Failure to Complete Improvements. ....................................................................................................... 11-59
1130.05 Return of Guarantee. .............................................................................................................................. 11-59
1130.06 Types of Acceptable Performance Guarantees. ...................................................................................... 11-59
Section 1131. Example Instruments Relating to Improvement Guarantees. ............................................ 11-61
CERTIFICATE OF DEVELOPMENT CONFORMANCE ................................................................................... 11-62
DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT ....................................................... 11-64
CERTIFICATE OF CORPORATE RESOLUTION ............................................................................................. 11-67
SURETY AGREEMENT FOR MAINTENANCE LETTER OF CREDIT ................................................................ 11-68
SURETY AGREEMENT FOR PERFORMANCE LETTER OF CREDIT ............................................................... 11-70
PERFORMANCE BOND ............................................................................................................................. 11-72
WARRANTY AGREEMENT FOR REQUIRED LANDSCAPING ....................................................................... 11-76
11-1
Article 11. Procedures and Permits
Section 1101. OverviewZoning and Land Development.
1101.01 Application Intake and Processing.
An application for any permit or approval under this Article or for a hardship variance or special ex-ception variance under the Appeals Article of this Development Code will first be considered as fol-lows:
(a) If the application is for a project that qualifies as a Development of Regional Impact (DRI), and is the first request for City action or is a revision to a previous DRI, refer to Section 1123 of this Ar-ticle for details and procedures.
(b) If the application is for approval of an excep-tion plat for a minor subdivision, refer to 1101.03(b).
(c) If the application is for any other type of ap-proval or permit, refer to the appropriate Divi-sions and Sections of this Article or the Appeals Article for procedures pertinent to the request.
1101.02 Zoning Changes (Rezoning or Special Use Approv-al).
(a) If a proposed use is not allowed by right under the existing zoning on a property, a request for an amendment to the Official Zoning Map (of-ten called a rezoning) or approval of a Special Use must be approved prior to development, construction, or occupancy.
(b) See Article 2 of this Development Code for a list of all uses allowed by right or by Special Use approval in each zoning district.
(c) A zoning change for approval of a subdivision, multi-family, or nonresidential project must in-clude a subdivision sketch plan, preliminary site development plan, or PUD master concept plan, as applicable, showing the proposed lay-out of the project.
1101.03 Subdivisions.
Permitting and construction of a major or exemp-tion subdivision will be conducted generally as de-scribed in the following Section.
(a) Major Subdivisions.
(1) The approval of a Concept Plan for a sub-division, if desired by the developer, al-
Section 1101 OverviewZoning and Land Development. City of Duluth UDC
11-2
lows a property to be developed in smaller portions within the context of the plan for the entire property. Approval of a Concept Plan also allows early issuance of a clearing or a clearing and grubbing permit for an appropriate portion of the subdivision.
(2) A Development Permit is issued by the Planning and Development Director based on re-view and approval of a Preliminary Subdivision Plat and other development plans for con-struction of the subdivision.
(3) Receipt and approval by the Planning and Development Department (for street improve-ments, landscaping, and drainage) and the Gwinnett County Department of Planning and Development (for water and sewer) of accurate descriptions of the as-built condition of public improvements is required in order to allow approval of a Certificate of Development Conformance by the Planning and Development Director.
(4) An executed Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement, with appropriate maintenance warranty and performance guarantee documents attached, is received and approved by the Planning and Development Director.
(5) Deeds and easement dedications, as applicable, for all public rights-of-way and other lands or facilities to be dedicated to the City of Duluth, and all improvement warranty and guar-antee documents, are forwarded to the City Council for acceptance.
(6) Approval of a Final Subdivision Plat by the Planning and Development Director will author-ize recordation of the plat with the Clerk of the Gwinnett County Superior Court.
(7) After recordation of the Final Plat, the lots may be sold, and building permits and driveway permits on the lots may be obtained.
(8) Any final improvements deferred under a Performance Agreement must be completed and inspection approval obtained from the Planning and Development Department before the maintenance period begins.
(9) At the end of the maintenance period, all public improvements will be inspected by the Planning and Development Department. After the developer has made any required re-pairs, the maintenance surety will be released by the City and the public improvements will be accepted into perpetual maintenance.
(b) Minor Subdivisions.
Approval of a minor subdivision, when required by Article 5, is accomplished through approval and recording of an exemption subdivision plat, as follows:
(1) Deeds and easement agreements, as applicable, for all public rights-of-way, easements and other lands or facilities to be dedicated to the City of Duluth are received by the Director of Planning and Development and forwarded to the City Council for acceptance.
(2) Approval of a Final Subdivision Plat for the exemption subdivision by the Planning and De-velopment Director will authorize recordation of the plat with the Clerk of the Superior Court.
(3) After recordation of the Final Plat, the lots may be sold, and building permits and driveway permits on the lots may be obtained.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1102 Zoning and Special Uses, in General.
11-3
1101.04 Multi-family and Nonresidential Projects.
(a) The approval of a Concept Plan for a multi-family or nonresidential project allows a property to be developed in smaller portions within the context of the plan for the entire property. Approval of a Concept Plan also allows early issuance of a clearing, a clearing and grubbing or a grading permit for an appropriate portion of the project.
(b) A Development Permit is issued by the Planning and Development Director based on review and approval of a Site Plan and other development plans for construction of the project.
(c) A Building Permit is issued by the Planning and Development Director based on review and ap-proval of architectural plans. Buildings falling under the authority of the State Fire Marshal shall be approved by the Fire Marshal prior to issuance of the building permit.
(d) Driveway and sign permits are issued by the Planning and Development Department.
(e) Receipt and approval by the Planning and Development Director (for street improvements, land-scaping and drainage) and the Gwinnett County Department of Planning and Development (for water and sewer) of accurate descriptions of the as-built condition of public improvements is required in order to authorize issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
(f) An executed Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement, with appropriate maintenance warranty and performance guarantee documents attached, along with a warranty for landscaping materials, is received and approved by the Planning and Development Director.
(g) Acceptance of dedication deeds, easement agreements and improvement guarantees, if any, by the City Council is also required.
(h) Permanent electric power and occupancy of the building is authorized by the Planning and De-velopment Director based on final inspection and issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
(i) At the end of the maintenance period, all public improvements will be inspected by the Planning and Development Department. After the developer has made any required repairs, the mainte-nance surety will be released by the City and the public improvements will be accepted into perpetual maintenance.
DIVISION I. ZONING AND SPECIAL USES.
Section 1102. Zoning and Special Uses, in General.
1102.01 Authority.
(a) The City of Duluth Official Zoning Map may be amended from time to time by the City Council, but no map amendment (i.e., rezoning) or special use approval shall become effective unless it shall have been first submitted to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation.
(b) Procedures for approval of special exceptions and variances are found in Article 13, Appeals.
(c) Amendments to the text of this Development Code can only be initiated by the City Council and are addressed in Article 14, Administration.
1102.02 Initiation of Map Amendments and Special Use Approvals.
(a) A change in the zoning classification of a property by amending the Official Zoning Map, or a re-quest for a special use on a property may be initiated by the owner of the property or the own-
Section 1103 Zoning or Special Use Approval Process. City of Duluth UDC
11-4
ers authorized representative by filing an application with the Planning and Development De-partment.
(b) A change in the zoning of a property or consideration of a special use on a property may be initi-ated by the City Council on its own motion or at the request of any of the following: the Planning
and Development Director, the Planning Com-mission, or the owner of a property due to ex-traordinary circumstances.
(c) A general amendment to the Official Zoning Map involving some, many or all properties in the city may be initiated by the City Council on its own motion or at the request of the Planning and Development Director or the Planning Commission.
Section 1103. Zoning or Special Use Approval Process.
1103.01 Filing of Applications.
All proposed map amendments and special use ap-plications shall be submitted to the office of the Planning and Development Department in accord-ance with the schedule set by the Department.
1103.02 Pre-Application Conference.
(a) Prior to the filing of a rezoning or special use application, the owner or his representative is encouraged but not required to schedule a Pre-Application Conference with the Planning and Development Department Staff to review the feasibility of the proposed project in terms of its consistency with the land use plan, sur-rounding uses and zonings, and the adequacy of existing or public planned facilities. The owner is to provide the following information for con-sideration at this conference:
(1) A sketch plan showing the location and acreage of the project and the proposed layout of the streets and uses in relation to existing natural and man-made conditions. This plan may be a free-hand sketch made on a copy of a topographic map.
(2) Proposed uses.
(3) Identification of proposed method of wa-ter supply and sewage disposal.
(b) Following the pre-application conference, the owner may file a rezoning or special use appli-
City of Duluth UDC Section 1103 Zoning or Special Use Approval Process.
11-5
cation, as appropriate, and supporting materials as outlined in this Division.
1103.03 Planning Commission Meeting.
(a) The Planning Commission shall hold a public meeting to consider the application after adequate public notice of the meeting has been given.
(b) The City shall give notice of such public meeting and the application to be considered by provid-ing notice of the meeting in the same manner as required for public hearings under Section 1103.04.
(c) After hearing comments from all interested parties, the Planning Commission shall have 30 days within which to submit its recommendation, unless extended upon request of the applicant and the approval of the Planning Commission. If the Planning Commission fails to submit a recom-mendation within the specified period, the City Council may vote to proceed with a Public Hear-ing on the application without a recommendation from the Planning Commission.
1103.04 City Council Public Hearing; Notice.
(a) Subsequent to the Planning Commissions review, or subsequent to the City Councils decision to proceed without a recommendation, the City Clerk shall arrange a suitable hearing date for the City Council to consider the application.
(b) Public Hearing Notice.
A notice of time and place of the hearing shall be published at least 15 days, but not more than 45 days, prior to said public hearing in the official legal organ of the City of Duluth or another newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the city. The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing in accordance with O.C.G.A. 36-66-4. If the proposed amendment is a rezoning of property or special use initiated by a party other than the City Council, then:
(1) The published notice, in addition to the foregoing, shall include the location of the proper-ty, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property; and,
(2) A sign or signs containing that same information shall be placed on the property by the Planning and Development Department not less than 15 days, nor more than 45 days, prior to the date of the hearing. The sign or signs shall be placed in a conspicuous location on the property frontage in such manner as to be legible from the public road. On lots with more than one road frontage, a sign will be placed facing each public road. If the property has no road frontage, a sign shall be placed at a location on each road where access will be gained to the property.
1103.05 Special Public Hearing; Drug Dependence Treatment Facilities.
The following requirements are adopted as required by the Georgia Zoning Procedures Law (O.C.G.A.  36-66-4(f)).
(a) When a proposed map amendment or special use application relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency, a special public hearing shall be held on the proposed request. Such special public hearing shall be held at least six months and not more than nine months prior to the date of final action on the application by the City Council. The hearing required by this subsection shall be in addition to the public hearing required under Section 1103.04.
Section 1104 Public Hearing Procedures and Standards for Approval. City of Duluth UDC
11-6
(b) Notice of Special Public Hearing.
(1) The City shall give notice of such special public hearing by providing notice of the hearing in the same manner as required for public hearings under Section 1103.04.
(2) Both the posted notice and the published notice shall include a prominent statement that the proposed map amendment or special use application relates to or will allow the loca-tion or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treat-ment of drug dependency.
(3) The published notice shall be at least six column inches in size and shall not be located in the classified advertising section of the newspaper.
Section 1104. Public Hearing Procedures and Standards for Approval.
For purposes of this Section the term zoning decision shall have the meanings set forth in O.C.G.A. 36-66-3, covering both map amendments and special use approvals.
1104.01 Public Hearing.
Prior to making any zoning decision, the City Council shall conduct a public hearing. The public hear-ing shall be called and a public notice provided in accordance with the provisions of Section 1103.04 of this Article and in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. 36-66-4. At any such public hearing, the following procedures shall apply:
(a) A member of the Planning and Development staff will briefly summarize the requested zoning change and shall respond to any questions from the Mayor or member of the Council regarding the staff recommendations related to the proposed zoning change.
(b) The applicant shall be provided an opportunity to be heard and may present any evidence, in-formation or materials which the applicant desires for the City Council to consider in arriving at its determination.
(c) Public comments will be accepted and individuals making public comments may present any ev-idence, information and/or materials that the individual desires for the City Council to consider in arriving at its determination.
(d) The City Council may place reasonable time limitations on the presentation of the applicant and on public comments by individuals in support or opposition to the zoning decision. An equal time period be allowed for presentation of data, evidence and opinion by proponents of the zoning decision and by opponents of the zoning decision, and in no event shall the minimum time period allowed for presentation be less than ten minutes per side.
(e) Persons speaking either in support of or in opposition to a zoning decision having been recog-nized by the Mayor, shall state their name and address for the public record, and shall present any written documents they desire to be included in the record of the meeting to the City Clerk.
(f) All comments shall be directed to the Mayor and City Council and shall be made in an orderly manner.
(g) The applicant and any opponents to the zoning decision shall acquaint themselves with the pro-visions of Section 3 of the Conflict of Interest in Zoning Actions Law, O.C.G.A. 36-67A regarding disclosure of campaign contributions and shall comply with the provisions of that statute.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1104 Public Hearing Procedures and Standards for Approval.
11-7
1104.02 Standards Governing the Exercise of Zoning Power.
(a) In exercising the zoning powers granted to the Mayor and City Council by State Law, the City Council shall apply the following standards in making zoning decisions:
(1) Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and devel-opment of adjacent and nearby property.
(2) Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property.
(3) Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use that will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools.
(4) Whether the zoning proposal is consistent with the Land Use Policy Plan, Comprehensive Plan, transportation plans, or other plans adopted for guiding development within the City of Duluth.
(5) Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of property that give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning or special use proposal.
(b) Standards for review of a Planned Unit Development rezoning, in addition to those enumerated under paragraph (a), above, are found in Article 5 of this Development Code.
1104.03 Conditional Approval.
(a) In adopting a map amendment or approving a special use, the Planning Commission may rec-ommend and the City Council may impose special conditions which they deem necessary in or-der to make the requested action acceptable and consistent with the proposed uses of the dis-trict(s) involved and to further the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan. Such condi-tions may consist of: setback requirements from any lot line; specified or prohibited locations for buildings, parking, loading or storage areas or other land uses, driveway curb cut restrictions; maximum provisions; landscaping or planted area which may include the berms, or other buffer-ing provisions or protective measures; measures to alleviate undesirable views, light, glare, noise, dust or odor; permitted hours of operation; architectural style; a requirement that devel-opers must build according to site plans as adopted; a limitation on exterior modifications of ex-isting buildings; and on and off-street traffic improvements necessary to carry traffic generated by the proposed development.
(b) Such conditions:
(1) Shall only be valid if they are included in the motion approving the amendment of adop-tion.
(2) Shall be permanent conditions of approval unless a lesser period of time is specified in the amendment.
(3) Shall be required of the property owner and subsequent owners as a condition of their use of the property.
(4) Shall be permitted and continuously enforced by the Planning and Development Director in the same manner as any other provision of this Development Code.
Section 1105 Special Use Considerations. City of Duluth UDC
11-8
1104.04 Change in Conditions of Approval.
Any application that proposes a change in the conditions of approval previously established by the City Council through action on a rezoning or special use shall be considered a new application and therefore subject to all procedures and provisions of this Division I regarding the approval of a map amendment or special use, as applicable.
Section 1105. Special Use Considerations.
(a) The special use is designed to apply under any one of the following circumstances:
(1) A special use listed under the zoning district is desired for development and a more inten-sive zoning district containing that use, as a use by right would not be appropriate for the property; or
(2) A special use listed under the zoning district is desired for development and no zoning dis-trict contains that use as a use by right; or
(3) A unique use not addressed in any zoning district is desired for development and is not like-ly to be duplicated within the City of Duluth; or
(4) The density of development may be affected by the height of a building; or
(5) The neighboring properties may be affected by the height of any structure; or
(6) The special use would be consistent with the needs of the neighborhood or the community as a whole, be compatible with the neighborhood and would not be in conflict with the overall objective of the Comprehensive Plan.
(b) In order to accommodate these particular uses, special use approval allows the City Council to approve such a use on a particular parcel without changing the general zoning district. Such ap-proval shall be subject to the requirements set forth below and any additional conditions deemed necessary to ensure the compatibility of the special use with the surrounding proper-ties. All special use applications shall be for firm development proposals only. The special use shall not be used for securing early zoning for conceptual proposals that may not be undertaken for some time. A special use application shall be considered only if the application is made by the owner of the property or by his/her authorized agent. The minimum requirements for a spe-cial use approval are:
(1) Any uses allowed under special use approval shall also conform to the requirements of this Development Code for all uses as found in the zoning district.
(2) The application and review process for a special use shall be the same as for the zoning dis-trict under which the special use is found. In addition to the information and/or site plans which are required to be submitted for the proposed development, additional information deemed necessary by the Director in order to evaluate a proposed use and its relationship to the surrounding area shall be submitted. In the review process, particular emphasis shall be given to the evaluation of the characteristics of the proposed use in relationship to its immediate neighborhood and the compatibility of the proposed use with its neighborhood.
(3) In the approval process for a special use approval application, the City Council shall consid-er the policies and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan, particularly in relationship to the proposed site and surrounding area, and shall consider the potential adverse impacts on the surrounding area, especially in regards but not limited to traffic, storm drainage, land values and compatibility of land use activities.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1106 Withdrawal.
11-9
(4) If an application is approved and a special use approval is granted, all conditions that may have been attached to the approval are binding to the property. All subsequent develop-ment and use of the property shall be in accordance with the approved plan and condi-tions.
(5) Changes to a special use or development of a site for the special use, shall be treated as an amendment to the special use Permit and shall be subject to the same application and re-view process as a new application.
(6) An application for special use approval in a residential district and which use is proposed to operate in a dwelling or as an accessory use to a dwelling is subject to the following addi-tional requirements:
a. The special use shall operate within the dwelling on the property or, if approved by the City Council, in an accessory structure.
b. The exterior character of the dwelling shall be preserved in its residential state and there shall be no outside evidence of the operation of a special use to the neighbor-hood, except for any accessory structure approved by the City Council.
(7) The owner of the property approved for a special use may voluntarily request termination of the special use by notifying the Director in writing. The Director shall notify the City Council through the Planning Commission of the voluntary termination. The approval of a special use for a specific use which may be operated by a lessee under a private agreement with a lessor in any non-residential district shall not obligate the City Council to be respon-sible for or be required to resolve any disputes which may arise out of the voluntary termi-nation of the special use by the property owner.
(8) The Planning and Development Department shall have the right to periodically examine the operation of the specific use to determine compliance with the requirements and any con-ditions. If the Planning and Development Director determines that the requirements and conditions are being violated, a written notice shall be issued to the owner of the property outlining the nature of the violation and giving the owner of the property a maximum of ten days to come into compliance. If after ten days the violations continue to exist, the Di-rector shall forward a report to the City Council through the Planning Commission who may recommend that action be taken to remove the special use from the property.
(9) Upon approval by the City Council, a special use shall be identified on the official zoning maps.
(10) Upon approval by the City Council of a special use, the owner of the property shall be is-sued a notice from the Director that states the specific use permitted, the requirements of this Section and any conditions attached to the approval.
(11) The Planning and Development Department shall not issue a Certificate of Occupancy for the specific use unless all requirements and conditions of the special use approval have been fulfilled by the owner of the property.
Section 1106. Withdrawal.
Any applicant wishing to withdraw an application prior to final action by the City Council shall file a written request for withdrawal with the Planning and Development Director.
Section 1107 Applications for a Map Amendment or Special Use Approval. City of Duluth UDC
11-10
(a) The withdrawal request must be in writing and signed by the owner, the applicant or the own-ers authorized agent.
(b) If the request for withdrawal is received prior to the publication of notice for the public hearing as required under Section 1103.04, the application shall be withdrawn administratively by the Planning and Development Director.
(c) If a request for withdrawal of an application is received after notice has been published (or irre-trievably set for publication) but before the scheduled Planning Commission public meeting, the application may be withdrawn with the consent of the Planning Commission and removed from further consideration.
(d) Should any request for withdrawal be made after the public meeting by the Planning Commis-sion, the application shall remain on the City Council agenda and the withdrawal request shall be considered for approval or denial by the City Council. If withdrawal is denied, the City Council will proceed with consideration of the application.
Section 1107. Applications for a Map Amendment or Special Use Approval.
1107.01 Application Form and Documents.
(a) The proper form on which to file an application for a map amendment or special use approval can be obtained from the Planning and Development Department. The completed application shall be filed with the Planning and Development Department at least 30 days prior to the Plan-ning Commission meeting at which the request will be considered.
(b) Any transmittal purporting to be an application for a map amendment or special use approval shall be regarded as mere notice of intention to seek an amendment until such time as it is made on the required form provided by the Planning and Development Department and is com-plete in all respects.
(c) The Planning and Development Department will review the application for completeness within 10 days of submission. Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant.
(d) An application for a map amendment or special use approval shall contain the following in order to be considered complete:
(1) A signed and notarized application form including all of the information required to be sup-plied by the applicant on the form or attached to it. If the owner is a corporation or part-nership then provide an executed Certificate of Corporate Resolution (see Section 1131 for an example) authorizing submission of the application.
(2) Letter of intent stating the reasons for the rezoning or special use request, a description of the proposal, and addressing each of the standards under Section 1104.02 and Section 1105 (and Article 5 for PUDs) for map amendments or special use approval, as applicable.
(3) Payment of fees as set forth in the schedule of fees adopted by the City Council under Arti-cle 13 of this Development Code.
(4) Copy of the Deed (with legal description) as proof of ownership.
(5) If the applicant is not the owner of the property, provide a notarized property owners au-thorization for the applicant to act on behalf of the owner on the request (accompanied by an executed certificate of corporate resolution if the owner is a corporation).
City of Duluth UDC Section 1107 Applications for a Map Amendment or Special Use Approval.
11-11
(6) Political contribution disclosure if required under the requirements of O.C.G.A. 36-67A-3 of the Georgia Conflict in Interest in Zoning Actions Law.
(7) Such plans and other documents required under Section 1107.02.
1107.02 Plans and Other Documents Showing Proposed Use Required.
(a) An application for a map amendment or special use to create, extend or otherwise alter a CPD-R, R-100, R-75, RM, HC-Auto, HC-Retail, C-1, C-2, CPD-C, O-I, O-N, M-1, M-2 or MH zoning district shall be accompanied by a sketch plan at an approximate scale and such other plans, elevations or additional information as the Planning and Development Director may require, showing the proposed development.
(b) For a PUD rezoning, the master concept plan map and accompanying development summary report, as described in Article 5 of this Development Code, shall be submitted.
(c) Upon the receipt of a map amendment or special use application, no building or other permits shall be granted except for uses or structures that conform essentially with the sketch plan and other documents submitted with the application for a map amendment or special use.
1107.03 Sketch Plan Standards.
All applications for a rezoning (other than a PUD) or special use shall be accompanied by a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision or development site prepared and stamped by a registered land surveyor, engineer, architect or landscape architect containing the following information:
(a) The sketch plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch on a sheet size not to exceed 24 inches by 36 inches. The Planning and Development Director may approve other sheet sizes as deemed appropriate.
(b) The sketch plan shall be drawn on a boundary survey of the property, showing bearings and dis-tances of all property boundary lines, land lot and district lines, known survey monuments, north arrow and scale, surveyors name and registration number, and date of survey.
(c) The following information shall be depicted on the sketch plan.
(1) Project name.
(2) Project owner and address (both local and permanent addresses if different) and telephone and fax number(s).
(3) Name and address of person or company preparing the sketch plan.
(4) Vicinity map.
(5) Proposed use of property.
(6) Total acreage.
(7) Total number of lots and minimum lot sizes (if applicable).
(8) Size, location, and names of adjoining existing streets or access drives and proposed rights-of-ways and roadways.
(9) Proposed method of sewerage disposal (express as a note).
(10) All contiguous property under the ownership or control of the applicant, except those lands specifically to be excluded by the Department. Areas not planned for development at the time of the submittal shall be shown as Future Development.
Section 1108 Refiling Restrictions after Denial of an Application. City of Duluth UDC
11-12
(11) General development data (in tabular form) for multi-family or non-residential site devel-opments, such as number of residential units, gross square feet of nonresidential buildings, number of parking spaces, etc.
(12) General development data (in tabular form) for single-family developments, such as mini-mum lot size, floor area of homes, and all relevant conditions of zoning.
(13) Any other data requested by the Planning and Development Director necessary for an un-derstanding and evaluation of the project.
(d) The sketch plan shall show the following physical characteristics as appropriate to the proposed development to an approximate (not engineering) level of accuracy:
(1) Location of ingress and egress points, internal roadways and parking areas.
(2) Location of 100-year floodplain, lakes, ponds and other watercourses.
(3) Dumpster location.
(4) Proposed landscaping and tree-save areas.
(5) Building heights.
(6) The approximate location and arrangement of existing buildings, parking areas and other improvements that are proposed to remain.
(7) For multi-family and non-residential developments, the approximate location and ar-rangement of proposed buildings, parking areas and other improvements including storm-water detention areas and all required buffers.
(8) Location of existing and proposed sidewalks.
(9) Existing zoning of the property and adjoining properties.
(10) Boundaries of the Chattahoochee River Corridor and Chattahoochee River Tributary Protec-tion Areas, if applicable.
(e) Additional information may be required when proposing a Planned Unit Development - see Arti-cle 5 of this Development Code for specifics.
Section 1108. Refiling Restrictions after Denial of an Application.
(a) If an application for approval of a map amendment or special use on a property is denied by the City Council, an application for the same or any other map amendment or special use on said property may not be accepted by the Planning and Development Department until the expira-tion of 12 months from the date of action by the City Council on the original application unless the City Council denied the original request without prejudice.
(b) The City Council may initiate a map amendment or special use approval on property for which an application was previously denied, once the six-month waiting period required by O.C.G.A. 36-66-4.c has lapsed.
(c) The property owner may request a City Council Initiation, if he or she can demonstrate to the City Council that the proposed rezoning or special use is significantly different from the previ-ously denied application. A significant difference includes, but is not limited to, a change in the requested zoning district, land use, density of development, buffer proposal, or other items which were discussed at public hearing and/or figured into the original denial of the rezoning or special use.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1109 Timely Implementation Required.
11-13
Section 1109. Timely Implementation Required.
Actions to be taken if proposed plans of property owner are not implemented within specified 12 months and found to be inconsistent with the comprehensive plan.
(a) If a building permit, development permit, certificate of occupancy or preliminary subdivision plat has not been issued or approved within 12 months of the date of approval of a map amendment or special use requested by a property owner and in accordance with the proposed development plans and other submitted documents, and if it is determined that such plans or zoning is inconsistent with the Future Land Use designation of the Comprehensive Plan, then the Planning and Development Director may notify the Planning Commission of the lack of activity on the property.
(b) The Planning Commission shall review each such situation and report its findings to the City Council.
(c) In circumstances where the zoning and proposed development is not consistent with the Com-prehensive Plan, the Planning Commission may recommend to the City Council that it initiate a rezoning or special use application to change the land to its appropriate zoning district classifica-tion or rescind the special use approval in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan Land Use designation.
DIVISION II. PERMITS REQUIRED FOR DEVELOPMENT OR CONSTRUCTION.
Section 1110. Authorization Required for Land Disturbance or Development Activities.
1110.01 Permit Required; Exemptions.
No disturbance of the land, including clearing, grubbing, or grading activities, shall commence or proceed except in accordance with the provisions of these Development Regulations, unless the ac-tivity is exempt as an agricultural activity in the RA-200 zoning district, or is for the construction of an individual single-family detached or duplex residence on a buildable lot of record.
1110.02 Plan Review and Approval.
Any developer of land within the City of Duluth shall first submit to the Planning and Development De-partment such plans, plats, or construction drawings as may be required by this Development Code and shall have been granted a permit consistent with this Development Code and approved by the Planning and Development Department prior to the initiation of development activities. Approval of plans by the City or employees shall not imply nor transfer acceptance of responsibility for the application of the principles of engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, or any other pro-fession, from the professional corporation or individual under whose hand or supervision the plans were prepared and sealed. Division III of this Article details the elements of the required plans.
1110.03 Chattahoochee River Corridor Certificate.
If any portion of a property included within a proposed project is located within 2,000 feet of the bank of the Chattahoochee River, the project shall first obtain a Certificate authorizing the develop-ment under the provisions of the Metropolitan River Protection Act before any clearing, grading, or construction activity may be granted a permit by the Planning and Development Department or any other agency. All permits issued by the City of Duluth pursuant to such authorization shall be con-sistent with the requirements and provisions of the Certificate. Any violation of the provisions of the
Section 1111 Land Disturbance Permits. City of Duluth UDC
11-14
Metropolitan River Protection Act Certificate shall be considered as though a violation of this Devel-opment Code, and shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions hereunder.
1110.04 Proposed Development in Special Flood Hazard Areas.
Any land owner or developer desiring a permit for development activity on a site where an area of special flood hazard is located shall meet the requirements of the Floodplain Management section in Article 8 of this Code.
1110.05 Interdepartmental Review and Approval.
The Planning and Development Department shall not issue a permit for any development activities until the plans, plats, or construction drawings, as applicable, have been approved by such other de-partments or agencies as may have authority or jurisdiction over said activities in whole or in part.
1110.06 Activities Limited to Permit Authorization.
Development activities shall be limited to those as authorized by the applicable permit and as may be further restricted by conditions of approval pertaining thereto attached by the Planning and De-velopment Department or other department or agency as may have authority or jurisdiction over said activities in whole or in part.
1110.07 Developer's Responsibility for Compliance.
No permit shall be interpreted to relieve any developer or subdivider of the responsibility of main-taining full compliance with all codes, ordinances, and other regulations of the City of Duluth except as amended by an approved Waiver, Variance, or other relief granted through applicable formal ap-peal procedures for a specific property or application. Any permit issued in error or in contradiction to the provisions of an adopted code, ordinance, or regulation of the City of Duluth shall be consid-ered to have been null and void upon its issuance.
Section 1111. Land Disturbance Permits.
1111.01 Clearing Permit, Clearing and Grubbing Permit, and Grading Permit.
The following permits covering portions of the land development process may be issued in accord-ance with the requirements of this Development Code and the provisions of any Metropolitan River Protection Act Certificate, if applicable:
(a) Clearing Permit.
(1) A permit limited to clearing only with no grubbing or other land disturbance (as de-fined in the Georgia Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Act) may be issued upon identification of the property, the limits of the area to be cleared and the type of ac-tivities to be undertaken, and approval of a Tree Protection/Replacement Plan as may be required under Section 1112. All clearing activities are to be consistent with the provisions of this Development Code, the Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control provi-sions of this Development Code, and any conditions of zoning.
(2) A clearing permit shall expire unless clearing activities are commenced within 60 consecu-tive calendar days of issuance of the permit or if activities lapse and are abandoned for a period exceeding 30 consecutive calendar days.
(3) A clearing permit shall not be construed as approval of or authorization to construct any improvements, buildings, or other structures on the property.
(b) Clearing and Grubbing Permit.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1111 Land Disturbance Permits.
11-15
(1) A clearing and grubbing permit may be approved based on approval of a Concept Plan and Tree Protection/Replacement Plan (if required) for the development. Appropriate soil ero-sion and sedimentation controls and tree protection measures shall be placed and main-tained as required.
(2) A permit for clearing and grubbing shall expire unless activities are commenced within 60 days of issuance of the permit or if activities lapse and the project is abandoned for a peri-od exceeding 14 calendar days.
(3) A clearing and grubbing permit shall be limited to the removal of vegetation and stumps and the placement of required tree protection measures and soil erosion and sedimenta-tion facilities, and may authorize the removal of existing structures on the property at the option of the developer. No grading or construction activities may be started under a clear-ing and grubbing permit. The approval of a clearing and grubbing permit shall not imply the approval of or authorization to construct any improvements, buildings, or other structures on the property.
(c) Grading Permit.
(1) A grading permit which may include clearing and grubbing, may be issued prior to approval of a development permit, as provided under Article 10 of this Development Code. A grading permit may also be issued for earth borrow or storage, where no development or construc-tion is proposed or imminent, based on approval of a grading plan, soil erosion and sedi-ment control plan, and hydrology study, consistent with the requirements of Section 1112, the zoning category of the site, and the provisions of the Comprehensive plan (as applica-ble).
(2) A grading permit shall expire unless activities are commenced within 60 consecutive calen-dar days of issuance of the permit or if activities lapse and the project is abandoned for a period exceeding 30 consecutive calendar days. Any site for which the grading permit ex-pires shall immediately be stabilized to prevent erosion.
(3) A grading permit shall be limited in its authorization to land grading activities along with as-sociated tree protection, clearing and grubbing, and demolition activities, and may author-ize the construction of storm drainage improvements and soil erosion and sedimentation facilities as allowed by the permit.
1111.02 Development Permit.
(a) Development Activities Authorized.
A Development Permit shall be issued to authorize all activities associated with the land devel-opment process, including clearing and grubbing, grading, for the construction of such im-provements as streets, surface parking areas and drives, sewer systems, stormwater drainage facilities, sidewalks, or related structures permanently placed on or in the property. Grading for building and structures requiring a building permit is not authorized under a Development Per-mit. Clearing, grubbing and grading outside the rights-of- way and utility easements is not al-lowed by a Development Permit unless in compliance with Section 1112. Water and sanitary sewer system improvements shall be authorized solely by the Gwinnett County Public Utilities Department.
Section 1112 Approval to Remove Trees. City of Duluth UDC
11-16
(b) Development Permit Approval.
A development permit (which may include grading, clearing, and grubbing) shall be issued at the developer's request following approval of a Metropolitan River Protection Act Certificate, if applicable, and upon approval of a Preliminary Plat for a subdivision or a Site Plan for a non- subdivision project, along with approval of all other development plans and documents re-quired to be submitted under this Article. All plans approved for a development permit shall ex-pire after six months if no permit is issued within said time period.
(c) Expiration of Development Permits.
A development permit shall expire 12 consecutive calendar months after issuance unless devel-opment activity as authorized by the permit are commenced within said 12-month period or if such authorized activities lapse and the project is abandoned for a period exceeding 60 consecu-tive calendar days. The Planning and Development Director may approve one extension not ex-ceeding three consecutive calendar months within which time development activity must com-mence or the permit shall expire. Said extension shall be applied for within the first 12 consecu-tive calendar months after the permit's issuance.
(d) Lapse in Construction Activity.
For the purposes of this Development Code, a lapse in or suspension of development activity as authorized by a development permit, as a direct result of action or inaction on the part of the City of Duluth completely beyond the control of the developer, shall not be considered as a lapse in activity causing the development permit to expire. The 12 months within which devel-opment activity must begin shall exclude any such time period during which the activity is pro-hibited or has been caused to lapse by said City action or inaction.
(e) Expiration of Approved Development Plans.
(1) If construction activity has not commenced within the permit period and the Development Permit expires, the Director shall require new site plans to be submitted for the project. The new plans must comply with any changes or amendments to these regulations, the Zoning Ordinance, or other ordinances as adopted by the City.
(2) Where development plans have been approved by the Director, and no development per-mit has been issued, new plans shall be submitted after 24 months if a Development Permit has not been issued and construction has not commenced on the project.
Section 1112. Approval to Remove Trees.
1112.01 Tree Removal Approval Required for Development Activity.
(a) No person shall engage in any new Development Activity, such as the construction of a subdivi-sion, multi-family project or nonresidential development, without meeting the requirements of a Site Development Plan as required in Section 1116.
(b) For any existing multi-family or nonresidential development for which a development permit was previously issued, no tree shall be removed that would reduce the tree density on the property below that required under Article 7 without the reissuance of the tree removal permit (or approval of a sketch if qualified under Section 1112.07(b)).
(c) No person shall clear cut any parcels or combination greater than 2 acres without specific plan approval during zoning or first obtaining a Special Use approval. Clear cutting of parcels less
City of Duluth UDC Section 1112 Approval to Remove Trees.
11-17
than 2 acres shall not be allowed unless approved by the Planning and Development Director with clear evidence of necessity for development of the parcel.
1112.02 Application Requirements for Tree Removal.
(a) When a person applies for tree removal approval as defined in Section 1112.06, such person shall also file an application for a tree removal permit and provide the following information:
(1) A complete tree survey and inventory, as described in Section 1112.08.
(2) An integrated site plan showing Specimen Trees, the trees to be saved and those to be re-moved, utilities to be installed, grading, the approximate location of all structures, drive-ways and curb cuts and proposed tree plantings and other landscaping.
(3) A detailed plan to protect and preserve trees before, during and for a period of 2 years af-ter construction, which plan shall contain the following information:
a. All items found on the Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Submittal check-list pertinent to normal plan review.
b. Site area (roads, utility lines, detention ponds, etc.)
c. The locations of existing and proposed structures, paving, driveways, cut and fill area, detention areas, etc.
d. Phase lines or limits of construction.
e. A delineation of all protected zones with any required dimensions.
f. Calculations showing compliance with the required Site Density Factor using existing trees, replacement trees, and/or contributions to the City of Duluth Tree Replacement Fund or Tree Bank (See Density Factor Analysis, Article 7).
g. Location of all existing and proposed utility lines or easements.
h. Locations of any boring sites for underground utilities.
i. Locations of all Specimen Trees and indications whether they are to be removed or preserved.
j. Locations of all tree protection devices, materials to be used in each location and de-tails.
k. A delineation of a Tree Save Area in which trees have been inventoried for density cal-culations.
l. If applicable, locations and details of all permanent tree protection measures (tree wells, aeration system, permeable paving, retaining walls, bollards, etc.; and
m. Additional information as required on a case-by-case basis.
(b) Minor changes to existing development require only a sketch showing changes to be submitted to the Planning and Development Director for review and approval.
1112.03 Tree Survey Plan and Inventory.
(a) The tree survey as required in Article 7 shall be in the form of a to-scale map or a site plan pre-pared and sealed by a registered surveyor or certified engineer, arborist or landscape architect, noting the location of all trees (as described in Paragraph 1112.08(b) below) within the area to
Section 1112 Approval to Remove Trees. City of Duluth UDC
11-18
be modified from its natural state and 25 feet beyond in each direction or to the property line, whichever is less. (See example in Article 7.)
(b) All Specimen Trees and all trees that are to be counted toward meeting density requirements must be shown on the survey and inventoried by size (caliper or DBH, whichever is applicable) and species.
(c) Sampling methods may be used to determine tree densities for forested (over 5 acres). Speci-men Trees must be shown on the plan with an indication whether they are to be retained or removed. All Tree Protection zones (see example in Article 7) and Tree Save Areas must be de-lineated on the plan. All Buffers with existing trees must be delineated on plans as Tree Save Areas. Land disturbance within any Buffer is subject to Planning and Development Department approval.
1112.04 Tree Survey Inspection.
Following the receipt of the completed tree removal application and supporting data, the Planning and Development Director or his designee shall schedule and conduct an inspection of the proposed development site. The applicant or his designee shall be advised as to the date and time of the in-spection and given an opportunity to participate. Following inspections, the Planning and Develop-ment Director, consistent with the purposes of this Development Code, shall advise the applicant of any recommended changes in the applicants proposed tree removal, protection or replanting plans.
1112.05 Tree Removal Permit.
(a) The Planning and Development Director shall review all applications and supporting data and take one of the following actions: approve, approve with conditions or disapprove.
(b) The issuance of a tree removal permit does not authorize any development activity until such time as an appropriate development plan approval is granted and a permit is issued pursuant to Section 1111.
(c) Tree removal and replacement shall begin no later than 180 days after issuance of the tree re-moval permit and shall be completed no later than two years after the issuance of the permit. The Planning and Development Director may refuse to issue any permit for tree removal until the submission of all development plans and receipt of other evidence satisfactory to the Direc-tor that there is a reasonable certainty that the development activity is imminent. One renewal of a permit at no additional fee shall be granted if a reasonable request is made.
(d) No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until all requirements of the tree planting have been satisfactorily completed or an acceptable performance guarantee has been approved (see Sec-tion 1130).
1112.06 Tree Removal Approval Required for Development Activity.
(a) No person shall engage in any new Development Activity, such as the construction of a subdivi-sion, multi-family project or nonresidential development, without meeting the requirements of a Site Development Plan as required in Section 1116.
(b) For any existing multi-family or nonresidential development for which a development permit was previously issued, no tree shall be removed that would reduce the tree density on the property below that required under Article 7 without the reissuance of the tree removal permit (or approval of a sketch if qualified under Section 1112.07(b)).
City of Duluth UDC Section 1112 Approval to Remove Trees.
11-19
(c) No person shall clear cut any parcels or combination greater than 2 acres without specific plan approval during zoning or first obtaining a Special Use approval. Clear cutting of parcels less than 2 acres shall not be allowed unless approved by the Planning and Development Director with clear evidence of necessity for development of the parcel.
1112.07 Application Requirements for Tree Removal.
(a) When a person applies for tree removal approval as defined in Section 1112.06, such person shall also file an application for a tree removal permit and provide the following information:
(1) A complete tree survey and inventory, as described in Section 1112.08.
(2) An integrated site plan showing Specimen Trees, the trees to be saved and those to be re-moved, utilities to be installed, grading, the approximate location of all structures, drive-ways and curb cuts and proposed tree plantings and other landscaping.
(3) A detailed plan to protect and preserve trees before, during and for a period of 2 years af-ter construction, which plan shall contain the following information:
a. All items found on the Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Submittal check-list pertinent to normal plan review.
b. Site area (roads, utility lines, detention ponds, etc.)
c. The locations of existing and proposed structures, paving, driveways, cut and fill area, detention areas, etc.
d. Phase lines or limits of construction.
e. A delineation of all protected zones with any required dimensions.
f. Calculations showing compliance with the required Site Density Factor using existing trees, replacement trees, and/or contributions to the City of Duluth Tree Replacement Fund or Tree Bank (See Density Factor Analysis, Article 7).
g. Location of all existing and proposed utility lines or easements.
h. Locations of any boring sites for underground utilities.
i. Locations of all Specimen Trees and indications whether they are to be removed or preserved.
j. Locations of all tree protection devices, materials to be used in each location and de-tails.
k. A delineation of a Tree Save Area in which trees have been inventoried for density cal-culations.
l. If applicable, locations and details of all permanent tree protection measures (tree wells, aeration system, permeable paving, retaining walls, bollards, etc.; and
m. Additional information as required on a case-by-case basis.
(b) Minor changes to existing development require only a sketch showing changes to be submitted to the Planning and Development Director for review and approval.
Section 1113 Building Permits. City of Duluth UDC
11-20
1112.08 Tree Survey Plan and Inventory.
(a) The tree survey as required in Article 7 shall be in the form of a to-scale map or a site plan pre-pared and sealed by a registered surveyor or certified engineer, arborist or landscape architect, noting the location of all trees (as described in Paragraph (b) below) within the area to be modi-fied from its natural state and 25 feet beyond in each direction or to the property line, whichev-er is less. (See example in Article 7.)
(b) All Specimen Trees and all trees that are to be counted toward meeting density requirements must be shown on the survey and inventoried by size (caliper or DBH, whichever is applicable) and species.
(c) Sampling methods may be used to determine tree densities for forested (over 5 acres). Speci-men Trees must be shown on the plan with an indication whether they are to be retained or removed. All Tree Protection zones (see example in Article 7) and Tree Save Areas must be de-lineated on the plan. All Buffers with existing trees must be delineated on plans as Tree Save Areas. Land disturbance within any Buffer is subject to Planning and Development Department approval.
1112.09 Tree Survey Inspection.
Following the receipt of the completed tree removal application and supporting data, the Planning and Development Director or his designee shall schedule and conduct an inspection of the proposed development site. The applicant or his designee shall be advised as to the date and time of the in-spection and given an opportunity to participate. Following inspections, the Planning and Develop-ment Director, consistent with the purposes of this Development Code, shall advise the applicant of any recommended changes in the applicants proposed tree removal, protection or replanting plans.
1112.10 Tree Removal Permit.
(a) The Planning and Development Director shall review all applications and supporting data and take one of the following actions: approve, approve with conditions or disapprove.
(b) The issuance of a tree removal permit does not authorize any development activity until such time as an appropriate development plan approval is granted and a permit is issued pursuant to Section 1111.
(c) Tree removal and replacement shall begin no later than 180 days after issuance of the tree re-moval permit and shall be completed no later than two years after the issuance of the permit. The Planning and Development Director may refuse to issue any permit for tree removal until the submission of all development plans and receipt of other evidence satisfactory to the Direc-tor that there is a reasonable certainty that the development activity is imminent. One renewal of a permit at no additional fee shall be granted if a reasonable request is made.
(d) No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until all requirements of the tree planting have been satisfactorily completed or an acceptable performance guarantee has been approved (see Sec-tion 1130).
Section 1113. Building Permits.
1113.01 Applicable Codes.
Building permits for all structures or interior finishes are issued after the applicant for said permits has met the applicable requirements of the fire prevention and life safety codes of Gwinnett County, and
City of Duluth UDC Section 1113 Building Permits.
11-21
the various health, water, sewer, and building codes, as well as the provisions of any Certificate ap-proved under the Metropolitan River Protection Act, if applicable.
1113.02 Health Department: On-Site Sewage Disposal.
For any structure for which on-site sewage disposal will be provided, a permit issued by the Health Department shall be required prior to issuance of a building permit. Said permit may first require ap-proval by the Gwinnett County Health Department of a plan showing the location of the sewage dis-posal system and other site improvements, in accordance with their regulations.
1113.03 Single-Family and Duplex Residences.
(a) A building permit for a single or two-family residence may be issued after the recording of a Final Plat or after the lot upon which the building is to be located has otherwise become a build-able lot of record.
(b) The approval by the Department of a House Location Plan (HLP), Residential Drainage Plan (RDP), or Residential Drainage Study (RDS), may be required prior to issuance of the building permit, as noted and conditioned on the Final Plat or as may be required for compliance with the Georgia Metropolitan River Protection Act. For such lots, a Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued until conformance to the HLP, RDP, or RDS has been field verified by the Planning and De-velopment Department as shown on a certified field survey prepared by a Registered Land Sur-veyor and a stamped as-built survey has been submitted to the Department. (See Sections 1115.04 and 1115.05 for plan and study specifications.)
(c) Digital drawing files shall be submitted in Adobe PDF file format.
1113.04 Swimming Pools.
Issuance of a building permit for a swimming pool as an accessory use to a single of two-family resi-dence, whether to be issued at the same time as or subsequent to the permitting or construction of the dwelling, shall first require approval of a Swimming Pool Location Plan. The plan shall show the proposed location of the swimming pool and enclosing fence relative to the residence, the property boundaries, setback lines, septic tank and septic tank drain field (if any), and any easements on the site. The location of such swimming pool and shall comply with all requirements of the applicable zon-ing district and the Swimming Pool Code. Based on site conditions, a Residential Drainage Study (RDS) may be required prior to issuance of the building permit (see Section 1115.05). A Certificate of Oc-cupancy shall not be issued until conformance to the Swimming Pool Location Plan and to provi-sions of the RDS, if applicable, has been field verified by the Department.
1113.05 Multi-Family and Nonresidential Structures.
(a) Issuance of a building permit for any principal building other than a single- family detached or duplex residence (and associated accessory structure) shall first require issuance of a Develop-ment Permit for the building site, and the building permit shall be consistent with said Develop-ment Permit.
(b) Building plans must be reviewed and approved by the Gwinnett County Fire Services Division, and Public Utilities Departments and the Duluth Planning and Development Department prior to permitting for all multi-family and nonresidential structures and such accessory structures.
Section 1113 Building Permits. City of Duluth UDC
11-22
Building Plan approval shall expire after one year, after which re-review and approval shall be required prior to issuance of a building permit for the building or additional buildings.
(c) Digital drawing files shall be submitted in Adobe PDF file format.
1113.06 Issuance on Buildable Lots of Record; Exceptions.
Building permits shall only be issued on buildable lots of record, as defined in these Regulations, ex-cept under special circumstances limited to and as specifically described in this Section, below.
(a) In a single-family detached and duplex residential subdivision, building permits for no more than two model home buildings, on specific lots may be issued by the Planning and Development De-partment on the basis of an approved Preliminary Plat after the approval by the Fire Services Di-vision and the Gwinnett County Health Department or Water Pollution Control Division, as ap-propriate, and subject to all limitations or requirements as may be established by the Planning and Development Director. No Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued for the completed model home until the Final Plat encompassing the model home building lots has been approved and recorded.
(b) In fee-simple townhouse subdivisions, a building permit may be issued on a buildable lot of rec-ord established for each building (containing any number of townhouse dwelling units) through recording of a Final Plat following completion of all required public improvements. Upon com-pletion of the buildings, the Final Plat shall be re-recorded to establish individual lots for the townhouse units, based on their actual locations, prior to issuance of Certificates of Occupancy.
(c) In Non-Residential subdivisions, building permits may be issued by the Planning and Develop-ment Department on the basis of an approved Site Plan, after a Development Permit has been approved reflecting the site plan and construction drawings for specific buildings and associated site improvements, after the stormwater detention facility has been constructed and all erosion control measures have been installed according to the approved Erosion Control Plan. Issuance of the building permits shall be conditioned upon the following:
(1) A Performance Guarantee, prepared in accordance with Section 1130, shall have been re-ceived, drawn in favor of the City of Duluth and in an amount not less than 125% of the cost of completing all public improvements as authorized and required by the Site Plan and these Regulations;
(2) The Performance Guarantee shall not exceed an aggregate total for all required public im-provements of $12,000 per acre for the total acreage included within the subdivision or portion of the subdivision wherein the improvements are proposed, except by approval of the City Council;
(3) Gwinnett County Fire Services Division approval shall be required prior to issuance of any building permit, which may include approval of acceptable access and water pressure of combustible construction;
(4) Approval of Gwinnett County Health Department for on-site sewage disposal by the Gwin-nett County Water Pollution Control Division for a building to be served by public sewer shall be required prior to issuance of any building permit;
(5) Construction of the required public improvements shall proceed concurrently with con-struction of the buildings;
City of Duluth UDC Section 1114 Concept Plan Specifications.
11-23
(6) No C.O. shall be approved for any structure within the subdivision prior to recording of the Final Plat without the express approval of the Planning and Development Director; and
(7) The Planning and Development Director shall have found that the public interest is best served and that a public purpose is involved in the acceptance of the Performance Bond.
DIVISION III. PLAN AND PLAT SPECIFICATIONS.
The following Sections of this Division outline the required elements of both the required and op-tional plans and plats mentioned throughout this Development Code.
Section 1114. Concept Plan Specifications.
(a) The approval of a Concept Plan for a subdivision or site development allows a property to be developed in smaller portions within the context of the plan for the entire property. Approval of a Concept Plan also allows early issuance of a clearing or a clearing and grubbing permit for a subdivision under Section 1120.02(c), or, for a non-subdivision project, a clearing, a clearing and grubbing or a grading permit under Section 1121.02(c). If the entire property is to be developed at once, a Concept Plan is not required.
(b) A Master Concept Plan approved for a Planned Unit Development (PUD) serves as a concept plan in lieu of the requirements of this Section. See Article 5 for Master Concept Plan require-ments.
1114.02 Concept Plan Specifications; General.
(a) The Concept Plan for a subdivision or site development shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch on a sheet size which shall not exceed 48 inches by 36 inches; however, a scale of 200 feet to one inch may be used to avoid sheet sizes larger than 48 inches by 36 inches. The Planning and Development Director may approve other sheet sizes as deemed appropriate.
(b) The Concept Plan may be prepared as a freehand drawing to approximate scale showing the proposed improvements, rights-of-way, lot lines, etc., produced on a boundary survey or other property outline map of the property.
1114.03 The Concept Plan shall contain the following:
(a) Approximate total acreage;
(b) Proposed total number of lots and minimum lot size;
(c) Size and location of adjoining existing streets or access drives and proposed rights-of-way, roadways, and access drives;
(d) For multi-family and nonresidential site developments (not subdivisions), the approximate lo-cation and arrangement of buildings, parking areas and other improvements, including stormwater detention areas and all required buffers;
(e) Topography with contour intervals no greater than 10 feet;
(f) Proposed method of sewage disposal (expressed as a note);
(g) Boundary lines of the overall property showing bearings and distances along all lines and the bearings and distance to an existing street intersection or recognized permanent landmark. The source of said boundary information shall be indicated;
Section 1115 Subdivision Development Plans. City of Duluth UDC
11-24
(h) All contiguous property under the ownership or control of the developer, except those lands of a dissimilar zoning category specifically approved to be excluded by the Department. Areas not planned for development at the time of the submittal shall be shown as Future Develop-ment;
(i) An authorization statement on the Concept Plan to read as follows:
I hereby submit this Concept Plan as authorized agent/owner of all property shown thereon, and certify that all contiguous property under my ownership or control is in-cluded within the boundaries of this Concept Plan, as required by the Unified Develop-ment Code.
Authorized Agent/Owner
Date
(j) Location sketch (vicinity map);
(k) Lakes, ponds, and floodplains and the source of floodplain data including the panel number of flood insurance rate maps;
(l) Required recreation areas and other public areas to be dedicated to the public or held in common ownership by a homeowners association or other similar entity;
(m) Existing zoning of the property and adjoining properties;
(n) Land lot and district;
(o) Subdividers name, local, and permanent addresses (if different) and telephone number;
(p) Name of company or person preparing the plan;
(q) Boundaries of the Chattahoochee River Corridor and Chattahoochee River
(r) Tributary Protection Areas, if applicable to the property;
(s) General development data (in tabular form) for multi-family or nonresidential site developments, such as number of residential units, gross square feet of buildings, number of parking spaces, etc.;
(t) General development data (in tabular form) for single family developments, such as minimum lot size, floor area of homes, and all relevant conditions of zoning; and,
(u) A signature block to read as follows:
This Concept Plan has been reviewed and approved for general compliance with the Unified Development Code of the City of Duluth, Georgia.
Director, Department of Planning and Development
Date
Section 1115. Subdivision Development Plans.
1115.01 Subdivision Development Plans; General.
(a) An application for a development permit for a subdivision shall include the following De-velopment Plans: the Preliminary Plat, a certified boundary survey, associated slope or con-
City of Duluth UDC Section 1115 Subdivision Development Plans.
11-25
struction easements (if any), and other such construction drawings and plans as may be re-quired by this Section 1115.
(b) The Development Plans shall generally conform to the Concept Plan, if any, or to the Master Concept Plan approved for a Planned Unit Development (PUD), and may constitute only that portion of the ap-proved Concept Plan or PUD Master Concept Plan that the subdivider proposes to construct at one time as a single unit, provided that such portion conforms to the requirements of this Sec-tion 1115. If no Concept Plan or PUD Master Concept Plan was approved for the property, the De-velopment Plans shall include the entire property being developed within the same zoning cate-gory.
(c) Scale.
The Development Plans shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch. Sheet size shall not exceed 48 inches by 36 inches. Plan and profile sheets shall have a horizontal scale of no less than 100 feet to one inch and a vertical scale of no less than 10 feet to one inch.
1115.02 Preliminary Subdivision Plats.
(a) Certified Boundary Survey.
(1) The Preliminary Plat shall be based on a certified boundary survey of the entire property contained within the Preliminary Plat, and it shall be tied to a point of reference (tie point) with the same degree of accuracy as the boundary survey itself.
(2) The survey shall have an accuracy of no less than 1 in 10,000, and shall meet all require-ments of Georgia Law regarding the recording of maps and plats.
(3) Each Preliminary Plat shall be drawn on, accompanied by or referenced to a boundary sur-vey meeting the minimum requirements of the preceding paragraph.
(b) The Preliminary Plat shall contain the following:
(1) Proposed name of subdivision.
(2) Name, address, and telephone numbers of both the owner of record and the subdivider.
(3) Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of each professional firm associated with the development planning (i.e., engineer, architect, etc.).
(4) Date of survey, north point, and graphic scale, source of vertical datum, date of plat draw-ing, and space for revision dates.
(5) Proposed use of the site, such as single-family residences, duplexes, townhouses, office park, industrial subdivision, etc. For residential subdivisions, indicate the total number of dwelling units within plat.
(6) Location (Land District and Land Lot), acreage, and density, if applicable.
(7) Location sketch showing the subdivision in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well-known landmarks such as major streets, rivers and railroads. Sketches may be drawn freehand and at a scale sufficient to clearly show the information required but not less than one inch equal to 2,000 feet. U.S. Geological Survey Maps may be used as a reference guide for the location sketch.
Section 1115 Subdivision Development Plans. City of Duluth UDC
11-26
(8) Name of former subdivision, if any, and all of the land in the Preliminary Plat which has previ-ously been subdivided, showing boundaries of same.
(9) Boundary lines of the tract shall be indicated by a heavy line giving lengths in feet and hundredths of a foot, bearings in degrees, minutes, and seconds, and the bearing and dis-tance to designated tie point.
(10) Directional flow arrows for street drainage and individual lot drainage when finished grad-ing of lots is not shown.
(11) Contour lines based on sea level datum, or other datum acceptable to the Department. These shall be drawn at intervals of not more than two feet. Contour lines shall be based on field surveys or photogrammetric methods from aerial photographs. The basis for the topographic contour shown shall be specified and dated.
(12) Natural features within the proposed subdivision, including drainage channels, bodies of water, and other known significant features such as extensive exposed rock. On all water-courses leaving the tract, the direction of flow shall be indicated. The 100-year floodplain shall be outlined and the source of the depicted floodplain shall be indicated. For those lots containing floodplain, a Floodplain Lot Chart shall be provided showing the area (in square feet) of each lot lying inside and outside of the floodplain as though the land dis-turbance activity were completed.
(13) Man-made and cultural features existing within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision, including existing rights-of-way measured from centerline, pavements widths, names of ex-isting and platted streets; all easements, city, and County jurisdiction lines; existing struc-tures on the site and their proposed disposition, Chattahoochee River Corridor infor-mation and limits of Chattahoochee River Tributary Protection Area (if applicable), and other significant information. Location and dimensions of existing bridges; water, sewer lines and other existing utility lines, culverts and other existing features should be indicated.
(14) Proposed layout including lot lines, lot numbers and block letters, proposed streets with roadway and right-of-way lines and names, sites reserved through covenants, easements, dedications, or otherwise for public uses. Lots shall be numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. The minimum building setback lines from all streets shall be shown. Streets (including cul-de-sacs) shall be dimensioned to show rights-of-way and roadway widths, central angles, and intersection radii. Centerline curve data shall be pro-vided for roadway curves [radius, length, amount of superelevation (if any), point of curva-ture (P.C.), point of tangency (P.T.), etc.] if not shown separately on construction drawings.
(15) Identify unit number, division, or phase of development, if any, proposed by the subdivider.
(16) Existing zoning of the property, rezoning and variance case numbers, dates of approval and conditions (as applicable) shall be shown. Note minimum lot size, minimum yard setback requirements and other applicable zoning requirements. Show and dimension any required buffers, landscape strips, No-access easements, etc. Note any approved waivers from these Regulations.
(17) Show all adjoining property owners, subdivision names, lot numbers and lot lines, block let-ters, and zoning.
(18) Location of all known existing or previously existing landfills.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1115 Subdivision Development Plans.
11-27
(19) Proposed recreation area sites, if any; land area of the site, area and percent of site within the 100-year floodplain, proposed disposition of the site (public ownership, homeowners association, etc.).
(20) Such additional information as may be reasonably required to permit adequate evaluation of the subdivision.
(21) Street lighting design which conforms to The American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting.
(22) Statement of Approval. Each Preliminary Plat shall carry the following certificate printed or stamped thereon:
All requirements of the Development Regulations of the City of Duluth relative to the preparation and submission of a subdivision development permit application having been fulfilled and said application and all supporting plans and data having been re-viewed and approved by all affected governmental jurisdictions, agencies and depart-ments under their applicable regulations, approval is hereby granted, on this Prelimi-nary Plat and all other Development Plans associated with this subdivision, subject to all further provisions of said Development Regulations and other City existing Regula-tions.
Director, Department of Planning and Development
Date
THIS APPROVAL EXPIRES TWELVE MONTHS FROM THE DATE OF APPROVAL UN-LESS A DEVELOPMENT PERMIT IS ISSUED.
NOTE: The boundaries of the lots shown on this Plat have not been surveyed. This Plat is not for recording.
(c) The Preliminary Plat shall be accompanied by other Development Plans showing the following in-formation when such information is not shown on or evident from the Preliminary Plat. The var-ious plans may be combined where appropriate and clarity can be maintained.
(1) An Erosion Control Plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Division of Article 10. Erosion control measures may be shown on the Grading Plan, if desired.
(2) Grading Plans prepared in accordance with the requirements of this Development Code if grading is proposed beyond the street rights-of-way.
(3) Stormwater Drainage Construction Data:
a. Location and size of all proposed drainage structures including detention ponds, catch basins, grates, headwalls, pipes and any extensions thereof, energy dissipators, im-proved channels, and all proposed drainage easements to be located outside street rights-of- way lines.
b. Profiles of all storm drainage pipes and the slope of receiving channels. On storm drainage profiles, a pipe chart will be shown which includes pipe numbers, pipe sizes, pipe materials, pipe slopes, pipe length, contributing drainage area, design flow, de-
Section 1115 Subdivision Development Plans. City of Duluth UDC
11-28
sign storm frequency, runoff coefficient and velocity. The hydraulic grade line will be shown an all pipes for the required design flow. The hydraulic grade line will be shown for all pipes located in the public rights-of-way for the design flow.
c. Profiles of all open channels and ditches including Mannings' 25-year storm normal depth and velocity. On storm drainage profiles an open channel chart will be shown which will include open channel numbers, conveyance size, lining material, length, channel slope, contributing drainage area, design storm frequency, runoff coefficient and velocity.
d. Hydrological study used in determining size of structures, including a map of all con-tributing drainage basins and acreages.
(4) If sanitary sewers are required by Gwinnett County Water Pollution Control, Sanitary Sewer Plans, including the location and size of all proposed sewer lines, manholes, easements re-quired therefore, and sufficient dimensions to locate same on the ground.
(5) Construction Data for New Streets and Street Widenings:
a. Centerline profiles and typical roadway sections of all proposed streets and street widenings.
b. Where sanitary or storm sewers are to be installed within a street, the grade; size, lo-cation and bedding class of pipe; location and invert elevation of manholes shall be in-dicated on the road profile.
c. Profiles covering roadways that are extensions of existing roadways shall include ele-vations at 50-foot intervals for such distance as may be adequate to provide for conti-nuity consistent with the standards required by these Regulations for street improve-ments but not less than 200 feet.
d. All elevations shall be coordinated and tied into U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey or De-partment of Transportation benchmarks where feasible, or into reference monuments established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
e. Stub streets shall be profiled at least 200 feet onto the adjoining property (no tree cut-ting).
(6) Buffer and Landscape Plan, if any such areas exist within the subdivision, prepared in ac-cordance with the requirements of Article 7 and specification of these Regulations.
(7) Tree Protection Plan (if required).
(8) Floodplain Management Plans. If any floodplain areas are located on the property, such da-ta as is required by the Floodplain Management provisions of Article 8 shall be submitted.
(d) Encroachments.
Where construction is proposed on adjacent property, an encroachment agreement or easement shall be submitted to the Department.
1115.03 Final Plat Specifications.
(a) The Final Plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in black ink on tracing cloth or other permanent reproducible material. The scale shall be 100 feet to one inch or larger. Sheet size shall not ex-ceed 48 inches by 36 inches. (Note that any sheet larger than 17 inches by 22 inches must be
City of Duluth UDC Section 1115 Subdivision Development Plans.
11-29
photographically reduced to no more than 17 inches by 22 inches in order to be recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court.)
(b) The Final Plat shall be based on a certified boundary survey delineating the entirety of the prop-erty contained within the Final Plat and tied to a point of reference (tie point) with the same de-gree of accuracy as the boundary survey itself. The survey shall have an accuracy of no less than 1 in 10,000, and shall meet all requirements of Georgia Law regarding the recording of maps and plats.
(c) The Final Plat shall substantially conform to the Preliminary Plat and it may constitute only that portion of the Preliminary Plat which the subdivider proposes to record at the time, provided that such portion conforms to the requirements of these Regulations, and said portion is not in-consistent with the public health, safety, or welfare. Any substantial deviation from the ap-proved Preliminary Plat shall require revision and re-approval of the Preliminary Plat.
(d) The Final Plat shall contain the following information:
(1) Name of the subdivision, unit number, Land District, and Land Lot numbers.
(2) Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the owner of record and the subdivider if not the owner.
(3) Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of each professional firm associated with the portion of the subdivision within the Final Plat.
(4) Date of plat drawing, graphic scale, north point; notation as to the reference of bearings to magnetic, true north or grid north, and indication whether bearings shown are calculated from angles turned.
(5) Location sketch of tract showing major surrounding features.
(6) Name of former subdivision if any or all of the Final Plat has been previously recorded.
(7) Case number and date of approval for any applicable rezoning, Special Use approval, vari-ance or waiver affecting the property.
(8) Location and dimension of any buffer, landscape strip, special setback, no-access easement, etc., required by this Development Code.
(9) Boundary lines of the tract, to be indicated by a heavy line, giving distances to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot and bearings to the nearest second. Bearing and distance to a des-ignated tie point shall be shown. The Plat shall have a closure precision of one foot in no less than 10,000 feet.
(10) Municipal or County jurisdictional lines approximately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse or adjoin the subdivision; land lot lines trav-ersing or adjoining the subdivision.
(11) Locations, widths and names of all streets and alleys within and immediately adjoining the Plat, the location and widths of all internal public crosswalks and all other public rights-of-way.
(12) Street centerlines showing angles of deflection and standard curve data including radii, length of arcs and tangents between curves, point of curvature (P.C.) and point of tangency (P.T.).
Section 1115 Subdivision Development Plans. City of Duluth UDC
11-30
(13) Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-tenth of a foot, bearings to the nearest sec-ond, and radii of rounded corners, as necessary to delimit each lot.
(14) Building setback lines along streets with dimensions.
(15) When lots are located on a curve or when side lot lines are at angles other than 90 degrees, the lot width measured in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance may be required to be shown, if deemed necessary by the Department for clarity.
(16) Lots numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically.
(17) Location and size of all drainage pipe, location and extent of detention ponds, the location and size of all public water mains and fire hydrants, and the location, dimensions, and pur-pose of any easements including construction or slope easements if required.
(18) Location of any areas to be reserved, donated or dedicated to public use with notes stating their purpose and limitations. Location of any areas to be reserved by private deed cove-nant for common use of all property owners, or dedicated to a homeowner's association.
(19) Accurate location, material, and description of monuments and markers. (Note: All monu-ments shall be in place prior to approval of the Final Plat.)
(20) Certificates and statements specified in these Regulations, below.
(21) All information required under the Georgia Metropolitan River Protection Act for recording of plats, if applicable.
(22) Extent of the 100-year floodplain and a floodplain chart showing the area within and out-side the floodplain for each lot containing any portion of the 100-year floodplain. Origin of the floodplain data shall be indicated.
(23) Street address numbers and block number designations for street names signs on abutting streets, where appropriate.
(24) Individual lots shall be designated HLP (House Location Plan), RDP (Residential Drainage Plan) and/or RDS (Residential Drainage Study) if such are required by the Department to be approved prior to issuance of a building permit.
(25) All other notes or notations as may be required by the Department.
(26) All fees associated with traffic control devices and street name signs must be paid in full to Gwinnett County Traffic Engineering prior to approval of the final plat.
(e) If any streets, lands or easements are shown as the Final Plat for dedication to the City of Du-luth, a Warranty Deed or deeds transferring title to said streets, lands or easements in fee sim-ple, in a form acceptable to the City, shall be submitted with the Final Plat application.
(f) If any lands are shown on the Final Plat for dedication to a Property Owners Association in order to meet minimum park, open space or conservation area requirements of these Regulations, a copy of the deed of transfer for such dedication and a copy of the instrument of incorporation of the Property Owners Association shall be submitted with the Final Plat application.
(g) Each Final Plat shall bear the following certificates or statements printed or stamped thereon as follows:
(1) Final Surveyor's Certificate:
City of Duluth UDC Section 1115 Subdivision Development Plans.
11-31
It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct as to the property lines and all improvements shown hereon, and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist on their location, size, type and material are correctly shown. The field data upon which this plat is based has closure precision of one foot in ____feet and an angular error of ____per angle point, and was adjusted using ____rule. This plat has been cal-culated for closure and is found to be accurate within one foot in ____ feet and con-tains ____ acres. The equipment used to obtain the linear and angular measurements herein was_____.
(2) Owners Acknowledgement and Declaration:
STATE OF GEORGIA COUNTY OF GWINNETT
The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, in person or through a duly authorized agent, acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey and dedicates by this Declaration to the use of the public forever all streets, sewer collectors, lift stations, drains, easements, and other public facilities and appurtenances hereon shown, and transfers ownership of all public use areas in fee simple by deed, for the purposes herein expressed.
Signature of Subdivider
Date Signed
Printed or typed name of Subdivider
(3) Notification of Private Streets.
The following statements must be included on any final plat in which the streets are to be held in private ownership:
NOTIFICATION OF PRIVATE STREETS
This subdivision is served by private streets.
The streets designated as private streets on this plat are owned and maintained by the Homeowners Association of this development and are not owned or maintained by the City of Duluth. No public funds of the City are to be used to build, repair or maintain these private streets. The owners, purchasers, lenders, heirs, assigns or other parties taking title to or otherwise procuring an interest in any portion of this property are ultimately responsible for such maintenance and repairs, individually or through the Homeowners Association.
RIGHT OF ACCESS
The streets designated as private streets on this plat are subject to an easement that grants the right of vehicular access to every lot served by the street, as well as the right to place and have access to public and private utilities therein by the owners of such utilities.
PURCHASERS ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Section 1115 Subdivision Development Plans. City of Duluth UDC
11-32
The above statement must be divulged at the sale of any lot within this subdivision and acknowledged by the signature of the purchaser of the lot in order to obtain a house location plan approval, building permit or certificate of occupancy from the City of Duluth.
(4) A statement of private covenants if any, and if they are brief enough to be put directly on the Plat; otherwise, if covenants are separately recorded, a statement as follows:
This plat is subject to the covenants set forth in the separate document(s) attached hereto-dated_______, which hereby become a part of this plat, and which were record-ed ______ and signed by the owner.
(5) Final Plat Approval:
The Director of the Department of Planning and Development of the City of Duluth, Georgia, certifies that this plat complies with the Unified Development Code of the City of Duluth, as currently in effect, as well as all applicable conditions of zoning ap-proval; and has been approved by all other affected governmental jurisdictions, agencies and departments, as applicable. The Director hereby accepts on behalf of the City of Duluth the dedication of all public rights-of-way and easements, storm drainage and other public facilities, and the Director hereby acknowledges ac-ceptance of the public water and sewer lines and facilities by Gwinnett County. This plat is approved subject to the provisions and requirements of the Development Per-formance and Maintenance Agreement for this project dated __________, 20____, along with all associated sureties and warranties executed between the Owner and the City of Duluth.
DATED THIS ________DAY OF _______________, 20____ .
Director, Department of Planning and Development
(6) Public Notice - Drainage. Every Single-Family Residential Final Plat shall contain the follow-ing statement:
NOTE: The City of Duluth assumes no responsibility for overflow or erosion of natu-ral or artificial drains beyond the extent of the street right-of- way, or for the exten-sion of culverts beyond the point shown on the approved and recorded subdivision plat.
Every Final Plat that is not a single-family subdivision shall contain the following statement:
NOTE: The City of Duluth assumes no responsibility for overflow or erosion of natural or artificial drains beyond the extent of the street right-of-way, or for the extension of culverts beyond the point shown on the approved and recorded subdivision plat. The
City of Duluth UDC Section 1115 Subdivision Development Plans.
11-33
City of Duluth does not assume the responsibility for the maintenance of pipes in drainage easements beyond the City right of way.
(7) House Location Plans (HLP). On any Final Plat containing one or more lots for which a House Location Plan approval will be required prior to issuance of a building permit, the fol-lowing statement shall be included:
HLP - HOUSE LOCATION PLAN
A House Location Plan shall be required to be approved by the Planning and Develop-ment Department prior to issuance of a Building Permit on those lots labeled HLP. A House Location Plan is a scale drawing submitted by the builder at the time of permit application. It is not required that this plan be prepared by a land surveyor or profes-sional engineer. The purpose of this plan is to ensure that the house is properly located on the lot. Please refer to the Gwinnett County Development Regulations or contact the Duluth Development Regulations for more information.
(8) Residential Drainage Plan (RDP) or Study (RDS). On any Final Plat containing one or more lots for which either a Residential Drainage Plan (RDP) or Residential Drainage Study (RDS) will first be required prior to issuance of a Building Permit, the following statement shall be included:
RDP - RESIDENTIAL DRAINAGE PLAN or RDS - RESIDENTIAL DRAINAGE STUDY
A Residential Drainage Plan or Residential Drainage Study shall be required to be ap-proved by the Planning and Development Department prior to issuance of a Build-ing Permit on those lots labeled RDP or RDS, respectively. Please refer to the Duluth Development Regulations and contact the Department for more information.
1115.04 House Location Plan (HLP).
House Location Plans, when required, must meet the following requirements:
(a) House Location Plans shall be drawn to scale and may be shown on a certified boundary survey of the lot or any other drawing showing the information required. The HLP may be combined with a Residential Drainage Plan (RDP) if both are required for the lot.
(b) It is not the intent that the House Location Plan be prepared by a registered surveyor or engi-neer, but said plan must be done with sufficient accuracy to ensure that the proposed im-provements will be constructed in conformance with the regulations of this Development Code, as applicable.
(c) House Location Plans shall show the following information as applicable:
(1) Boundary lines of the lot, giving distances to the nearest one-tenth of a foot and bearings to the nearest minute.
(2) Location and names of all abutting streets or other rights-of-way. If the lot is located in a subdivision served by private streets, the following notations shall be placed on the HLP:
NOTIFICATION OF PRIVATE STREETS
This lot is served by a private street.
Section 1115 Subdivision Development Plans. City of Duluth UDC
11-34
Any such private street is owned and maintained by the Homeowners Association of the development and is not owned or maintained by the City of Duluth. No public funds of the City are to be used to build, repair or maintain these private streets. The owners, purchasers, lenders, heirs, assigns or other parties taking title to or otherwise procuring an interest in any portion of this property are ultimately responsible for such maintenance and repairs, individually or through the Homeowners Association.
(3) Minimum front, side and rear setback lines with dimensions, and notation of the existing zoning on the property.
(4) The approximate outline of all buildings, driveways, parking areas, swimming pools, recrea-tional courts, patios, accessory structures and other improvements existing or proposed on the property, including dimensions on all improvements and distances of each to the near-est property lines.
(5) All easements, public water, sewer or storm drainage facilities traversing or located on the property, and septic tank and drain fields, if any.
(6) Subdivision name, lot designation, land lot, and district.
(7) North arrow and scale.
(8) Limits of the 100-year floodplain, if applicable, and any required buffers or special setback lines.
(9) If the lot is located within the Chattahoochee River Corridor, the location of each area by vulnerability category and calculations of impervious surface and clearance by category, or other such data required in accordance with the Certification for the subdivision approved under the Metropolitan River Protection Act. Show any buffer or setback required under said Act.
(10) All other applicable requirements of this Development Code.
(11) Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of both the owner of the property and the per-son preparing the House Location Plan.
(d) If a lot is located in the Chattahoochee River Corridor, a Certificate of Occupancy shall not be is-sued for the structure or any other improvements until conformance to the provisions or other requirements of the House Location Plan have been field verified by the builders surveyor and submitted to the Planning and Development Department.
(e) The House Location Plan shall contain the following signature block. If the HLP is required be-cause of floodplain on the lot, the language contained in the brackets below must be included; otherwise, said bracketed language should be deleted from the signature block.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1115 Subdivision Development Plans.
11-35
This House Location Plan has been reviewed for general compliance with the Unified Development Code of the City of Duluth, Georgia, and is hereby approved for issu-ance of a Building Permit for the residential structure and other improvements shown hereon. [No framing inspection will be approved until a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, as built, prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor or Professional Engineer, has been received by the Department.] This approval is granted with the provision that no Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for completion of construc-tion until conformance to this House Location Plan has been field verified by the De-partment of Planning and Development or verified by an as-built survey prepared for the builder by a Registered Land Surveyor and submitted to the Planning and De-velopment Department.
Director, Department of Planning and Development
Date
1115.05 Residential Drainage Plan (RDP) or Study (RDS).
(a) Residential Drainage Plans, when required, must meet the following requirements: Residential Drainage Plans (RDPs) shall be drawn to scale on a certified boundary survey of the lot prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor, having an error of closure not exceeding one in 5000 feet. The Residential Drainage Plan may be combined with a House Location Plan if both are required for the lot.
(b) Residential Drainage Plans shall show the following as applicable:
(1) Boundary lines of the lot, giving distances to the nearest one-tenth of a foot and bearings to the nearest minute.
(2) Location and names of all abutting streets or other rights-of-way.
(3) The outline of all buildings, driveways, parking areas, swimming pools, recreational courts, patios, accessory structures and other improvements existing or proposed on the property, including dimensions on all improvements and distances of each to nearest property lines.
(4) All easements, public water, sewer or storm drainage facilities traversing or located on the property, and septic tank and drain field, if any.
(5) Subdivision name, lot designation, land lot, and district.
(6) North arrow and scale.
(7) Contour lines based on sea level datum. These shall be drawn at intervals of not more than two feet and shall be based on a field survey. Proposed grading of the lot shall be shown along with the finished floor elevation of the lowest habitable floor of the house.
(8) Stormwater features, including swales, pipes, stormwater detention and other structures, all drainage easements and directions of flow.
(9) Floodplain features, including the limits of the flood hazard area, 100-year flood high water elevation, origin of the floodplain data, and any proposed modifications to the floodplain limits.
(10) Sedimentation and erosion control measures to be taken or placed on the lot during con-struction.
Section 1116 Site Development Plans. City of Duluth UDC
11-36
(11) Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of both the owner of the property and person preparing the Residential Drainage Plan.
(12) Seal, registration number, and date of expiration of the Professional Engineer or Landscape Architect who prepared the drainage improvements or modifications shown on the Resi-dential Drainage Plan.
(c) A Residential Drainage Study (RDS) shall be conducted by the developers or builders design professional prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy on those lots so noted on the Final Plat. The requirements for a RDS contained herein shall apply to lots that formerly required SSED (Site Study  Engineering Division) approval prior to issuance of a Building Permit.
The grading and construction of the lot shall be field verified by the developers or builders de-sign professional as being in conformance with grading plans and stormwater management studies approved for the subdivision prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
(d) A Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued for the structure until a written certification has been received from the developers or builders design professional stating that the provisions or improvements required by the Residential Drainage Plan or as a result of the Residential Drainage Study have been verified in the field.
(e) If a RDP or RDS is required because a stream or floodplain is on or adjacent to the lot, the nota-tion on the development plans and plat should be RDP-E or RDS-E as appropriate.
Section 1116. Site Development Plans.
1116.01 Site Development Plans; General.
(a) An application for a Development Permit for a multi-family or nonresidential site shall consist of the Site Plan, a certified boundary survey or Final Plat reference, associated slope or con-struction easements (if any), and such other Development Plans as may be required by this Section 1116.
(b) The Development Plans shall generally conform to the Concept Plan, if any, or to the Master Concept Plan approved for a Planned Unit Development (PUD), and may constitute only that portion of the ap-proved Concept Plan or PUD Master Concept Plan which the developer proposes to construct as a single unit, provided that such portion conforms to the requirements of these Regulations, all setbacks, maximum density and other zoning restrictions. If no Concept Plan or PUD Mas-ter Concept Plan was approved on the property, the Development Plans shall include the en-tire property being developed having the same zoning classification.
(c) Scale.
The Development Plans shall be clearly and legibly drawn at an engineering scale convenient to illustrate the details of the project. Sheet size shall not exceed 48 inches by 36 inches. Plan and Profile sheets, if any, shall have a horizontal scale of no less than 100 feet to one inch and a vertical scale of no less than 10 feet to one inch.
1116.02 Project Boundary Data.
(a) The Site Plan shall be based on the boundaries of a lot as recorded on a Final Subdivision Plat or on a certified boundary survey delineating the entirety of the property contained within the pro-ject, which is tied to a point of reference (tie point) with the same degree of accuracy as the boundary survey itself. The survey shall have an accuracy of no less than 1 in 10,000, and shall meet all requirements of Georgia Law regarding the recording of maps and plats.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1116 Site Development Plans.
11-37
(b) Each Site Plan shall be drawn on, accompanied by or referenced to a boundary survey which shall at least meet the requirements of the above paragraph.
1116.03 The Site Plan shall contain the following (on one or more sheets):
(a) Proposed name of development. If the project is located within a subdivision, the name of the subdivision, lot, and block number must also be shown.
(b) Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of both the owner of the property, and the develop-er, if different.
(c) Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of each professional firm associated with the Site Plan (engineer, landscape architect, etc.).
(d) Date of survey, north point, and graphic scale, source of datum, date of drawing, and space for revision dates.
(e) Proposed use of the site, including gross square footage for each different type of use or build-ing.
(f) Location (Land Lot and District), acreage or area in square feet, and density (if applicable).
(g) Location sketch locating the development in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well-known landmarks such as major thoroughfares or railroads. Sketches may be drawn in freehand and at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch equal to 2,000 feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide for the location sketch.
(h) Size and location of all buildings, building setback lines, minimum yard lines, and distances be-tween buildings and from buildings to the nearest property lines; location of outdoor storage areas; parking and loading areas, driveways, curb cuts and designated fire lanes. Each building shall be identified with a number or letter.
(i) Boundary lines of the perimeter of the tract indicated by a heavy line giving lengths to the near-est one-hundredth of a foot and bearings to the nearest second. Bearing and distance to desig-nated tie point.
(j) Directional flow arrows for street drainage.
(k) Contour lines based on sea level datum. These shall be drawn at intervals of not more than 2 feet and shall include the entire site and all abutting public streets. Contour lines shall be based on field surveys or photogrammetric methods from aerial photographs. The basis for the topo-graphic contour shall be specified and dated.
(l) Natural features within the proposed development, including drainage channels, bodies of wa-ter, and other known significant features such as extensive exposed rock. On all watercourses leaving the tract, the direction of flow shall be indicated. The 100-year floodplain shall be out-lined and the source of the depicted floodplain information shall be indicated. The acreage or area in square feet within the floodplain shall be indicated.
(m) Man-made and cultural features existing within and adjacent to the proposed development, in-cluding existing rights-of-way measured from centerline, pavement widths, and locations of ju-risdictional lines (if appropriate); existing structures on the property and their disposition, Chat-tahoochee River Corridor information and Chattahoochee River Tributary Protection Areas (if applicable), and other significant information. Location and dimensions of existing bridges; wa-
Section 1116 Site Development Plans. City of Duluth UDC
11-38
ter and sewer, and other existing lines; other public utility lines and structures; culverts and oth-er existing features should be shown.
(n) Proposed street names, roadway and right-of-way lines and widths and sites reserved through covenants, easement, dedication or otherwise for public use.
(o) Identify unit number, division or stage of development, if appropriate, as proposed by the de-veloper.
(p) Show all adjoining property owners, subdivision names, lot numbers, block letters and lot lines, and zoning.
(q) Show the location and number of parking spaces, as required in the Zoning and Georgia Handi-cap Laws.
(r) Zoning district and rezoning case number, date and conditions of approval (as applicable). Vari-ances obtained for the development site should be shown with case number, date of approval and conditions (if applicable). Note any approved waivers of these Regulations.
(s) If buffers, other landscaping or screening treatments are required, show the location, size, and type of materials (natural or planted) on the plan in conformance with the Tree Protection Plan or Buffer and Landscape Plan, as applicable.
(t) Location, height, and size of all freestanding signs to be erected on the site, and indication whether lighted or unlighted.
(u) Location of all known existing landfills and proposed on-site bury pits (State EPD Permit or other approval may be required).
(v) Such additional information as may be reasonably required to permit an adequate evaluation of the project.
(w) Development Approval Statement. Each Site Plan shall carry the following certificate printed or stamped thereon:
All requirements of the Unified Development Code of the City of Duluth, Georgia, rel-ative to the preparation and submission of a development permit application having been fulfilled, and said application and all supporting plans and data having been re-viewed and approved by all affected jurisdictions, agencies and departments as re-quired under their respective and applicable regulations, approval is hereby granted for this Site Plan and all other Development Plans associated with this project subject to all further provisions of said regulations and requirements.
Director, Department of Planning and Development
Date
THIS APPROVAL EXPIRES TWELVE (12) MONTHS FROM THE DATE OF APPROVAL UN-LESS A DEVELOPMENT PERMIT IS ISSUED.
1116.04 Other Plans Required.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1116 Site Development Plans.
11-39
The Site Plan shall be accompanied by other Development Plans showing the following infor-mation when same is not shown on, or evident from the Site Plan. The various plans may be com-bined where appropriate and clarity can be maintained.
(a) Erosion Control Plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Soil Erosion, Sedi-mentation and Pollution Control Division of Article 10. Erosion control measures may be shown on the Grading Plan, if desired.
(b) Grading Plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of this Development Code, if appli-cable.
(c) Stormwater Drainage Construction Data:
(1) Location and size of all proposed drainage improvements, and drainage easements to be located outside street right-of-way lines.
(2) Profiles of all storm drainage pipe and slope of receiving channels. Hydraulic grade lines shall be shown for all pipes (except roof drains) for the required design flow. On storm drain-age profiles a pipe chart will be shown which will include pipe number, pipe size, pipe ma-terial, pipe slope, pipe length, contributing drainage area, design flow, design storm fre-quency, runoff coefficient and velocity. On all pipes, the hydraulic grade line shall be shown. Profiles of all open channels and ditches including the design flow normal depth and velocity. On storm drainage profiles an open channel chart will be shown which will in-clude open channel numbers, conveyance size, lining material, length, channel slope, con-tributing drainage runoff coefficient and velocity for the required design flow.
(3) Acreage of drainage areas and hydrological study used in determining size of structures, in-cluding map of all contributing drainage basins and acreages.
(d) Sewage Disposal Plans, as follows:
(1) Sanitary Sewer Plans, including profiles and other information as may be required by Gwinnett County Water Pollution Control.
(2) For projects proposed to be served by on-site sewage disposal systems, the Gwinnett Coun-ty Health Department must be consulted.
(e) Street Widening and Construction Data:
(1) Centerline profiles and typical roadway sections of all proposed street improvements. Pro-files (and plans, where required) shall be drawn on standard plan and profile sheets with plan sections showing street layout, pavement and right-of-way width, curvature, and re-quired drainage facilities.
(2) Where sanitary or storm sewers are to be installed within a street, the grade, size, location and invert elevations of manholes shall be indicated on the road profile.
(3) Profiles covering roadways that are extensions of existing roadways shall include eleva-tions at 50-foot intervals for such distance as may be adequate to provide continuity con-sistent with the standards of these Regulations, but no less than 200 feet.
(4) All elevations shall be coordinated and sited into U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey or Department of Transportation benchmarks where feasible or into reference monuments es-tablished by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Section 1116 Site Development Plans. City of Duluth UDC
11-40
(f) Floodplain Management Plans. If any floodplain areas are located on the property, such data as is required by the Floodplain Management provisions of Article 8 shall be submitted.
(g) Private Water System Plans, if any, indicating proposed water main size and location, with fire hydrants, on the site. The distance and direction to all other fire hydrants within 500 feet of the site or buildings along existing streets or other access drives shall also be indicated.
(h) Street striping plan, showing striping in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, for any street to be widened to four or more lanes.
(i) Landscape Plan:
(1) A complete tree survey and inventory, as described in Section 1112.03.
(2) An integrated site plan showing Specimen Trees, the trees to be saved and those to be re-moved, utilities to be installed, grading, the approximate location of all structures, drive-ways and curb cuts and proposed tree plantings and other landscaping.
(3) A detailed plan to protect and preserve trees before, during and for a period of 2 years af-ter construction, which plan shall contain the following information:
a. All items found on the Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Submittal check-list pertinent to normal plan review.
b. Site area (roads, utility lines, detention ponds, etc.)
c. The locations of existing and proposed structures, paving, driveways, cut and fill area, detention areas, etc.
d. Phase lines or limits of construction.
e. A delineation of all protected zones with any required dimensions.
f. Calculations showing compliance with the required Site Density Factor using existing trees, and/or replacement trees (See Density Factor Analysis, Article 7.)
g. Location of all existing and proposed utility lines or easements.
h. Locations of any boring sites for underground utilities.
i. Locations of all Specimen Trees and indications whether they are to be removed or preserved.
j. Locations of all tree protection devices, materials to be used in each location and de-tails.
k. A delineation of a Tree Save Area in which trees have been inventoried for density cal-culations.
l. If applicable, locations and details of all permanent tree protection measures (tree wells, aeration system, permeable paving, retaining walls, bollards, etc.; and
m. All proposed plantings per Article 7.
n. Additional information as required on a case-by-case basis.
(The above items may be integrated into the normal application requirements and submittal.)
City of Duluth UDC Section 1117 Tree Protection Plan Specifications.
11-41
(j) Minor changes to existing development require only a sketch showing changes to be submitted to the Planning and Development Director for review and approval.
1116.05 Encroachments.
Where construction is proposed to extend onto adjacent property, an encroachment agreement or easement shall be submitted to the Planning and Development Department with the Site Plan.
1116.06 Public Notice  Drainage.
Every Site Plan shall contain the following statement:
NOTE: The City of Duluth assumes no responsibility for overflow or erosion of natural or artificial drains beyond the extent to the street right-of-way, or for the extension of culverts beyond the point shown on the approved and recorded plan. The City does not assume the responsi-bility for the maintenance of pipes in drainage easements beyond the City right-of-way.
Section 1117. Tree Protection Plan Specifications.
A Tree Protection Plan shall be drawn and submitted to the Department in accordance with the re-quirements as stated in the Buffer, Landscape and Tree Conservation provisions of Article 7.
Section 1118. Buffer and Landscape Plan Specifications.
A Buffer and Landscape Plan shall be drawn and submitted to the Department in accordance with the requirements as stated in the Buffer, Landscape and Tree Conservation provisions of Article 7.
Section 1119. Digital Submission Requirements: As-Built Data and Final Plats.
1119.01 Digital submissions.
In addition to the requirements of this Development Code for the submission of printed copies, de-velopment plans, as-built data drawings and all final subdivision plats approved for recordation shall be submitted to the Planning and Development Department in a digital format as follows:
(a) Digital drawing files shall be submitted in Adobe PDF format and shall include:
(1) Final plat as approved as required under Section 1115.03.
(2) As-built survey drawings as required under Section 1127.02(a).
(3) Site Development plans as required under Section 1116.
DIVISION IV. PROCEDURES.
Section 1120. Subdivision Review Procedures.
1120.01 Pre-Application Conference.
Whenever any subdivision of a tract of land is proposed to be made, whether for residential or non-residential development, the subdivider is encouraged to present to the Planning and Development Department preliminary documents and graphic exhibits to permit early evaluation of the subdivid-
Section 1120 Subdivision Review Procedures. City of Duluth UDC
11-42
er's intentions and coordination with the Comprehensive Plan, this Development Code, Metropolitan River Protection Act, etc., and to inform and provide the subdivider with the necessary regulations in order to properly accomplish the proposed project.
1120.02 Concept Plan Approval.
(a) Application for Concept Plan approval shall be submitted to the Planning and Development De-partment using an official application form provided by the Department. The Concept Plan shall include the entire property being proposed for development, but need not include the appli-cant's entire contiguous ownership.
(b) In such case that the subdivider elects not to submit a Concept Plan, the subdivider may pro-ceed directly with the submittal of Development Plans provided that the plans show the entire property proposed for development. In so doing, however, the subdivider assumes the risk of premature design and engineering expenses in the event that the City requires substantial de-sign and engineering changes.
(c) Following Concept Plan approval, a clearing permit meeting the requirements of Section 1111.01(a) or a clearing and grubbing permit meeting the requirements of Section 1111.01(b) may be issued. Such permits must be consistent with an approved Certificate issued under the Metropolitan River Protection Act, if applicable.
(d) Copies of the approved Concept Plan shall be provided to the Department for permanent record in the number determined by the Director.
1120.03 Development Plans Approval for Subdivisions.
(a) An application for Development Plans approval and issuance of a development permit shall be submitted to the Department using an application form and number of copies as determined by the Planning and Development Director. The Development Plans may include only a portion of the property included within an approved Concept Plan. However, if no Concept Plan has been approved, the Development Plans must include the entire property being developed and having the same zoning. The application shall include the Preliminary Plat, and construction drawings. All construction drawings and other engineering data shall be prepared and sealed by a Profes-sional Engineer or Landscape Architect currently registered in the State of Georgia, in accord-ance with provisions of Georgia Law.
(b) Following submission of the Development Plans, including a Preliminary Plat and all construction drawings required for development permit review, a grading permit shall be issued upon the developer's request provided that said permit shall also be based upon a Tree Protection Plan (if required), soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, hydrology study, and related construc-tion drawings, and consistent with an approved Certificate issued under the Metropolitan River Protection Act Certificate (if applicable). The grading permit shall be limited to the area within the approved Development Plans and may be further conditioned as deemed appropriate or necessary pending development permit approval.
(c) The Planning and Development Director shall indicate on a review copy of the drawings or in a written memorandum all comments related to compliance of the Development Plans with this Development Code, principles of good design, conditions of zoning approval, and the regulations of other departments and State agencies as appropriate. The Director shall have final staff au-thority to determine the applicability of all comments under this Development Code and condi-tions of zoning approval.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1120 Subdivision Review Procedures.
11-43
(d) The Planning and Development Director may not approve any Preliminary Plat whereon is shown a lot which would present particularly unusual difficulties for construction of a building, which would clearly require a variance to be reasonably usable, or which is otherwise unbuild-able because of the presence of floodplain, unusual configuration, lack of public utilities or for any other reason. A House Location Plan (HLP) may be required as a part of the Preliminary Plat approval to substantiate the buildability of any such difficult or unusual lot.
(e) The subdivider shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations, and zoning re-quirements and for the satisfaction of all of the noted and written comments of the Planning and Development Director.
(f) Should an applicant disagree with the findings or final review comments of the Planning and De-velopment Director or of any other department or agency having jurisdiction, concluding that factual or interpretive errors have been made, the applicant may file an appeal under the provi-sions of Article 12.
(g) When the Director has determined that the plat and other Development Plans are in compliance with all applicable City regulations and requirements and approval has been received from all other departments and agencies having jurisdiction, he or she shall sign and date a development approval statement (Section 1115.02(b)(22)) which is stamped or printed on a reproducible copy of the plat. Approved copies of the Preliminary Plat and Development Plans shall be transmitted to the applicant and retained by the Department for its records.
(h) Following the above approval, a Development Permit shall be issued at the developer's request to begin construction activities based on the approved Development Plans.
1120.04 Final Plat Approval.
(a) When construction of the subdivision or a recordable portion of the subdivision has been com-pleted (except for items for which a performance guarantee can be accepted), the subdivider may submit an application to the Planning and Development Department for Final Plat approval, using an application form and number of copies as determined by the Director.
(b) The Planning and Development Director shall indicate on a review copy of the plat or in a writ-ten memorandum all comments related to compliance of the Final Plat with this Development Code, conditions of zoning approval, and the regulations of other City departments and State agencies as appropriate. The Director shall have final staff authority to determine the applicabil-ity of any and all comments under this Development Code or conditions of zoning approval.
(c) The Director may not approve any Final Plat whereon is shown or by which is otherwise created a lot that would present particularly severe and unusual difficulties for construction of a build-ing, which would clearly require a variance to be reasonably usable, or which is otherwise un-buildable due to the presence of floodplain, unusual configuration, lack of public utilities, or for any other reason.
(d) Lots that would appear to be buildable under certain circumstances and would require further study or additional information before a building permit could be issued, but which present problems or unusual difficulties which can reasonably be addressed or overcome by the lot owner, may be included in the Final Plat with the appropriate notation that a HLP, RDP or RDS will be required prior to issuance of a building permit. See Sections 1115.04 and 1115.05 for de-tails.
Section 1120 Subdivision Review Procedures. City of Duluth UDC
11-44
(e) The subdivider shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations, zoning require-ments and for the satisfaction of all of the comments of the Planning and Development Director.
(f) Final approval by the Planning and Development Director shall not be shown on the Final Plat until all requirements of these and other applicable regulations have been met, and the Director has received a completed request for Approval of Development Conformance and an executed Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement, prepared in accordance with the re-quirements of Section 1127 and Section 1128.
(g) The Director shall further determine that either:
(1) All improvements to the subdivision required for approval of the Final Plat under the rules and regulations of the City of Duluth have been completed in accordance with the appro-priate specifications; or
(2) All of the required improvements have been completed except final grassing, pavement topping, required landscaping, or sidewalks, in which case) a performance guarantee meet-ing the requirements of Section 1130 shall have been filed by the subdivider with the De-velopment Performance and Maintenance Agreement.
(h) Payment for materials and installation of traffic control and street name signs shall be made to the appropriate Gwinnett County Department in accordance with the traffic engineering regula-tions prior to approval of the Final Plat. Payment of the cost of striping major thoroughfares or signalization, where required, if not completed by the developer shall also be received by the appropriate Gwinnett County Department prior to approval of the Final Plat.
(i) Payment of the required plat recording fee shall be made to the City prior to approval of the Fi-nal Plat.
(j) Once the Department has approved the Final Plat and all other affected departments and agen-cies of government as required have certified compliance and signed the Route Sheet or have stamped the plans, the Planning and Development Director shall certify by his or her signature on the original of the Final Plat that all of the requirements of this Development Code and the conditions of zoning approval have been met, and that all other affected departments and agencies having jurisdiction have approved the plat. The Final Plat shall not be deemed ap-proved until it has been signed by the Planning and Development Director and where use of septic tanks is proposed, by a duly authorized representative of the Gwinnett County Health De-partment.
1120.05 Recordation of Approved Final Plat.
(a) The Planning and Development Director will forward the executed deeds for the streets, lands and easements as well as the Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement and doc-uments required under Section 1128, to the City Council for approval.
(b) Once the final subdivision plat has been certified and the City Council approvals have been granted, it shall be recorded by the Planning and Development Director, or by the applicant with the Planning and Development Directors approval, with the Clerk of the Superior Court.
(c) If recorded by the applicant, one copy of the recorded plat shall be filed by the applicant with the records of the Planning and Development Department, showing the map book, volume and page numbers where the plat is recorded.
1120.06 Revised Final Plat.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1121 Non-Subdivision Review Procedures.
11-45
(a) Application for Approval of Final Plat Revisions.
The owner or developer of the subdivision shall file the survey of any proposed revision to a pre-recorded plat with the Planning and Development Director.
(1) Proposed revisions to a recorded plat that alter or change in any way the street, utility or drainage layout, or the overall size of the original subdivision, shall be submitted as a new final plat application, in accordance with the requirements and procedures of Section 1120.04. Revised construction drawings, as applicable to the proposed changes, shall ac-company the application.
(2) If the subdivision is still 100 percent owned by the developer, the Planning and Develop-ment Director may administratively review and certify the revised final plat.
(3) If any lots have been sold, the new lot owners must be informed of the changes, in writing, and their approval of the changes obtained by the owner or developer and submitted to the Planning and Development Director. If approval of all such owners is not obtained, the revised final plat shall be forwarded to the City Council for a public hearing prior to approv-al of the revised plat and notice of said public hearing shall be sent by mail to all such own-ers of record at least 15 days prior to the public hearing.
(4) If the proposed revisions are limited to the correction of errors on the original plat and have no substantive effect on any lot that has been sold in the subdivision, the Planning and Development Director may administratively review and approve the revised final plat.
(b) Review, Approval and Recordation of Revised Final Plat.
Review, approval and recordation of the revised final plat shall follow the procedures and provi-sions of Sections 1120.04 and 1120.05, above.
Section 1121. Non-Subdivision Review Procedures.
1121.01 Pre-Application Conference.
Whenever any development of a single parcel of land (other than a subdivision or a one or two-family dwelling) is proposed to be made, the developer is encouraged to present to the Planning and Development Department preliminary documents and graphic exhibits to permit early evaluation of the developer's intentions and coordination with the Comprehensive Plan, this Development Code, Metropolitan River Protection Act, etc., and to inform and provide the developer with the necessary regulations in order to properly accomplish the proposed project.
1121.02 Concept Plan Approval.
(a) Application for Concept Plan approval shall be submitted to the Planning and Development De-partment using an application form and in number of copies to be determined by the Planning and Development Director.
(b) The Concept Plan shall include the entire property being developed. Properties which adjoin the subject property and which are under the same ownership or control as the subject property shall be so indicated. In such case that the developer elects not to submit a Concept Plan, then the developer may proceed directly with the submittal of Development Plans provided that the plans show the entire property proposed for development. In so doing, however, the developer assumes the risk of premature design and engineering expenses in the event that the City re-quires substantial changes in the plans.
Section 1121 Non-Subdivision Review Procedures. City of Duluth UDC
11-46
(c) Following Concept Plan approval, a clearing permit meeting the requirements of Section 1111.01(a), or a clearing and grubbing permit meeting the requirements of Section 1111.01(b), or a grading permit meeting the requirements of Section 1111.01(c) may be issued. Such per-mits must be consistent with an approved Certificate issued under the Metropolitan River Pro-tection Act, if applicable.
(d) Copies of the approved Concept Plan shall be provided to the Planning and Development De-partment for permanent record, in a number as determined by the Planning and Development Director.
1121.03 Site Development Plans Approval.
(a) An application for Development Plan approval and issuance of a development permit shall be submitted to the Planning and Development Department using an application form and in num-ber of copies as determined by the Planning and Development Director. The Development Plans may encompass only a portion of a property included within an approved Concept Plan; howev-er, if no Concept Plan has been approved, the Development Plans shall include the entire prop-erty being developed and having the same zoning . The application shall include the Site Plan and construction drawings, as appropriate, as described in Division III of this Article. All con-struction drawings and other engineering data shall be prepared and sealed by a Professional Engineer or Landscape Architect currently registered in the State of Georgia, in accordance with the provisions of Georgia Law.
(b) The Planning and Development Director shall indicate on a review copy of the drawings or in a written memorandum all comments related to compliance of the Development Plans with this Development Code, principles of good design, conditions of zoning approval, and the regulations of other departments and State agencies as appropriate. The Director shall have final staff au-thority to determine the applicability of all comments under this Development Code and condi-tions of zoning approval.
(c) The developer shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations, and zoning re-quirements and for the satisfaction of all of the noted and written comments of the Planning and Development Director.
(d) Deeds to lands dedicated to the City in fee simple, shall be submitted to the Planning and De-velopment Director for recording.
(e) Should an applicant disagree with the findings or final review comments of the Planning and De-velopment Director or of any other City department, concluding that factual or interpretive er-rors have been made, the applicant may file an appeal under the provisions of Article 12.
(f) When the Planning and Development Director has determined that the Site Plan and other De-velopment Plans are in compliance with all applicable City regulations and requirements, and approval has been received from all other department and agencies having jurisdiction, he or she shall sign and date a statement of development approval (Section 1116.03(w)) stamped or printed on a reproducible copy of the Site Plan. Approved copies of the Site Plan and construc-tion drawings shall be transmitted to the applicant and retained by the Planning and Develop-ment Department for its records.
(g) Following the above, a Development Permit shall be issued at the developer's request to begin construction activities based on the approved Development Plans. A building permit may also be issued on the basis of the approved development permit under the provisions contained in this Development Code. However, a Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued, until a Certificate
City of Duluth UDC Section 1122 Assignment of Names and Address.
11-47
of Development Conformance for the project and a Development Performance and Mainte-nance Agreement, prepared in accordance with the requirements of Section 1127 and Section 1128, has been received by the Planning and Development Director.
1121.04 Certificate of Development Conformance Approval Process.
(a) Final approval by the Planning and Development Director shall not be shown on the Certificate of Development Conformance until all requirements of these and other applicable regulations have been met, and the Director has received a properly completed request for Approval of Development Conformance and an executed Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement prepared in accordance with the requirements of Section 1127 and Section 1128.
(b) The Director shall further determine that either:
(1) All improvements to the development required for approval of the Certificate of Develop-ment Conformance under the regulations of the City of Duluth have been completed in ac-cordance with the appropriate specifications; or,
(2) All of the required improvements have been completed except final grassing, pavement topping, required landscaping, or sidewalks, in which case a performance guarantee meet-ing the requirements of Section 1130 shall have been filed by the developer with the De-velopment Performance and Maintenance Agreement.
(c) Payment for materials and installation of traffic controls and street name signs shall be made to the appropriate Gwinnett County department in accordance with their regulations prior to ap-proval of the Certificate of Development Conformance. Payment of the cost of striping major thoroughfare or signalization, where required, if not completed or installed by the developer shall also be paid to the appropriate Gwinnett County department prior to approval of the Cer-tificate of Development Conformance.
(d) Once the Department has approved the Certificate of Development Conformance and all other affected departments and agencies of government as required have certified compli-ance, by signing the Route Sheet, the Director shall certify by his or her signature on the origi-nal of the Certificate of Development Conformance that all requirements of this Development Code and the conditions of zoning approval have been met. The Certificate of Development Conformance shall not be deemed approved until it has been signed by the Planning and De-velopment Director and where use of septic tanks is proposed, by a duly authorized repre-sentative of the Gwinnett County Health Department.
Section 1122. Assignment of Names and Address.
1122.01 Subdivision or Development Names.
(a) Proposed subdivision or development names must be reviewed and approved by Gwinnett County Department of Planning and Development prior to the issuance of a development per-mit. Names will be reviewed upon submission of the Preliminary Plat or Site Plan.
(b) Proposed names shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically, the name of any other subdivision in Gwinnett County or its municipalities except for extensions of existing sub-divisions or developments.
(c) Subdivision and development names may be reserved if submitted and approved along with the Concept Plan or PUD Master Concept Plan for the project.
1122.02 Street Names.
Section 1122 Assignment of Names and Address. City of Duluth UDC
11-48
(a) Proposed street names must be reviewed and approved by the Gwinnett County Depart-ment of Planning and Development prior to approval of a Final Plat for recording. Street names may be reserved through approval of a Concept Plan, PUD Master Concept Plan or Preliminary Plat for the subdivision. Proposed names for private streets shall follow the same rules as for public streets.
(b) Street names shall consist of a root name of the developer's choosing and a suffix designation (Street, Avenue, Drive, etc.) and shall be followed by a quadrant suffix. Directional prefix-es (North, South, etc.) and the prefixes old or new shall not be used.
(c) A proposed street that is obviously in alignment with another already existing and named street shall bear the name of such existing street, unless this requirement is waived by the Gwinnett County Departments of Public Safety and Engineering or the Duluth Police Department.
(d) Except within the same development, no proposed street name shall duplicate (be spelled the same or be phonetically the same) as an existing street name within Gwinnett County regard-less of the use of such Street, Avenue, Boulevard Drive, Place, Way, Court or however otherwise designated. In the same development, a root name may not occur more than twice.
(e) All street root names and suffix designations are subject to the approval of the County. Ob-scene or otherwise unacceptable language, abbreviations, contractions, or initials may not be used.
(f) Root names shall consist of no more than 13 characters including space, hyphens, etc. Letters not occurring in the English alphabet, and numerals, shall not be used.
(g) All streets shall bear the proper quadrant suffix appropriate to its location within the City (i.e., NE, NW, SE and SW), as determined by Gwinnett County Traffic Engineering.
1122.03 Street Address Assignments.
(a) A street address number must be assigned by Gwinnett County Planning and Development prior to issuance of a building permit. For any new structure proposed on a property which has not been assigned an address, a street number will be assigned upon confirmation or estab-lishment of the property as a buildable lot of record under the requirements of these Regula-tions.
(b) Subdivisions.
House numbers will be assigned by Gwinnett County Planning and Development after an Ex-emption Plat or Preliminary Plat is approved for the property. Submission of two copies of the approved plat is required. Block number assignments shall also be designated for abutting ma-jor street name signs at this time, if required.
(c) Commercial/Industrial Projects or Buildings.
(1) Projects will be numbered by Gwinnett County Planning and Development after the devel-oper submits the Site Plan for review.
(2) Apartment Projects.
(3) Projects will be numbered by Gwinnett County Planning and Development after the devel-oper submits the Site Plan for development review. The overall development will be issued a single street address. The developer will be responsible for numbering/lettering of indi-vidual buildings and units.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1123 Developments of Regional Impact.
11-49
(4) Condominium Projects.
Projects will be numbered by Gwinnett County Planning and Development after the devel-oper submits the Site Plan for development review. Individual units shall be numbered consecutively if located along public or private streets. Units in the stacked-flat configura-tion shall use the same numbering approach as applies to an apartment project.
(d) The following numbering systems shall be used pursuant to U.S. Postal Service regulations:
(1) Individual mailboxes for each dwelling unit: Each street within the project must be named.
(2) Cluster box system - Centralized mailbox for entire project: One street name will serve to assign all house numbers for main delivery.
Section 1123. Developments of Regional Impact.
1123.01 Types of Approvals Covered.
The provisions of this Section apply to any type of official City action requested by a private party re-lated to a development project, such as a rezoning or special use approval, special exception variance or hardship variance approval, approval of a subdivision or site development plan, issuance of a de-velopment permit or building permit, or hook-up to a public utility.
1123.02 Thresholds for Regional Review.
Any development project for which any City action is requested that meets or exceeds any of the de-velopment thresholds adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA) shall be con-sidered as qualified for review as a Development of Regional Impact (DRI).
1123.03 Process for DRI review.
(a) Submission to the Atlanta Regional Commission (ARC).
(1) First request for governmental action.
a. Upon determination by the Planning and Development Director that a request for City approval qualifies for DRI review, the applicant shall provide such information as nec-essary for completion of the DRI review form (available from the Planning and Devel-opment Department or DCA).
b. The completed DRI review form shall be submitted electronically by the Planning and Development Director to the Atlanta Regional Commission (ARC), the Georgia Regional Transportation Authority (GRTA) and DCA through the DCA web site.
c. Once ARC has determined that the project is a DRI, the 30-day review period officially begins.
d. Throughout the DRI process, the applicant shall coordinate with the Planning and De-velopment Department and provide such additional information as may be needed to complete the DRI review process.
(2) Subsequent requests for governmental action.
Once the development project has been reviewed by ARC and the first governmental action has been taken, no further reviews by ARC will be required unless the project is substantial-ly revised, as determined by ARC in consultation with the Planning and Development Direc-tor.
Section 1124 Payment of Fees. City of Duluth UDC
11-50
(b) Final Action by the City.
(1) Review by the City of the development project may proceed during the DRI process, but no final action approving the project may be taken until the DRI process is completed.
(2) Approval of the first request for governmental action by the City shall not be made on a Development of Regional Impact until:
a. The DRI Report has been received from ARC reflecting its public findings and com-ments, if any, and the City has had adequate time to consider the Report; or
b. Said report is not received within 30 days of official determination by ARC that the project is a DRI, or by the end of such time that DRI process extensions have been ap-proved by ARC.
Section 1124. Payment of Fees.
(a) Application filing and permit fees shall be as may be established from time-to-time by the City Council as provided in Article 13.
(b) Application fees, if any, shall be submitted with the application and upon acceptance of said submission for review and consideration shall not be refundable. Failure to pay a required appli-cation fee shall cause the application to be returned to the applicant without acceptance for re-view or consideration by the City.
(c) Permit fees, if any, shall be submitted as a prerequisite to issuance of the permit. Non- payment as a result of submission of a check having insufficient funds on account, or for any other rea-son, shall cause the permit to be voided and reissuance subject to penalty as may be established by the City Council.
(d) Following the approval of development plans, and prior to authorization to begin construction, the developer shall pay to the City such required inspection, curb cut, or other fees as may be established from time-to-time by the City Council. Further, the developer shall pay fees such as sanitary sewer permit charges and other associated fees to the appropriate jurisdiction or agen-cy. Such fees shall not be refundable following issuance of a Development Permit, except upon approval of the City Council.
(e) Prior to approval of a Certificate of Development Conformance for a project, the developer shall provide to the Gwinnett County Department of Transportation payment of any and all fees for traffic control signs, street name signs, and street striping as shall be required by Gwinnett County.
(f) Prior to approval of a Final Plat or Certificate of Occupancy, the developer shall provide to the Planning and Development Department such recording fees as shall be required by these Regu-lations or established from time-to-time by the City Council.
DIVISION V. DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES AND COMPLETION.
Section 1125. Initiation of Development Activities.
1125.01 Initial Activities Required.
Following the issuance of any permit authorizing grading on any site:
City of Duluth UDC Section 1125 Initiation of Development Activities.
11-51
(a) Required erosion control measures must be installed where practical by the developer and in-spected and approved by the Planning and Development Department prior to actual grading or removal of vegetation. All control measures shall be in place as soon after the commencement of activities as possible and in coordination with the progress of the project.
(b) Soil sedimentation facilities must be installed and operational prior to major grading operations.
(c) Areas required to be undisturbed by this Development Code, conditions of zoning approval, Metropolitan River Protection Act or other ordinance or regulation shall be designated by survey stakes, flags, or other appropriate markings and shall be inspected and approved by the De-partment of Planning and Development prior to the commencement of any clearing or grading activities.
1125.02 Tree Protection Areas.
Prior to the initiation of land disturbance activities and throughout the clearing and grading process the following must be accomplished for any designated tree protection area in accordance with any approved Buffer and Landscape Plan or Tree Protection Plan for the property:
(a) For those trees which are not to be removed, all protective fencing, staking, and any tree pro-tection area signs shall be in place. These barriers must be maintained throughout the land dis-turbance process and should not be removed until landscaping is begun.
(b) The tree protection areas shall not be utilized for storage of earth and other materials resulting from or used during the development process.
(c) Construction site activities such as parking, materials storage, concrete washout, burning, etc. shall be arranged so as to prevent disturbances within the tree protection areas.
1125.03 Development Inspections.
Oral notification shall be made by the developer or contractor to the Planning and Development De-partment at least 24 hours prior to the need for an inspection of activity for each of the following phases as authorized by any permit for site work or development. Inspections shall be made by the Planning and Development Department, and passed prior to continuation of further activity or pro-ceeding into new phases.
(a) Prior to authorization for clearing or clearing and grubbing of the site or any portion thereof in-cluded under the permit, installation of required erosion control measures and designation of tree protection areas and other areas to remain undisturbed shall be inspected.
(b) Prior to authorization for grading, installation of required erosion control measures and soil sed-imentation facilities, and designation of tree protection areas and other areas to remain undis-turbed, shall be inspected. Installation of slope stakes shall be required.
(c) Upon completion of roadway grading, a Certificate shall be submitted to the appropriate Gwin-nett County department certifying that the centerline of the road and the offset centerline of the water line are within 6 inches of those shown on the approved plans or realigned plan sub-mittal. The Certificate shall be copied simultaneously to the Duluth Planning and Development Department for informational purposes only. Inspection and approval shall be required prior to trenching or continuation with sub-base preparation.
(d) Upon completion of installation of storm drainage pipe, detention, or other stormwater facili-ties.
Section 1126 Field changes. City of Duluth UDC
11-52
(e) Prior to initiation of installation of sanitary sewer and appurtenances. This notification shall be made by the developer or contractor to the appropriate Gwinnett County department, and cop-ied simultaneously to the Duluth Planning and Development Department for informational pur-poses only. Inspections may occur throughout the installation process.
(f) Prior to initiation of installation of water lines and appurtenances. This notification shall be made by the developer or contractor to the appropriate Gwinnett County department, and cop-ied simultaneously to the Duluth Planning and Development Department for informational pur-poses only. Inspections may occur throughout the installation process.
(g) Curbing of roadways. Inspection should be requested before the forms have been set (if used). Roadway width will be spot checked by string line between curb stakes.
(h) Sub-base or subgrade of streets. After compaction, the subgrade will be string-lined for depth and crown. The subgrade shall be roll tested and shall pass with no movement, to the satisfac-tion of the Planning and Development Department.
(i) Street base. The base will be string-lined for depth and crown, and shall pass a roll test with no movement to the satisfaction of the Planning and Development Department.
(j) Paving. A Planning and Development Department inspector shall be on site during the paving process to check consistency, depth, and workmanship. For asphalt paving, the temperature of the material will be spot-checked, and the roadways will be cored after completion to check thickness.
1125.04 Responsibility for Quality and Design.
The completion of inspections by the City of Duluth officials and employees and authorization for work continuation shall not transfer responsibility for the quality of the work performed or materials used from the contractor or developer, nor imply or transfer acceptance of responsibility for project design or engineering from the professional corporation or individual under whose hand or supervi-sion the plans were prepared.
1125.05 Stop Work Orders.
Work that is not authorized by an approved permit, or is not in conformance with the approved plans for the project, or is not in compliance with the provisions of this Development Code or any other adopted code, ordinance or regulation of the City of Duluth, shall be subject to immediate Stop Work Order by the Planning and Development Department. Work that proceeds without having received the necessary inspections of the Planning and Development Department or the appropriate Gwinnett County department, as applicable, shall be halted until all inspections are completed.
1125.06 Stabilization for Erosion Control.
If for any reason a clearing and grubbing, grading, or development permit expires after land disturb-ance activities have commenced, the developer shall be responsible for stabilizing the site for erosion control, under the direction of the Planning and Development Department.
Section 1126. Field changes.
1126.01 Field Change; Defined.
A field change as used in this Section is official approval for a developer or builder to deviate from approved development construction plans or architectural building plans necessitated by unantici-pated conditions discovered during the construction process.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1126 Field changes.
11-53
1126.02 Field Change; Approval.
(a) Authority to Approve Field Changes.
(1) Field changes may be approved only by the Director of the Duluth or Gwinnett County de-partment responsible for plan review and approval related to the improvement for which the change is proposed. Such approvals are to be coordinated between the affected de-partments as appropriate.
(2) Administrative approval shall not be given for any change that would not have been ap-proved as part of the original permit if the unanticipated conditions had been known.
a. A change that would be inconsistent with the requirements of this Development Code must be considered as a variance under the provisions of the Appeals Article of this Development Code.
b. Consistency with all other codes, regulations and ordinances is required unless an ap-peal or waiver is granted under the provisions of such applicable code, regulation or ordinance.
(3) Administrative approval shall not be given for any change that is inconsistent with the con-ditions of zoning approval imposed by the City Council through the rezoning or special use approval process. Such a change can only be considered and approved as a change in zon-ing conditions under Section 1104.04.
(b) Process for Approval of Field changes.
(1) A request for a field change shall be made to the Director of the Department responsible for plan review and approval related to the improvement for which the change is proposed (i.e., the responsible Director).
(2) Revised development construction plans or architectural building plans, as applicable, must be submitted with the proposed change clearly indicated.
(3) If the revised plans relate to a change under this Development Code, the request will be acted upon within two full business days of receipt of the plans, and either:
a. There are no comments and the change is approved by the Duluth Planning and De-velopment Director;
b. Plan review comments are forwarded and resubmittal for further review is required;
c. The information submitted is inadequate to determine consistency with regulations and resubmittal is required; or
d. The change is approved by the Duluth Planning and Development Director subject to attached plan review comments or conditions of approval.
(4) If the revised plans relate to a change under the codes or regulations of Gwinnett County, the request will be acted upon by the responsible County Director in accordance with the Countys procedures.
(5) The field change, as ultimately approved, shall be documented by the developer or builder on revised development construction plans or architectural building plans, as applicable, and distributed to the appropriate departments of both the City and the County.
Section 1127 Approval of Development Conformance. City of Duluth UDC
11-54
1126.03 Emergency Field Change Requests.
In the case of an emergency field change request, the responsible Director, with consideration to or oral comments from other potentially affected departments, may provisionally approve the pro-posed field change or provisionally approve it with modification. The provisions for such approval are:
(a) The field change subsequently shall be formally requested, documented and reviewed under the process set forth under 1126.02(b).
(b) The developer or builder requesting the field change accepts all responsibility and liability that may result from emergency approval relative to requirements resulting from the formal review.
(c) All requirements resulting from the formal review shall be implemented by the developer or builder that requested the field change in a timely manner.
(d) The field change, as ultimately approved through the formal review, shall be documented on re-vised development construction plans or architectural building plans, as applicable, and distrib-uted to the appropriate departments of both the City and the County.
Section 1127. Approval of Development Conformance.
1127.01 Pre-requisite to Final Plat or Certificate of Occupancy Approval.
(a) Approval of a Certificate of Development Conformance for any part of a project included in a development permit shall be a prerequisite to the approval of a final plat for a subdivision or is-suance of a certificate of occupancy for any part of a project included in a development permit, except for single-family and two-family residential structures.
(b) The approval shall reflect the owner's certification that all site work and construction has been accomplished according to the terms of approved plans and permits, and that all facilities or improvements required by this Development Code are in compliance with appropriate standards, regulations, codes and ordinances. Such approval shall be revoked in cases of fraud or whenev-er unauthorized changes are made to the site without the benefit of required permits.
1127.02 Submission Requirements.
(a) Upon completion of the project or a phase of the project as authorized for construction by the development permit, the owner shall file a Certificate of Development Conformance with the Planning and Development Director along with record as-built drawings of all stormwater de-tention facilities and modifications to the limits of the 100-year floodplain (if any) and an as-built hydrology study for the project with the actual parameters from the record drawing of the detention facilities, along with all streets intended for dedication to the public or to be re-tained as private facilities.
(b) A record as-built drawing of the water system and sanitary sewer improvements, if any, shall also be prepared, separately, and submitted to the appropriate Gwinnett County department in accordance with their regulations, with a copy filed simultaneously with the Planning and De-velopment Director.
(c) The Certificate of Development Conformance shall be accompanied by a Development Perfor-mance and Maintenance Agreement completed in draft form. If the owner is a corporation, the documents shall be signed by the President or other authorized officer, and either the corporate secretary shall attest to the signature and affix the corporate seal, or a Certificate of Corporate Resolution shall also be submitted. See Section 1131 for examples of such instruments.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1128 Project Closeout and Continuing Maintenance.
11-55
1127.03 Approval
Following final inspection and approval of all record as-built drawings, the Planning and Develop-ment Director shall approve the Certificate of Development Conformance.
Section 1128. Project Closeout and Continuing Maintenance.
1128.01 Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement.
Based upon the approved Certificate of Development Conformance, the owner shall file a final De-velopment Performance and Maintenance Agreement with the Planning and Development Director, along with any required Certificate of Corporate Resolution and performance or maintenance surety, as a prerequisite to the approval of a final plat for a subdivision or issuance of a certificate of occu-pancy for any part of a project included in the development permit, except for single-family and two-family residential structures. The Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement (see Sec-tion 1131 for an example) shall include the following:
(a) Performance: If applicable, agreement to complete required improvements yet to be completed (e.g., grassing, topping, sidewalks, required landscaping) by a date certain, and to provide per-formance surety to guarantee such completion in accordance with Section 1130. Final landscap-ing shall be provided in accordance with a schedule acceptable to the Planning and Develop-ment Department. The developer may be allowed up to nine months in which to finish the other designated improvements, after the date of approval of the Certificate of Development Con-formance.
(b) Maintenance: Agreement to maintain and repair or restore as necessary all street, drainage and landscaping improvements as required by this Development Code, whether public or private, and to provide maintenance surety to guarantee such maintenance in accordance with Section 1129. Repairs shall be made for any deficiencies identified within the maintenance period or the maintenance surety shall be called to complete same.
(c) Indemnification of the City against all liability for damages arising as a result of errors or omis-sions in the design or construction of the development for a period of twenty years. If liability is subsequently assigned or transferred to a successor in title or other person, a copy of such legal instrument shall be filed with the Superior Court of Gwinnett County, Georgia. Failure to record such instrument shall not affect the assignment of responsibility for liability indemnification.
Section 1129. Maintenance Warranty.
The owner shall be responsible for the full cost of maintenance after completion of all improvements required by this Development Code, whether public or private, in accordance with the Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement for the project and the provisions of this Section.
1129.01 Maintenance Surety Required.
(a) Prior to approval of a final subdivision plat, or issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a multi-family or nonresidential development project, a maintenance warranty in a form of surety as described in this Section is required for all stormwater detention facilities and for all street and stormwater drainage improvements shown on the record as-built surveys, and for all land-scaping specifically required by this Development Code.
(b) The provision of such surety shall not limit the owners responsibility for the full cost of mainte-nance, repair or restoration during the maintenance period of all improvements required by this
Section 1129 Maintenance Warranty. City of Duluth UDC
11-56
Development Code and included in the pertinent Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement.
1129.02 Maintenance Period.
(a) Start date: For a subdivision, the start of the maintenance period shall be the date of final subdi-vision plat approval. For a multi-family or nonresidential development project, the start of the maintenance period shall be the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
(b) The maintenance period shall extend for 18 calendar months from the start date, above, or from the date of completion and City approval of the last deferred improvement covered by a Per-formance Guarantee, whichever occurs later
(c) The maintenance period will be extended for staged or phased developments in those cases that meet the provisions of Section 1129.05.
1129.03 Maintenance Surety Standards.
(a) For continuing maintenance of the stormwater detention facilities and for maintenance of the street and stormwater drainage improvements, the following shall apply:
(1) The maintenance surety shall be in the form of a valid irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or other reputable financial institution chartered to do business in the State of Georgia. Such letter of credit must comply with the requirements of Section 1129.04.
(2) The value of the maintenance surety shall be equal to 33% of the cost of construction of the stormwater detention, street and stormwater drainage improvements shown on the as-built surveys and as estimated for deferred improvements under Section 1130.02. Cop-ies of contractor agreements or actual invoices paid, or as otherwise determined by the City Engineer, shall evidence the cost of construction.
(3) The maintenance surety shall include the estimated cost for maintenance of continuing op-erations of the stormwater drainage and detention pond facilities during the maintenance period. Maintenance shall include repair of erosion controls, removal of silt from detention ponds and other items pertinent to the continuing operation of the stormwater drainage system for the development.
(b) Maintenance surety for the sanitary sewer facilities and water system improvements is required separately by Gwinnett County in accordance with its regulations.
(c) A maintenance surety for continued compliance with the buffer and landscaping requirements of this Development Code, as applicable, shall be in the form of a landscaping warranty. The landscaping warranty shall provide for the replacement or restoration of any or all plantings and landscape material for a period of 12 calendar months from the date of City approval following installation of such plantings and landscape material. Such warranty shall be in a form accepta-ble to the City (see Section 1131 for an example).
(d) Repairs shall be made for any deficiencies identified in the covered improvements within the maintenance period or the surety shall be called by the City to complete same.
1129.04 Letter of Credit for Maintenance Surety.
The letter of credit shall be in a form acceptable to the City (see Section 1131 for an example). The executed letter of credit shall be submitted with the final Development Performance and Mainte-nance Agreement and shall certify the following:
City of Duluth UDC Section 1129 Maintenance Warranty.
11-57
(a) That the issuer guarantees funds as an assignment in an amount no less than the total amount determined in accordance with Section 1129.03.
(b) That the issuer guarantees that any liens or encumbrances that exist or may be placed on the improvements will not become the responsibility of the City under any circumstances.
(c) That if the owner fails to maintain, repair, replace or restore each of the specified improvements within the maintenance period, upon written demand of the City Engineer the issuer will pay to the City immediately, and without further action, the full amount of the total assignment stated in the letter of credit (less the actual cost of covered improvements expended as of the date of demand and accepted by the City as to reasonableness).
(d) That the letter of credit shall not be terminated less than 60 calendar days after the date of the end of the maintenance period as contained in the pertinent Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement, may not be withdrawn or reduced in amount, and will be automatical-ly renewed on a month-to-month basis until released in writing by the Planning and Develop-ment Director.
1129.05 Staged or Phased Developments.
(a) In cases where a second phase or any other later stage of a subdivision or site development pro-ject will utilize the streets or drainage facilities provided in the original or an earlier phase of the project, the maintenance surety for the second or later phase of the project shall include the streets or drainage facilities located in the original or earlier phase of the project for the dura-tion of the maintenance period of the second or later phase of the project.
(b) In cases where a second phase or any other later stage of a subdivision or site development pro-ject will utilize the same streets or drainage facilities as those covered by an active maintenance surety for the original or earlier phase of the project, said maintenance surety for the original or earlier phase of the project shall be extended in amount and duration to continue coverage of the original or earlier phase throughout the maintenance period of the second or later phase of the project.
1129.06 Release of Maintenance Warranty.
(a) Prior to the end of the maintenance period, the City Engineer will inspect the improvements covered by the maintenance warranty and identify any repairs, replacement or restoration needed to maintain or return the improvements to full compliance with the as-built standards and requirements for such improvements required by this Development Code.
(b) The developer shall undertake and complete all maintenance, repairs, replacement or restora-tion identified in paragraph (a) of this subsection in a timely manner.
(c) When the warranty work identified in paragraph (a) of this subsection has been completed by the developer and approved by the City Engineer for conformity with this Development Code, the maintenance warranty shall be released by the Planning and Development Director, and written notice of such release shall be provided to the issuer of the letter of credit.
(d) The maintenance surety shall be automatically extended by the issuer beyond the expiration date stated in such surety on a month-to-month basis if all inspections of warranty work re-quired by paragraph (a) of this subsection have not been completed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, prior to said expiration date stated in the maintenance surety, unless written de-mand for nonperformance is received by the issuer in accordance with Section 1130.04.
Section 1130 Performance Guarantee. City of Duluth UDC
11-58
Section 1130. Performance Guarantee.
As a prerequisite to approval of a final plat for a subdivision or a certificate of occupancy for a multi-family or nonresidential development project, completion of certain improvements required under this Development Code may be deferred in accordance with the Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement for the project and the provisions of this Section.
1130.01 Posting Performance Guarantee.
(a) The applicant may post a performance guarantee for the construction of certain deferred im-provements required under this Development Code as an attachment to the Development Per-formance and Maintenance Agreement and of a type acceptable to the City Council.
(b) Improvements eligible for deferral under performance surety are limited to final topping of streets, installation of sidewalks, installation of plantings and landscape materials, and grassing of street shoulders and easements, as applicable to the project. All other improvements re-quired by this Development Code shall have been completed by the developer, inspected and approved by the City, and covered by the Certificate of Development Conformance for the pro-ject.
(c) Such performance guarantee shall comply with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfac-tory to the City as to form, sufficiency and manner of execution. (See Section 1131 for exam-ples.) The period within which required improvements must be completed shall be specified in the Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement, and shall not exceed nine months from the date of approval of the Certificate of Development Conformance unless an extension of an additional three calendar months has been granted by the Planning and Development Di-rector.
(d) The expiration date of the performance guarantee shall be no less than 60 days following the date established in the Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement for completion of the deferred improvements. Completion of the improvements shall mean the final inspec-tion and approval by the City Engineer of the improvements in accordance with the design and construction standards of this Development Code.
(e) Such guarantee shall be approved by the City Council as to amount and type of surety and con-ditions satisfactory to the City Council. The City Council may subsequently, upon proof of diffi-culty, approve extension of the completion date set forth in such guarantee for a maximum pe-riod of up to three additional months.
1130.02 Cost of Improvements.
The cost of the improvements to be completed shall be established based on a properly executed and binding contract between the developer and the contractor selected to perform the work, and shall be supported by detailed cost estimates prepared by the contractor or a qualified design pro-fessional. Said contract and cost estimates shall be determined by the City Engineer to be sufficient to cover the full cost of design, surveying, construction, inspection, and preparation of as-built sur-veys, construction management and all other costs of the improvements.
1130.03 Restrictions Pending Completion of Improvements.
(a) No building permit shall be issued on any lot until continuous paved road access to the lot from the public road system has been established in accordance with the provisions of this Develop-ment Code. Established means having received final inspection and approval by the City Engi-
City of Duluth UDC Section 1130 Performance Guarantee.
11-59
neer of the road in accordance with the design and construction standards of this Development Code.
(b) For subdivisions and development projects that are staged in multiple phases, each phase must have continuous paved road access from the public road system to the boundary of the phase in accordance with the provisions of this Development Code. No phase can be approved for final plat recordation if its access depends on improvements that have not been completed in an ear-lier phase.
1130.04 Failure to Complete Improvements.
(a) In those cases where a performance guarantee has been posted and required improvements have either not been installed within the terms of such performance guarantee or have not pro-gressed in a timely manner such that completion within the time period of the guarantee can be achieved, the City Engineer may thereupon declare the guarantee to be in default and require that the issuer of the performance guarantee turn over to the City such funds that are due and payable under the terms of the guarantee.
(b) A default also shall be deemed to have occurred on the part of the owner if, in the sole judg-ment of the City Engineer, the owner has:
(1) Abandoned or unnecessarily delayed the performance of its obligations under the pertinent Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement; or,
(2) Renounced or repudiated its obligations under the said Agreement; or,
(3) Clearly demonstrated through insolvency, delay or otherwise, that its obligations under the said Agreement cannot be completed within the time allotted under the said Agreement; or,
(4) Has not complied with or is not in compliance with the minimum standards of this Unified Development Code for any one or more of the subject improvements, or,
(5) Transferred ownership of any portion of the project to a third party without assignment of the remaining responsibilities hereunder; or,
(6) Caused or experienced any damage to new or previously existing improvements creating an emergency situation.
1130.05 Return of Guarantee.
When the improvements have been completed, and inspected and approved by the City Engineer for conformity with this Development Code, the performance guarantee shall be released by the Plan-ning and Development Director.
1130.06 Types of Acceptable Performance Guarantees.
(a) Letter of Credit.
The developer shall provide a valid irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other reputable fi-nancial institution chartered to do business in the State of Georgia, for approval by the City Council. The letter of credit shall be in a form acceptable to the City (see Section 1131 for an ex-ample). The letter of credit shall certify the following:
(1) That the issuer guarantees funds in an amount equal to 110% of the cost, as established under Section 1130.02, of completing all required improvements.
Section 1130 Performance Guarantee. City of Duluth UDC
11-60
(2) That the issuer guarantees that any liens or encumbrances that exist or may be placed on the improvements will not become the responsibility of the City under any circumstances.
(3) That if the developer fails to satisfactorily complete the specified improvements within the required period or is otherwise in default under Section 1130.04, upon written demand of the City Engineer the issuer will pay to the City immediately, and without further action, the full amount of the total assignment stated in the letter of credit, less the actual cost of covered improvements expended as of the date of demand. Such expenditures shall be ev-idenced by invoices and proof of payments and shall be subject to review and acceptance by the City as to reasonableness.
(4) That the letter of credit shall not be terminated less than 60 calendar days after the date of performance completion as contained in the pertinent Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement, may not be withdrawn or reduced in amount, and will be auto-matically renewed on a month-to-month basis until released in writing by the Planning and Development Director.
(b) Performance or Surety Bond.
If a developer prefers not to post an irrevocable letter of credit, the City Council may allow the developer to post a performance bond as follows:
(1) A performance bond must be provided by a construction bonding or insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Georgia.
(2) The letter of credit shall be in a form acceptable to the City (see Section 1131 for an exam-ple).
(3) A performance bond shall certify the following:
a. That the bonding or insurance company guarantees funds in an amount equal to 150% of the cost, as established under Section 1130.02, of completing all required improve-ments.
b. That the bonding or insurance company guarantees that any liens or encumbrances that exist or may be placed on the improvements will not become the responsibility of the City under any circumstances.
c. That if the developer fails to complete the specified improvements within the required period or is otherwise in default under Section 1130.04, upon written demand of the City Engineer the bonding or insurance company will pay to the City immediately, and without further action, the full amount of the limit of insurance stated in the bond, less the actual cost of covered improvements expended as of the date of demand. Such expenditures shall be evidenced by invoices and proof of payments and shall be subject to review and acceptance by the City as to reasonableness.
(4) That the bond shall not be terminated less than 60 calendar days after the date of perfor-mance completion as contained in the pertinent Development Performance and Mainte-nance Agreement, may not be withdrawn or reduced in amount, and will be automatically renewed on a month-to-month basis until released in writing by the Planning and Devel-opment Director.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1131 Example Instruments Relating to Improvement Guarantees.
11-61
Section 1131. Example Instruments Relating to Improvement Guarantees.
The following pages present examples of forms, agreements, letters and warranties discussed above. Such instruments should be modified as appropriate for a particular project but must address all pro-visions required by this Development Code.
City of Duluth UDC
11-62
CERTIFICATE OF DEVELOPMENT CONFORMANCE
TO: DULUTH PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
DEVELOPMENT NAME: ______________________________________________________________________
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT NUMBER: _____________ LOCATION: ____________________________________
PHASE SUBMITTED FOR FINAL PLATTING OR DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL: _________________________
Forwarded herewith are the record as-built drawings, prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor, which include all stormwater detention facilities and approved modifications to the 100-year floodplain (if any), and the as-built condition of all streets and drainage structures authorized for construction under the Development Permit first noted above. This is to request final inspection and approval of this Certificate of Development Conformance.
THIS IS TO CERTIFY that all site work or construction authorized under the Development Permit first noted above, including:
a. clearing, grubbing, grading, and installation of soil erosion and stormwater detention facilities as required under said permit;
b. the location of structures, access, parking, or loading areas or other private improvements as approved under said permit;
c. the installation and planting of required landscaping, trees or other plant material to satisfy buffer or other land-scape regulations as required under said permit; and
d. all facilities, including stormwater drainage and road improvements, intended for maintenance or dedication to the City of Duluth, Georgia;
are in compliance with all plans, specifications, and other conditions approved under the Development Permit and all applicable standards, regulations, codes and ordinances adopted by the City of Duluth as may have been amended by variance or other relief provided through formal appeal procedures for the subject property, with the sole exception of those improvements so described in the attached DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT.
This is also to certify that all monies due to third parties for such work authorized for construction under the De-velopment Permit first noted above have been paid (or if not will be the responsibility of the Owner) and that the improvements are free and clear of any liens or encumbrances and that any liens or encumbrances subsequently filed on such facilities and improvements covered herein shall be the sole responsibility of the Owner.
Date
Owner (Print Name of Corporation or entity)
ATTEST:
Corporate Secretary (affix Corporate Seal), or
Notary Public (attach Certificate of Corporate Resolu-tion)
Signature
My commission expires:
Name (of individual signing above)
City of Duluth UDC Section 1131 Example Instruments Relating to Improvement Guarantees.
11-63
Address
Address
Telephone number
The record as-built drawings were prepared and sealed by:
REGISTERED. LAND SURVEYOR
Reg. No.
Date of Expiration
Final Inspection has been completed and APPROVAL IS RECOMMENDED by:
City Engineer
Date
CERTIFICATE OF DEVELOPMENT CONFORMANCE
APPROVED
Director of Planning and Development
Date
NOTE: After the date of this approval, alteration of the site, the roads, stormwater drainage facilities or other public struc-tures not in accordance with the record as-built drawings submitted with the Certificate of Development Conformance and with the Development Permit first noted above or a subsequently approved Development Permit, shall without further provision immediately nullify this approval and cause this document to be NULL AND VOID.
City of Duluth UDC
11-64
DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT
TO: DULUTH PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
DEVELOPMENT NAME: ______________________________________________________________________
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT NUMBER: _____________ LOCATION: ____________________________________
PHASE SUBMITTED FOR FINAL PLATTING OR DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL: _________________________
A final inspection of this Development [Phase] has been completed and the Certificate of Development Conform-ance has been approved and accepted by the Director of Planning and Development. This is to provide assur-ance that the below-signed Owner of this development agrees to the following as a condition precedent to the ap-proval of any applicable Final Plat for a subdivision or the issuance of any Certificate of Occupancy for any site development project.
1. PERFORMANCE
a. The topping course on all streets, as required by the Duluth Unified Development Code, shall be completed on or before ________________ , 20____ , said date being no more than nine calendar months from the date of Certificate of Development Conformance approval.
b. The installation of sidewalks, as required by the Duluth Unified Development Code, shall be completed on or before ________________ , 20____ , said date being no more than nine calendar months from the date of Certif-icate of Development Conformance approval.
c. Final landscaping, as shown on the approved Buffer and Landscape Plan or as required by the Duluth Unified Development Code, as applicable, shall be completed on or before ________________ , 20____ , said date be-ing no more than nine calendar months from the date of Certificate of Development Conformance approval.
d. All street shoulders and all easements shall be grassed, as required by the Duluth Unified Development Code, and shall be completed on or before ________________ , 20____ , said date being no more than nine calendar months from the date of Certificate of Development Conformance approval.
2. PERFORMANCE SURETY
In guarantee of the faithful completion of all improvements listed under Section 1, PERFORMANCE, the Owner agrees to furnish to the City a letter or letters of credit or other acceptable security with good and sufficient surety acceptable to the City in the following sums representing 110% of the estimated costs, as approved by the City Engineer, for the specific type of surety provided, as required by the Unified Development Code of Duluth, Geor-gia:
a. $ ____________ , representing 110% of the estimated cost of completing the final street topping, [for those streets identified on the attached plat of the subdivision] [as listed as follows: __________] [as attached hereto as Schedule A]; and,
b. $ ____________ , representing 110% of the estimated cost of completing the construction of all sidewalks, [as identified on the attached plat of the subdivision] [as listed as follows: __________] [as attached hereto as Schedule B]; and,
c. $ ____________ , representing 110% of the estimated cost of materials, and other attendant costs incidental to the installation of the final landscaping, [as identified on the approved Buffer and Landscape Plan] [as listed as follows: __________ ] [as attached hereto on Schedule C]; and,
d. $ ____________ , representing 110% of the estimated cost of grassing all street shoulders and easements, [as identified on the attached plat of the subdivision] [as listed as follows: __________] [as attached hereto as Schedule D].
The Owner further agrees and acknowledges that, upon completion of the work required under Section 1, PER-FORMANCE, all monies due to third parties for such work will have been paid (or if not will be the responsibility of
City of Duluth UDC Section 1131 Example Instruments Relating to Improvement Guarantees.
11-65
the Owner), that the improvements will be free and clear of any liens or encumbrances and that any liens or en-cumbrances subsequently filed on such facilities and improvements covered herein shall be the sole responsibility of the Owner.
A default in the Performance Surety shall be deemed to have occurred on the part of the Owner, if the Owner shall fail to complete the subject improvements within the time set forth under Section 1, PERFORMANCE, or any extensions thereof; or, prior to the expiration of such period, if in the sole judgment of the City, the Owner has:
(1) Abandoned or unnecessarily delayed the performance of its obligations under the Agreement; or,
(2) Renounced or repudiated its obligations under the Agreement; or,
(3) Clearly demonstrated through insolvency, delay or otherwise, that its obligations under the Agreement cannot be completed within the time allotted under the Agreement; or,
(4) Not complied with or is not in compliance with the minimum standards of the Duluth Unified Develop-ment Code, for any one or more of the subject improvements, or
(5) Transferred ownership of any portion of the project to a third party without assignment of the remain-ing responsibilities hereunder; or
(6) Caused or experienced any damage to new or previously existing improvements creating an emer-gency situation.
3. MAINTENANCE
a. Maintenance Period.
The Owner hereby warrants to the City that all stormwater detention facilities and all street improvements (includ-ing but not limited to the street pavement, base, sidewalks, sub-grades, cuts, fills, shoulders, grassing and traffic signs), stormwater drainage facilities, and required landscaping within this Development [Phase] shall be re-paired, replaced or restored as necessary to maintain compliance with the standards and requirements of the Du-luth Unified Development Code in force as of the date of this Agreement. This warranty shall begin on the date of approval of the accompanying CERTIFICATE OF DEVELOPMENT CONFORMANCE, and shall continue in full force and effect for no fewer than 18 calendar months after said approval date or the last completion date of all improvements included under Section 1, PERFORMANCE, whichever last occurs, unless extended under para-graph b of this Section 3.
b. Extension of Maintenance Period.
In the event that a second phase or any other later stage of the project will utilize the same streets or drainage fa-cilities as those covered by this Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement, the maintenance war-ranty provided by the Owner under paragraph a of this Section 3 and the maintenance surety provided under Sec-tion 4, MAINTENANCE SURETY, below, shall be extended automatically in duration and amount, in order to con-tinue the maintenance guarantee of the street and drainage improvements covered herein throughout the mainte-nance period of the second or later phase of the project.
4. MAINTENANCE SURETY
a. Street Improvements and Drainage Facilities.
The Owner agrees to furnish to the City a letter or letters of credit with good and sufficient surety acceptable to the City in the sum of $ ____________ , representing 33% of the construction cost of the street improvements and drainage facilities, in guarantee of the faithful performance of the maintenance required under Section 3, MAINTENANCE, above. The stormwater detention facilities, street pavement, base, sidewalks, sub-grades, cuts, fills, shoulders, grassing, traffic signs and drainage facilities in the development must be properly maintained and free from faults in design, materials and workmanship.
b. Landscaping.
The Owner agrees to furnish the City a Warranty Agreement for Required Landscaping in guarantee of the faithful maintenance required under Section 3, MAINTENANCE, above and for the replacement or restoration of plant-ings and landscape material as needed to maintain compliance with the buffer and landscaping requirements of the Duluth Unified Development Code, as applicable to the project.
City of Duluth UDC
11-66
c. Limitation of Owners responsibility.
It is agreed that the Owner shall be responsible for the full cost of maintenance after completion of all improve-ments covered by this Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement without any limitation established by the amount of maintenance surety provided under this Section 4.
5. INDEMNIFICATION
The Owner hereby agrees to indemnify the City and hold the City harmless from any and all damages which the City may suffer and from any and all liability, claims including interest thereon, demands, attorney's fees and costs of defense, or judgment against it, arising from errors or omissions in the design or construction of the develop-ment or from the effects of stormwater flows onto, from or across any and all lands as a result of the development, and Owner expressly agrees to defend against any claims brought or actions filed against the City where such claim or action involves in whole or in part, the subject of the indemnity contained herein whether such claims or actions are rightfully or wrongfully brought or filed. This indemnification shall commence upon the date of this Agreement and shall continue in full force and effect for a period of 20 years thereafter.
6. SEVERABILITY
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this agreement shall be declared or otherwise adjudged unconstitutional or void, the validity of the remaining portions of this agreement shall not be affected thereby, it being the intent of the City of Duluth in adopting this agreement that no portion or provision of this agreement shall become inoperative or fail by reason of the unconstitutionality or invalidity of any section, subsection, sen-tence, clause, phrase or provision of this agreement.
7. ASSIGNMENT OF LIABILITY
The Owner hereby agrees that any assignment or transfer of the provisions of Section 5, INDEMNIFICATION, above, in whole or in part, to any successor in title or other person, shall be recorded with the Clerk of the Superi-or Court of Gwinnett County and a copy of said legal instrument, as recorded, shall be filed with the Duluth Plan-ning and Development Department.
Date
Owner (Print Name of Corporation or entity)
ATTEST:
Corporate Secretary (affix Corporate Seal), or
Notary Public (attach Certificate of Corporate Reso-lution)
Signature
My commission expires:
Name (of individual signing above)
Address
Telephone number
DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE AGREE-MENT APPROVED
Director of Planning and Development
Mayor
Date
City of Duluth UDC Section 1131 Example Instruments Relating to Improvement Guarantees.
11-67
CERTIFICATE OF CORPORATE RESOLUTION
(PREPARE ON COMPANY LETTERHEAD)
I, ______________________________ , certify the following:
That I am the duly elected and authorized Secretary of ________________ (hereinafter referred to as the corpo-ration), a corporation organized and incorporated to do business under the laws of the State of ________________ ;
That said corporation has, through lawful resolution of the Board of Directors of the corporation, duly authorized and directed ________________ , in his official capacity as ________________ of the corporation, to enter into and execute the following described document(s) with the City of Duluth, Georgia, for the ___________________ development project and such phase as named thereon, in accordance with the requirements of the Duluth Uni-fied Development Code:
( List all that apply) Certificate of Development Conformance
Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement
Letter of Credit
Performance Bond
Warranty Agreement for Required Landscaping
Other : ________________________________
That the foregoing resolution of the Board of Directors has not been rescinded, modified, amended or otherwise changed in any way since the adoption thereof, and is in full force and effect on the date hereof.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have set my hand and corporate seal;
This the ____ day of ________________ , 20____.
_______________________________________ (CORPORATE SEAL)
Signature of Secretary
________________________________________
Signature of Notary Public
My commission expires: ____________________
City of Duluth UDC
11-68
SURETY AGREEMENT FOR MAINTENANCE LETTER OF CREDIT
(MUST BE PRINTED ON LOCAL BANK LETTERHEAD)
DATE: __________________________________________________
SUBJECT: SURETY AGREEMENT FOR MAINTENANCE WARRANTY
DEVELOPMENT NAME: ______________________________________________________________________
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT NUMBER: _________ LOCATION: ________________________________________
PHASE COVERED BY THIS WARRANTY: _______________________________________________________
SUBJECT IMPROVEMENTS: As specifically identified and described as follows:
All stormwater detention facilities and all street improvements (including but not limited to the street pavement, base, sidewalks, sub-grades, cuts, fills, shoulders, grassing and traffic signs), and stormwater drainage facilities [as identified on the attached plat of the subdivision] [as listed as follows: __________] [as attached hereto as Schedule A]; and,
Required landscaping [as identified on the approved Buffer and Landscape Plan] [as listed as follows: __________] [as attached hereto as Schedule B].
To the MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL of the City of Duluth:
This is to advise that ____________________________________________ , as Issuer, is holding at the request of ____________________________ , as Principal, the total amount of $ ________________ as an assignment that the subject improvements indicated above will be maintained in accordance with the standards and require-ments of the Unified Development Code of the City of Duluth, Georgia, and further that this money will not be re-leased until such time that we are notified by an authorized agent of the City of Duluth Mayor and City Council that the subject improvements have been properly and satisfactorily maintained and that any repairs, replace-ments, restoration or other work required by the City to return any part of the improvements to the applicable standards required by the Unified Development Code have been completed and accepted by the City, as evi-denced by the return of this letter of credit with such release signed and dated by the authorized agent of the Mayor and City Council of the City of Duluth, below.
This is also to advise that if the Principal should fail to maintain the subject improvements in accordance with the standards and requirements of said Unified Development Code to the satisfaction of the City, upon written notifi-cation from the responsible official of the City of Duluth, this party as Insurer will pay to the City of Duluth immedi-ately, and without further action, the total amount of the assignment indicated above (less the actual cost of cov-ered improvements expended as of the date of demand and accepted by the City as to reasonableness); provid-ed, however, the amount is not to exceed the total amount held as an assignment.
This is also to advise that the Issuer guarantees that any liens or encumbrances that exist or may be placed on the subject improvements will not become the responsibility of the City under any circumstances, and that any such liens or encumbrances shall be satisfied by the Principal to the satisfaction of the Insurer prior to the release of this letter of credit by the City.
It is also agreed that this letter of credit shall not be terminated less than 60 calendar days after the date of the end of the maintenance period as established in said Unified Development Code, and that this letter of credit may not be withdrawn or reduced in amount and will be automatically renewed in 30-day increments until released by the authorized agent of the Mayor and City Council of the City of Duluth.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1131 Example Instruments Relating to Improvement Guarantees.
11-69
Date
Signature
ATTEST: Notary Public
Printed Name
My commission expires:
Title
APPROVED BY THE DULUTH MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
Clerk to the Mayor and City Council
Mayor
Date
Final Inspection has been completed and AP-PROVAL IS RECOMMENDED by:
City Engineer
Date
RELEASE OF MAINTENANCE SURETY
Director of Planning and Development
Date
City of Duluth UDC
11-70
SURETY AGREEMENT FOR PERFORMANCE LETTER OF CREDIT
(MUST BE PRINTED ON LOCAL BANK LETTERHEAD)
DATE: __________________________________________________
SUBJECT: SURETY AGREEMENT FOR PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
DEVELOPMENT NAME: ______________________________________________________________________
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT NUMBER: _________ LOCATION: ________________________________________
PHASE SUBMITTED FOR FINAL PLATTING OR DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL: _________________________
SUBJECT IMPROVEMENTS: As specifically identified and described as follows:
Final street topping, [for those streets identified on the attached plat of the subdivision] [as listed as follows: __________] [as attached hereto as Schedule A]; and,
The construction of all sidewalks, [as identified on the attached plat of the subdivision] [as listed as follows: __________] [as attached hereto as Schedule B]; and,
The installation of the final landscaping, [as identified on the approved Buffer and Landscape Plan] [as listed as follows: __________ ] [as attached hereto on Schedule C]; and,
Grassing all street shoulders and easements, [as identified on the attached plat of the subdivision] [as listed as follows: __________] [as attached hereto as Schedule D].
To the MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL of the City of Duluth:
This is to advise that ____________________________________________ , as Issuer, is holding at the request of ____________________________ , as Principal, the total amount of $ ________________ as an assignment that the subject improvements indicated above will be constructed and completed in accordance with the stand-ards and requirements of the Unified Development Code of the City of Duluth, Georgia, and further that this mon-ey will not be released until such time that we are notified by the City of Duluth that the subject improvements have been properly and satisfactorily completed and accepted by the City, as evidenced by the return of this letter of credit with such release signed and dated by the authorized agent of the Mayor and City Council of the City of Duluth, below.
This is also to advise that if the Principal should fail to construct and complete the subject improvements in ac-cordance with the standards and requirements of said Unified Development Code, upon written notification from the responsible official of the City of Duluth, this party as Surety will pay to the City of Duluth immediately, and without further action, the total amount of the assignment indicated above (less the actual cost of covered im-provements expended as of the date of demand and accepted by the City as to reasonableness); provided, how-ever, the amount is not to exceed the total amount held as an assignment.
This is also to advise that the Issuer guarantees that any liens or encumbrances that exist or may be placed on the subject improvements will not become the responsibility of the City under any circumstances, and that any such liens or encumbrances shall be satisfied by the Principal to the satisfaction of the Insurer prior to the release of this letter of credit by the City.
It is also agreed that this letter of credit shall not be terminated less than 60 calendar days after the date of the end of the performance period as established in said Unified Development Code, and that this letter of credit may not be withdrawn or reduced in amount and will be automatically renewed in 30-day increments until released by the authorized agent of the Mayor and City Council of the City of Duluth.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1131 Example Instruments Relating to Improvement Guarantees.
11-71
Date
Signature
ATTEST: Notary Public
Typed Name
My commission expires:
Title
APPROVED BY THE DULUTH MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
Clerk to the Mayor and City Council
Mayor
Date
Final Inspection has been completed and AP-PROVAL IS RECOMMENDED by:
City Engineer
Date
RELEASE OF PERFORMANCE SURETY
Director of CommunityDevelopment
Date
City of Duluth UDC
11-72
PERFORMANCE BOND
DEVELOPMENT NAME: ______________________________________________________________________
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT NUMBER: _________ LOCATION: ________________________________________
PHASE SUBMITTED FOR FINAL PLATTING OR DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL: _________________________
SUBJECT IMPROVEMENTS: As specifically identified and described as follows:
Final street topping, [for those streets identified on the attached plat of the subdivision] [as listed as follows: __________] [as attached hereto as Schedule A]; and,
The construction of all sidewalks, [as identified on the attached plat of the subdivision] [as listed as follows: __________] [as attached hereto as Schedule B]; and,
The installation of the final landscaping, [as identified on the approved Buffer and Landscape Plan] [as listed as follows: __________ ] [as attached hereto on Schedule C]; and,
Grassing all street shoulders and easements, [as identified on the attached plat of the subdivision] [as listed as follows: __________] [as attached hereto as Schedule D].
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that ___________________________ , hereinafter referred to as Principal, and ____________________________ , a ______________ Corporation authorized to do business in the State of Georgia, hereinafter referred to as Insurer, hereby declare that:
1. We are held and firmly bound unto the City of Duluth, Georgia (hereinafter referred to as the City) in the full and just sum of $__________________________ , lawful money of the United States of America, payable to the City under the terms of this Bond, and we bind ourselves, our heirs, executors, administrators, successors, and assigns, jointly and severally, firmly by this Bond.
2. This Bond shall be void if the Principal performs, in every respect, all of its obligations with regard to the subject improvements listed herein. Otherwise, this Bond shall continuously remain in full force and effect until released by the City.
3. (A) It shall be the duty of the Principal to notify Insurer of any revision to the plans, profiles and specifications of the subject improvements. Except as otherwise provided herein, Insurer expressly waives any right to receive no-tice from the City or to review or approve any revisions to the plans, profiles and specifications of the subject im-provements that are required to meet City, State or federal standards. No such revisions of any kind in the work shall in any way affect the obligation of the Insurer under this Bond; except that the Principal shall submit to the Insurer for review and approval, and the Insurer shall have the right to review and approve, any such revision that:
(1) Grants the Principal any extension of time beyond the period provided for in the Agreement for com-pletion of the subject improvements under the Agreement;
(2) Increases the cost of remaining construction of the subject improvements required under the Agree-ment by more than ten percent of the original sum of the Bond, as established by the estimate of Princi-pal; provided, however, that the Insurer shall be in all cases conclusively bound for purposes of this sub-paragraph by the estimate rendered by the Principal to the City as to the cost of any such revision. Where revisions are made without approval of Insurer as required by this subparagraph 3(A)(2), Insurer shall be released from any liability for such revisions in excess of ten percent of the original sum of this Bond; pro-vided, however, that such revision without review and approval of Insurer as required under this subpara-graph 3(A)(2) shall not otherwise operate as a release or discharge of any obligation of Insurer under this Bond.
(B) The failure or refusal of the City to take any action, proceeding or step to enforce any remedy or exercise any right under the Agreement or the taking of any action, proceeding or step by Principal, acting in good faith upon the belief that same is permitted by the provisions of the Agreement, shall not in any way release Principal or In-surer, or either of them, or their respective executors, administrators, successors or assigns, from liability under this Bond. Except as set forth herein, Insurer hereby waives notice of any amendment, indulgence or forbearance,
City of Duluth UDC Section 1131 Example Instruments Relating to Improvement Guarantees.
11-73
made, granted or permitted.
(C) The City, Principal and Insurer intend each provision of this Bond to be valid and binding upon them, and ex-pressly agree to abide thereby.
(D) In the event of a default (as defined in paragraph 4(A) of this Bond), the City may terminate whatever rights Principal and/or Insurer may have, to perform further work on the project.
4. (A) A default shall be deemed to have occurred on the part of the Principal, if Principal shall fail to complete the subject improvements under the Agreement within the time set forth therein or any extensions thereof; or, prior to the expiration of such period, if in the sole judgment of the Authorized City Official, the Principal has:
(1) Abandoned or unnecessarily delayed the performance of its obligations under the Agreement; or,
(2) Renounced or repudiated its obligations under the Agreement; or,
(3) Clearly demonstrated through insolvency, delay or otherwise, that its obligations under the Agreement cannot be completed within the time allotted under the Agreement; or,
(4) Not complied with or is not in compliance with the minimum standards of the Unified Development Code of the City of Duluth, Georgia, for any one or more of the subject improvements.
(B) If Principal defaults in the performance of all or any part of the obligations specified in the Agreement, the Au-thorized City Official shall give written notice of the default to the Insurer, with a copy to the Principal. In the event of such default and notice, Insurer shall within 30 calendar days of receipt of the default notice, give written re-sponse notice to the Authorized City Official stating whether it will assume or decline to assume the obligations of the Principal for completion of the subject improvements; and should it elect to assume said obligations Insurer shall be required to complete the subject improvements to the satisfaction of the City within 30 calendar days of said response notice or the date of completion of the subject improvements provided for under the Agreement, whichever is later. In the event that Insurer elects to assume the obligations of Principal as provided herein and thereafter fails to faithfully perform all or any part of the work, or should it unnecessarily delay all or any part of the work, the City may proceed as provided in paragraph 5 of the Bond.
5. Should Insurer, following notice of default, notify the City that it elects not to assume the obligations of Principal for completion of the subject improvements under the Agreement; or fails within 30 calendar days of receipt of the default notice as provided in paragraph 4 above to notify the City whether it elects to assume the obligations of Principal; or having elected to assume the obligations of Principal should it then fail to perform; then in either event the City may elect any of the following procedures or any combination thereof:
(A) Terminate whatever rights Principal and/or Insurer may have to perform further work on the project.
(B) Make demand on the Insurer for cash payment to be rendered immediately, but in no case less than five business days, and without further action, in the total amount of the Bond less the actual cost of the subject im-provements expended as of the date of demand. Such expenditures shall be evidenced by invoices and proof of payments and shall be subject to review and acceptance by the City as to reasonableness.
(C) Take over or contract anew all or any part of the work on the subject improvements that is not completed and complete the same. The Principal and Insurer shall be jointly and severally liable to the City for all costs incurred in completion of the subject improvements and/or correction thereof. Such costs shall include necessary repairs, replacement or restoration of work previously completed and any cost to satisfy any liens or encumbrances placed on the subject improvements; provided however, that Insurers liability shall not be greater than the total amount of the Bond.
(D) Take such other action as necessary, including but not limited to institution of legal action in a Court of com-petent jurisdiction, to compel payment of the total amount of the Bond or all costs incurred by the City in comple-tion of the subject improvements and/or correction thereof, whichever is the larger amount, plus Court costs and attorneys fees.
The Principal and Insurer consent and agree to comply with any and all elections of the above remedies, proce-dures and demands with respect thereto exercised by the City and further agree in the event of a failure to so comply with any demand made by the City pursuant to Paragraphs 4 and 5 herein, then they consent to and waive protest against the entry of a consent judgment in an amount no less than the total amount of the Bond or such greater amount to cover the cost of completion of the subject improvements, plus Court costs and attorneys'
City of Duluth UDC
11-74
fees; provided, however, that any such judgment against the Insurer shall not exceed the total amount of the Bond.
6. Insurer shall have the right, at any time within 30 days of the default notice provided for in 4(B) hereof, to re-quest that the Authorized City Official determine a sum constituting the total amount of the Bond less the actual cost of the subject improvements expended as of the date of demand (as evidenced by invoices and proof of payments acceptable to the Authorized City Official as to reasonableness, but not including payments for inade-quate or improper construction), as of that time. Should it so elect, Insurer may then pay over to the City the sum so determined and be released from any further obligations under this Bond. If funds are paid over under this sec-tion and the paid-over funds are not sufficient to complete the work, the City's sole remedy shall be to proceed against the Principal for any deficiency.
7. If any action or proceeding is initiated in connection with this bond and any and all obligations arising hereun-der, the venue thereof shall be the City of Duluth, Georgia, and it is further understood and agreed that this con-tract shall be governed by the laws of the State of Georgia, both as to interpretation and performance.
8. All notices sent to the Principal and Insurer shall be sent to the addresses set forth on the signature page un-less said Principal and Insurer notify the Authorized City Official in writing of such change. If the address of the Principal or Insurer changes, the Principal or Insurer shall immediately notify the Authorized City Official in writing of such change. Failure to notify the Authorized City Official of any change in address is deemed to be a waiver of any requirement for notice under this Bond to the Principal or Insurer. All written notice to the City required under this Bond shall be sent certified mail and addressed to the Authorized City Official with a copy to the City Attorney.
9. If any one or more of the provisions of this Bond are determined to be illegal or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, all other provisions shall remain in effect.
10. The Principal, his agents, employees or contractors, will comply with the applicable ordinances, laws, regula-tions and requirements of the City, including the Unified Development Code of the City of Duluth.
11. The Principal will hold harmless the City or any of its officers from any expense incurred through the failure of the Principal to perform or complete its obligations under the Agreement, or from any damages growing out of the negligence of the Principal, or his agents, employees or contractors.
12. Approval of this Bond by the City of Duluth Mayor and City Council shall be deemed acceptance without fur-ther notice to the Principal and/or Insurer.
13. The failure of the City to enforce or timely comply with any provision of this Bond shall not be deemed a waiv-er of the obligation of the Principal and Insurer hereunder.
14. Upon completion of the subject improvements, all monies due to third parties for such work will have been paid (or if not will be the responsibility of the Principal), that the improvements will be free and clear of any liens or encumbrances and that any liens or encumbrances subsequently filed on such facilities and improvements cov-ered herein shall be the sole responsibility of the Principal.
15. The provisions and obligations of this Bond shall be controlled by and interpreted by the provisions and re-quirements of the Unified Development Code of the City of Duluth, Georgia, in effect as of the date of execution of this Bond by the Principal and Insurer.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto have caused this agreement to be SIGNED, SEALED AND DELIV-ERED this ______________ day of ______________ , 20____ :
PRINCIPAL:
ATTEST:
(Print Name of Corporation or entity)
Corporate Secretary (affix Corporate Seal), or
Notary Public (attach Certificate of Corporate Reso-lution)
Signature
City of Duluth UDC Section 1131 Example Instruments Relating to Improvement Guarantees.
11-75
My commission expires:
Name (of individual signing above)
Address
Date
Telephone number
INSURER:
ATTEST:
(Print Name of Corporation or entity)
Corporate Secretary (affix Corporate Seal), or
Notary Public (attach Certificate of Corporate Reso-lution)
Signature
My commission expires:
Name (of individual signing above)
Address
Date
Telephone number
APPROVED BY THE DULUTH MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
Clerk to the Mayor and City Council
Mayor
Date
Final Inspection has been completed and RE-LEASE IS RECOMMENDED by:
City Engineer
Date
RELEASE OF PERFORMANCE BOND
Director of CommunityDevelopment
Date
City of Duluth UDC
11-76
WARRANTY AGREEMENT FOR REQUIRED LANDSCAPING
(PREPARE ON COMPANY LETTERHEAD)
DATE __________________________
RE: __________________________________________ (Project Name)
__________________________________________ (Site Address)
__________________________________________
To: the City of Duluth Mayor and City Council
This letter is to guarantee the plantings and landscape material required by the City of Duluth Unified Develop-ment Code at the said project for a period of twelve (12) months from the date installation is completed and ap-proved by the City of Duluth Director of Planning and Development or other representative of the City of Duluth Mayor and City Council . Said City approval of installation shall be evidenced by the signature of such authorized representative on the date shown, below. Failure to obtain such City approval shall automatically extend the be-ginning of this warranty period until such approval is granted.
I understand and agree that the Citys Development Inspector or other representative of the City of Duluth Mayor and City Council will perform an inspection of the plantings and landscape material by the end of the twelve (12) month guarantee period. Thereafter, the Owner either will be notified of compliance with the Buffer and Landscap-ing requirements of the City of Duluth Unified Development Code, or will be notified in writing of any replacements or restorations that must be made to maintain such compliance.
I understand and agree that I am required to replace any plantings that are found to be dead or near death, and to replace or restore any landscape material that is damaged or missing, in accordance with the notification of such replacements or restorations made by the City to the Owner. Replacement must be completed within thirty (30) calendar days from said written notification to the Owner from the City or a Performance Surety must be posted with the City for such period as necessary to guarantee replacement or restoration of the plantings or the land-scape material.
Owner or Landscape Contractor:
Date
ATTEST: Notary Public
Signature (affix Corporate Seal if Corporation)
My commission expires:
Printed Name
Address
Address
Telephone number
City of Duluth UDC Section 1131 Example Instruments Relating to Improvement Guarantees.
11-77
Final Inspection has been completed and RE-LEASE IS RECOMMENDED by:
Development Inspector (signature)
Date
RELEASE OF WARRANTY FOR INSTALLATION OF REQUIRED LANDSCAPING
Director of Planning and Development (signature)
Date
City of Duluth UDC
11-78
BLANK PAGE
12-i
Article 12. Appeals
Article 12 describes the process for addressing unusual situa-tions or unique problems that may arise from the strict inter-pretation or enforcement of this Development Code, including appeals from an administrative decision, for a special exception, and for unique hardships restricting reasonable use of a proper-ty.
Table of Contents Page
Section 1201. Appeals; in General. .......................................................................................................... 12-1
1201.01 Types of Appeals. ....................................................................................................................................... 12-1
1201.02 Temporary Suspension of Permitting and Stay of Enforcement. ............................................................... 12-1
1201.03 Applications for Relief. ............................................................................................................................... 12-1
Section 1202. Intent of this Article. ......................................................................................................... 12-2
1202.01 Initiation of an Appeal. ............................................................................................................................... 12-2
1202.02 Approval of an Appeal by the Zoning Board of Appeals. ........................................................................... 12-2
1202.03 Approval of an Appeal by City Council. ...................................................................................................... 12-2
Section 1203. Special Exceptions. ............................................................................................................ 12-3
1203.01 Appellant for a Special Exception............................................................................................................... 12-3
1203.02 General Limitations on Relief. .................................................................................................................... 12-3
1203.03 Standards for Approval. ............................................................................................................................. 12-3
1203.04 Administrative Approval. ........................................................................................................................... 12-3
Table 12-A: Special Exceptions ................................................................................................................... 12-4
1203.05 Limitations on Special Exception Approval. ............................................................................................... 12-6
Section 1204. Hardship Variances. .......................................................................................................... 12-6
1204.01 Appellant. ................................................................................................................................................... 12-6
1204.02 Conditions Governing Applications. ........................................................................................................... 12-6
1204.03 Limitations on hardship variance approval. ............................................................................................... 12-7
1204.04 Documentation. ......................................................................................................................................... 12-7
Section 1205. Floodplain Management Variances. ................................................................................... 12-7
1205.01 Appellant. ................................................................................................................................................... 12-7
1205.02 Floodplain Management Variances; General. ............................................................................................ 12-7
1205.03 Floodplain Management Variance Procedures. ......................................................................................... 12-7
1205.04 Standards for Approval. ............................................................................................................................. 12-9
1205.05 Requirements if Approved. ........................................................................................................................ 12-9
Section 1206. Process for Granting a Special Exception or Variance. ........................................................ 12-9
1206.01 Application and Initial Actions. .................................................................................................................. 12-9
1206.02 Public Notice. ........................................................................................................................................... 12-10
1206.03 Withdrawal............................................................................................................................................... 12-11
1206.04 Conducting a Public Hearing. ................................................................................................................... 12-11
1206.05 Decisions by the Zoning Board of Appeals. .............................................................................................. 12-12
Table of Contents Continued City of Duluth UDC
12-ii
1206.06 Decisions by the City Council. .................................................................................................................. 12-13
1206.07 Conditional approval. .............................................................................................................................. 12-13
1206.08 Re-Application. ........................................................................................................................................ 12-14
Section 1207. Appeals of an Administrative Decision. ............................................................................ 12-14
1207.01 Appellant. ................................................................................................................................................ 12-14
1207.02 Initiation of Administrative Appeal. ........................................................................................................ 12-14
1207.03 Action by the City Council. ...................................................................................................................... 12-14
12-1
Article 12. Appeals
Section 1201. Appeals; in General.
1201.01 Types of Appeals.
Persons may appeal for relief under the following circumstances:
(a) Appeals of a Legislative nature.
(1) Special exception.
When an exception is desired for a particular property from certain requirements of this Development Code, as specified in this Article, which is not inconsistent with the protection of the public health, safety or general welfare.
(2) Administrative decision.
When aggrieved by an action or an interpretation of the Planning and Development Direc-tor or any other administrative official of the City made under this Development Code. An administrative official is defined as the head of any department subject to these regula-tions.
(b) Appeals of a Quasi-judicial nature.
(1) Hardship variance.
When compliance with the requirements of this Development Code would create a particu-lar hardship unique to a property due to physical characteristics that are beyond the own-ers control.
(2) Floodplain management variance.
When the requirements of this Development Code for floodplain management would cre-ate an exceptional hardship that would adversely affect the use of a property or an historic structure.
1201.02 Temporary Suspension of Permitting and Stay of Enforcement.
(a) Upon submission of a valid and complete application for the granting of an appeal on a proper-ty, no permits shall be issued nor shall any actions be undertaken on the property by the owner or an employee, representative or contractee of the owner that may be affected by the out-come of such application.
(b) Stay of Proceedings. An appeal stays all judicial proceedings in furtherance of the action ap-pealed from, unless the Director from whom the appeal is taken certifies after the notice of ap-peal is filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case judicial proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order by a court of competent jurisdiction.
1201.03 Applications for Relief.
An application for any type of appeal as listed under Section 1201.01 shall be filed in writing with the Planning and Development Director on a form provided by the Department, along with supporting documents, that explain in detail the reasons and facts supporting the application.
Section 1202 Intent of this Article. City of Duluth UDC
12-2
Section 1202. Intent of this Article.
1202.01 Initiation of an Appeal.
It is the intent of this Article that all questions of interpretation and application of the provisions of this Development Code shall be first presented to the Planning and Development Director, and that an appeal of an adverse decision of the Director shall follow the procedure appropriate to the type of appeal as defined under Section 1201.01 and as proscribed by this Article.
1202.02 Approval of an Appeal by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(a) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide requests seeking justice and equity from unique situations that are alleged to have resulted in an unnecessary and unwarranted hardship
on a property, and from exceptional hardships cre-ated by the floodplain management provisions of this Development Code. The procedure for deciding such questions shall be as set forth in this Article with regard to hardship vari-ances and floodplain man-agement variances, as ap-propriate.
(b) The Zoning Board of Ap-peals shall hear and decide special exception requests that have been denied by the Planning and Devel-opment Director or are be-yond administrative ap-proval parameters.
(c) A decision by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be final unless appealed to the City Council, which ap-peal must be brought with-
in 15 days of the Zoning Board of Appeals decision.
1202.03 Approval of an Appeal by City Council.
(a) The City Council may hear and finally decide requests for special exceptions and hardship or floodplain management variances that have been included in the application for a proposed de-velopment that is under consideration for a rezoning or special use approval. In such cases, the Zoning Board of Appeals may include its recommendations on such special exceptions or vari-ances in its report, and the City Council shall assume all powers and duties otherwise exercised by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1203 Special Exceptions.
12-3
(b) The City Council shall hear and finally decide all appeals from actions by the Zoning Board of Ap-peals.
(c) The City Council shall hear and finally decide all appeals from an administrative decision not otherwise associated with a special exception or a hardship or floodplain management variance.
(d) Appeal from a final decision by the City Council shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction, and must be brought within 15 days of the City Councils final action.
Section 1203. Special Exceptions.
1203.01 Appellant for a Special Exception.
A request for approval of a special exception on a property shall be brought by the property owner or, with the owners permission, the holder of or applicant for a permit for development or construc-tion on the property.
1203.02 General Limitations on Relief.
Relief shall be limited to the requirements of this Development Code as listed under the special ex-ceptions column on Table 12-A: Special Exceptions.
1203.03 Standards for Approval.
A special exception may be approved upon a finding that the relief, if granted:
(a) Would not cause substantial detriment to the public good; and
(b) Would comply with all fire safety, utility and environmental health code requirements; and
(c) Would not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of the environment or of other property in the immediate vicinity; and
(d) Would not diminish and impair property values within the surrounding neighborhood; and
(e) Would not impair the purpose and intent of this Development Code.
1203.04 Administrative Approval.
(a) Special exceptions shall be considered for approval by the Zoning Appeals Board unless the re-quest is approved administratively.
(b) The Planning and Development Director, upon a finding that a special exception meets the standards for approval contained in Section 1203.03 may (but is not required to) administrative-ly approve such special exception within and not exceeding the parameters shown on Table 12-A: Special Exceptions.
(c) Actions following administrative consideration.
(1) Any administrative approval, approval with conditions or denial of a special exception by the Director shall be made in writing to the appellant and also made a part of the Depart-ment's records. Such administrative action shall be made within 15 days of receipt of a complete application for a special exception.
(2) Appeals from the administrative action by the Director on a special exception shall be for-warded to the Zoning Board of Appeals for final action in their normal course of business.
Section 1203 Special Exceptions. City of Duluth UDC
12-4
Table 12-A: Special Exceptions Special Exception Administrative Approval Parameters
Accessory uses and buildings:
An increase in the maximum allowable size of an accesso-ry building.
Any increase may be approved that is consistent with the use or normal operations of the proposed building and is compatible with neighboring properties. Any building so increased must obtain issuance of a building permit.
The placement or construc-tion of an accessory use or building on a lot prior to or in lieu of a principal use or building.
Administrative approval is not available.
Buffers, landscaping and tree protection.
Modification or waiver of the standards for zoning buffers, site landscaping or tree protection may be authorized by the Planning and Development Director in specific cases when, in the Directors opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance; provided any such determination shall be based fundamentally on the fact that unusual topographical or other exceptional conditions require such modification, and that the granting of the modification will not adversely affect the general public welfare or nullify the intent of this Development Code.
Fences within the required front yard in a residential district.
Fences within the required front yard must meet the following specifications and conditions for administrative approval:
a. The special exception application must include the following:
picture of fence (i.e., drawing, sketch, brochure, manufacturers literature, photograph or other pictorial documentation) and property survey showing the location of the fence, house and street frontage
1. A drawing, sketch, brochure, manufacturers literature, photograph or other pictorial documentation of the proposed fence; and
2. A property survey showing the location of the fence, the house or other principal building, and the street frontage.
b. The maximum height shall be 3 feet.
c. Fence shall be constructed with natural wood, simulated wood, brick columns or decorative ornamental iron only.
d. The distance between the pickets of a picket fence must be a minimum of 2 inches.
e. The color of the fence must be natural wood colors, neutral colors such as white, beige, ivory, cream off-white, or black, dark green wrought iron or the same color as the faade of the principal structure on the property.
f. The fence shall be maintained at all times by the property owner and/or occupant of the property.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1203 Special Exceptions.
12-5
Table 12-A: Special Exceptions Special Exception Administrative Approval Parameters
Land development construction standards.
Modification or waiver of the construction standards of this Development Code regarding land preparation or grading, drainage or erosion control, street design or construction, or the installation of utilities may be authorized by the Planning and Development Director in specific cases when, in the Directors opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance; provided any such determination shall be based fundamentally on the fact that unusual topographical or other exceptional conditions require such modification, and that the granting of the modification will not adversely affect the general public welfare or nullify the intent of this Development Code.
Maximum building height.
Not to exceed an additional 4 feet above the maximum allowed.
Minimum building setbacks.
a. Not to exceed a reduction in the minimum setback required by 10%, except the front setback may be reduced or waived for a multi-family or nonresidential use if the parking is located in the side or rear yards and the landscaping requirements of this Development Code are met.
b. For a legal nonconforming lot of record, when it is not possible to provide the required side yards and at the same time build a minimum width single-family dwelling, the Planning and Development Director is hereby authorized to grant a special exception reducing the side yard requirements for such lot the minimum amount necessary for a reasonable dwelling but, in no case shall each of the side yards be less than 5 feet in width.
Minimum lot width.
Administrative approval is not available.
Minimum floor area require-ments for dwellings.
Administrative approval is not available.
Nonconforming structure, enlargement or extension of.
Administrative approval is not available.
Parking requirements, such as the number of spaces required or improvement standards for parking lots.
In instances where an applicant shows specific and valid reasons why the requirements of the plan and design standards for off-street parking, the number of off-street parking spaces required or the minimum size and number of off-street loading and unloading spaces cannot be reasonably met and where a reduction of not more than 10 percent in such requirements will not adversely affect the spirit or the intent of this Development Code, the Director may administratively grant such reduction.
Signs.
See Article 6 provisions for Planning and Development Director approval for increasing sign sizes (up to 10%) or the number of signs, and for Master Sign Plan approvals.
Street frontage.
Administrative approval is not available.
Structures that overhang a required setback.
The overhang of a structure into a required setback may be administratively approved for up to no more than 4 feet.
Telecommunication Facilities:
Telecommunication facility setbacks (not a part of a special use application).
Not to exceed a reduction in the minimum setback required by 10%.
Separation between tele-communication towers greater than 70 feet in height.
Not to exceed a reduction in the minimum 1500-foot separation required by 10%, or greater if technologically required based on engineering requirements or visually preferable based on sight line studies or other documentation prepared by the appellant.
Section 1204 Hardship Variances. City of Duluth UDC
12-6
Table 12-A: Special Exceptions Special Exception Administrative Approval Parameters
The number of non-resident employees working in a home-based business.
Administrative approval is not available.
Zoning buffers and screening.
Administrative approval is not available.
1203.05 Limitations on Special Exception Approval.
In no case shall a special exception be granted from the conditions of approval imposed on a proper-ty through a zoning change or special use approval granted by the City Council.
Section 1204. Hardship Variances.
1204.01 Appellant.
A request for a hardship variance on a property shall be brought by the property owner or, with the owners permission, the holder of or applicant for a permit for development or construction on the property.
1204.02 Conditions Governing Applications.
(a) A variance from the terms of this Development Code may be granted where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Development Code would result in un-necessary hardship and such approval will not be contrary to the public interest. A variance from the terms on this Development Code shall not be granted unless a written application for a hardship variance is submitted demonstrating:
(1) That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other land, structures, or buildings in the same district;
(2) That literal interpretation of the provisions of this Ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties within the same district under the terms of this Development Code;
(3) That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the appel-lant;
(4) That granting the variance requested will not confer on the appellant any special privilege that is denied by this Development Code to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district; and,
(5) That the request is limited to the extent necessary to alleviate the unnecessary hardship and not as a convenience to the appellant nor to gain any advantage or interest over simi-larly zoned properties.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1205 Floodplain Management Variances.
12-7
(b) Non-conforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings in the same zoning district, and not permitted or non-conforming use of lands, structures or buildings in other zoning dis-tricts shall not be considered grounds for issuance of a hardship variance.
1204.03 Limitations on hardship variance approval.
In no case shall a hardship variance be granted for any of the following:
(a) A condition created by the applicant, including the result of an unwise investment decision or real estate transaction.
(b) A change in the conditions of approval imposed through a zoning change granted by the City Council.
(c) Reduction of a minimum lot size required by a zoning district except for a lot of record that ex-isted in its entirety prior to the adoption of this Development Code.
(d) A use of land or buildings or structures that is not allowed by the zoning district that is applica-ble to the property, or to alter the density requirements in the zone in question.
(e) Any increase in the number of dwelling units or nonresidential building floor area otherwise al-lowed by the zoning district that is applicable to the property.
1204.04 Documentation.
All applications for a hardship variance shall be accompanied by written information, a plat or draw-ing, or other documentation that clearly explains or shows the basis for the appeal.
Section 1205. Floodplain Management Variances.
1205.01 Appellant.
A request for a floodplain management variance on a property shall be brought by the property owner or, with the owners permission, the holder of or applicant for a permit for development or construction on the property.
1205.02 Floodplain Management Variances; General.
A floodplain management variance may be considered under the following circumstances:
(a) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determina-tion that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued desig-nation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic charac-ter and design of the structure.
(b) Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this Section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the de-velopment is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and cre-ate no additional threats to public safety.
1205.03 Floodplain Management Variance Procedures.
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an appellant who has been denied a permit for a development activity, or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit be-cause it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the floodplain management provisions of this Development Code. A request for a floodplain management variance may be submitted by an appellant to the Planning and Development Director.
Section 1205 Floodplain Management Variances. City of Duluth UDC
12-8
(a) Requests for such variances from the requirements of this Development Code shall be submit-ted to the Planning and Development Director. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures in Section 1206 of this Article, below. At a minimum, such proce-dures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard.
(b) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Appeals Board may appeal such decision to City Council, as provided below.
(c) Floodplain management variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(d) Floodplain management variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this Section are met, no reasonable alter-native exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
(e) Floodplain management variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any in-crease in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(f) In reviewing such requests, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in Floodplain Management Section of this Develop-ment Code.
(g) Conditions for variances:
(1) A Floodplain management variance shall be issued only when there is:
a. A finding of good and sufficient cause;
b. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hard-ship; and,
c. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the crea-tion of a nuisance.
(2) The provisions of the Floodplain Management Section of this Development Code are mini-mum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the in-stance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building.
(3) Any person to whom a floodplain management variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor eleva-tion.
(4) The Planning and Development Director shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(h) Any person requesting a floodplain management variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the
City of Duluth UDC Section 1206 Process for Granting a Special Exception or Variance.
12-9
Planning and Development Director, Zoning Board of Appeals or City Council shall deem neces-sary to the consideration of the request.
(i) Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of floodplain management stated in this Development Code, the Zoning Board of Appeals or the City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of a floodplain management variance as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this Development Code.
(j) Floodplain management variances shall not be issued after the fact.
1205.04 Standards for Approval.
In passing upon a floodplain management variance, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this Develop-ment Code relating to flood damage prevention, and the:
(a) Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(b) Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(c) Susceptibility of the facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(d) Importance of the services provided by the facility to the community;
(e) Necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent facility;
(f) Availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
(g) Compatibility of the use with existing and anticipated development;
(h) Relationship of the use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;
(i) Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including mainte-nance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
1205.05 Requirements if Approved.
(a) Any applicant to whom a floodplain management variance is granted shall be given written no-tice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the building is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life or property.
(b) The Planning and Development Director shall maintain the records of all such variance actions and report any floodplain management variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agen-cy upon request.
Section 1206. Process for Granting a Special Exception or Variance.
1206.01 Application and Initial Actions.
Section 1206 Process for Granting a Special Exception or Variance. City of Duluth UDC
12-10
(a) An application for a special exception, hardship or floodplain management variance shall include such descriptions, maps or drawings as needed to clearly illustrate or explain the action re-quested, and such filing fees as may be required. The Planning and Development Director may request such additional information from the appellant as necessary to provide a full under-standing of the appellants request.
(b) Once the record has been assembled, the Planning and Development Director will:
(1) Schedule unresolved appeals for consideration at the next meeting of the Zoning Board of Appeals for which adequate public notice can be given; and
(2) Send a letter by first class mail to the applicant or his attorney notifying the appellant of ei-ther 1) administrative resolution of the matter or 2) the date, time and place of the public hearing.
1206.02 Public Notice.
(a) Published notice.
At least 15 days prior to the public hearing, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing and shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the nature of the requested action
(b) Posting of signs.
(1) In addition to the newspaper notice, a sign or signs shall be placed by an official of the Planning and Development Department in a conspicuous location on the property frontage in such manner as to be legible from the public road. On lots with more than one road frontage, a sign will be placed facing each public road. If the property has no road frontage, the sign shall be placed on each road at a location where access will be gained to the prop-erty.
(2) The sign(s) must be in place no less than 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing and shall state the date, time and place for the Zoning Board of Appeals public hearing and the nature of the proposed variance.
(c) Sufficiency of public notice.
(1) Where published notice is given in accordance with this Section and a sign has been posted in accordance with this Section, no further notice to interested parties or adjacent or near-by property owners is required.
(2) As a matter of courtesy, the City may provide notification of the application by regular mail to all abutting property owners as shown by tax records prior to the public hearing which shall include a description of the application and the date, time and place of the public hearing. This notification shall be deemed made upon the mailing of the notice to persons listed on the tax records as owners of abutting property at the addresses shown on the tax records, regardless of whether the notice is actually received and regardless of whether ownership of abutting property has changed.
(3) Appearance of a person at the public hearing shall constitute a waiver of any claims by such person based upon improper publication of notice or posting on the property by such per-son.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1206 Process for Granting a Special Exception or Variance.
12-11
1206.03 Withdrawal.
Any appellant wishing to withdraw a special exception or variance application prior to final action on the application shall file a written request for withdrawal with the Planning and Development Direc-tor.
(a) The withdrawal request must be in writing and signed by the owner, the appellant or the own-ers authorized agent.
(b) If the request for withdrawal is received prior to the publication of notice for the public hearing as required under Section 1206.02, the application shall be withdrawn administratively by the Planning and Development Director.
(c) If a request for withdrawal of the application is received after notice has been published (or irre-trievably set for publication) for the scheduled public hearing, the appeal may be withdrawn at the public hearing with the consent of the Zoning Board of Appeals and removed from further consideration.
1206.04 Conducting a Public Hearing.
(a) Procedures.
(1) All public hearings held by the Zoning Board of Appeals to which this Article applies shall be held in accordance with the procedures of this Subsection.
(2) The presiding official may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena.
(3) The presiding official shall conduct the public hearing informally, as strict adherence to the rules of evidence is not required.
(4) All parties participating in the public hearing shall introduce only relevant evidence.
(5) All parties participating shall have the right to present witnesses and to cross-examine wit-nesses.
(b) Opening hearings.
The presiding official shall open the public hearing by stating the matter being considered at the hearing. At this time, the presiding official may summarize the public hearing procedures.
(c) Background and recommendations.
An official of the Planning and Development Department shall submit the assembled record of the request to the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Planning and Development Official shall provide such information or explanation as appropriate to the circumstances of the request.
(d) Proponents of the requested special exception or variance.
(1) Persons who support the request will be asked to comment first. The appellant or their des-ignated agent may, upon recognition and upon statement of name, address and relation-ship to the matter, present and explain the request. The appellant may appear in person or may be represented by an agent or counsel.
(2) The appellant or the appellants representative shall be required to attend the public hear-ing unless written notice of hardship is received prior to the hearing. Failure of the appel-lant or the appellants representative to attend the public hearing, except in cases of hard-ship, may be due cause for the tabling of the application.
Section 1206 Process for Granting a Special Exception or Variance. City of Duluth UDC
12-12
(3) The appellant shall have the burden of proof, which shall include the presentation of evi-dence and the burden of persuasion of each factor necessary to receive the approval of the request by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(4) After completion of the presentation of the appellant, other persons who support the re-quest will be asked to comment, and will be allowed to speak in support of the request up-on recognition and upon identification of the person's name, address, and relationship to the matter.
(e) Persons opposing the requested special exception or variance.
Persons who oppose the request will next be asked to comment. Each interested person, after being recognized, and providing their name, address and relationship to the matter shall be af-forded an opportunity to speak.
(f) Rebuttal.
The appellant shall have an opportunity for rebuttal concerning the request. Rebuttal must be limited to points or issues raised by opponents to the application at the hearing.
(g) Time limitations.
The presiding officer has the discretion to impose time limitations on comments of each person, provided that no less than ten minutes shall be allowed for all those speaking in support of the request and no less than ten minutes shall be permitted for those speaking against the request.
(h) Discussion.
All public comments having been heard, the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals may dis-cuss the matter among themselves. During this discussion period, the members may call on the Planning and Development Official, any proponent or opponent, or other persons in attendance to clarify points made previously, to answer questions or to provide additional information. Such persons may respond upon recognition.
(i) Delay, rescheduling or continuation of hearing.
A public hearing on a request may be delayed, rescheduled or continued to another time and date, provided the announcement of the new time, place and date is given at the time and place of the advertised hearing, which announcement shall constitute public notice for the delayed, rescheduled or continued hearing.
(j) Transcription.
(1) All proceedings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be recorded on tape or other media. The recording of the proceedings shall be retained until any further appeals on a request have been exhausted.
(2) The appellant or any person in opposition to the request, at their expense, is allowed to have the public hearing transcribed by a court reporter.
1206.05 Decisions by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(a) Findings of fact.
(1) Following the public hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt findings of fact sup-porting their decision and may adopt any additional report it deems appropriate.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1206 Process for Granting a Special Exception or Variance.
12-13
(2) In order to approve an application, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall further make a find-ing that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the special exception or variance and that approval would be the minimum needed to make possible the reason-able use of the land, building or structure.
(3) In preparing its findings or report, the Zoning Board of Appeals must consider the standards for approval set forth for a special exception under Section 1203.03(a), for a hardship vari-ance under Section 1204.02 and Section 1204.03, or for a floodplain management variance under Section 1205.04, as applicable.
(b) Decision.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall approve, approve with conditions or deny an application by majority vote no later than their next regularly scheduled meeting at which a quorum is present following the public hearing. If no decision obtains a majority vote, the application shall be con-sidered denied unless the appellant agrees to a tabling of the application to the Boards next regularly scheduled meeting.
(c) Appeal.
A decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall only be appealed to the City Council, and must be filed with the City Clerk within 15 days of the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals. If ap-pealed to the City Council, the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have an advisory ef-fect only and shall not be binding on the City Council.
(d) Written decision.
The appellant shall be informed in writing of the Boards decision and the findings of fact regard-ing the decision, which will be sent by regular mail within 7 days of the date of the decision. Failure to receive the written decision within 7 days shall not constitute a procedural error on the part of the City, nor affect the decision of the Board in any manner.
1206.06 Decisions by the City Council.
(a) The City Council shall consider an appeal of a decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals and take action on the application at its next regularly scheduled meeting that occurs at least 7 days after receipt of the appeal by the City Clerk.
(b) To take action is defined as to approve, to approve with conditions, to disapprove or to table the application. In taking such action, the City Council may ratify the findings of fact and decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals, or shall adopt their own findings of fact that support their ac-tion.
(c) If the City Council fails to make a decision within 60 days after the date of the decision on the application by the Zoning Board of Appeals, the decision by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall stand and be considered final. For the purposes of this paragraph, 60-days shall mean until the regular meeting of the City Council occurring no later than two calendar months following the Boards decision.
(d) Decision Final.
A decision of the City Council shall be final and may be appealed only to a court of competent jurisdiction. Such appeal must be taken within 15 days of the adoption of the minutes of the City Council meeting at which the decision was made.
1206.07 Conditional approval.
Section 1207 Appeals of an Administrative Decision. City of Duluth UDC
12-14
In granting any special exception or variance, the Zoning Board of Appeals or the City Council may impose appropriate conditions of approval which it deems necessary in order to make the requested action acceptable and consistent with the purposes of this Development Code and of the zoning dis-trict(s) involved, to ameliorate negative issues identified through evaluation of the special exception or variance, or to further the goals and objectives of any plans adopted by the City. Violation of such conditions of approval, when made a part of the term under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Development Code and punishable under the provisions of Article 13.
1206.08 Re-Application.
If an application for a special exception or a hardship or floodplain management variance on a prop-erty is denied by the Zoning Board of Appeals (or by the City Council upon appeal), a re-application for the same special exception or variance on the same property may not be made until the expira-tion of 12 months from the date of final action on the application, unless the Zoning Board of Ap-peals agrees to waive the 12-month waiting period by majority vote.
Section 1207. Appeals of an Administrative Decision.
1207.01 Appellant.
Any person aggrieved by an alleged error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made in the interpretation or enforcement of this Development Code by an administrative official of the City may initiate an appeal directly to the City Council.
1207.02 Initiation of Administrative Appeal.
(a) An administrative appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the action or interpretation appealed from, by filing the appeal in writing with the Planning and Development Director specifying the grounds of the appeal. The Planning and Development Director shall transmit a notice of said appeal to the City Council specifying the grounds thereof.
(b) The Planning and Development Director may initiate an administrative appeal independently when an interpretation or clarification of the meaning of words or phrases, of the particular boundaries of a zoning district or of any other provision of this Development Code is needed.
1207.03 Action by the City Council.
(a) Upon receiving a notice of an administrative appeal, the Planning and Development Director shall assemble such memos, papers, plans or other documents from the appellant as may con-stitute the record for the appeal or as may provide an understanding of the issues involved.
(b) The Planning and Development Director is authorized to resolve the administrative appeal to the satisfaction of all parties involved, if possible, and may seek the advice of the City Attorney.
(c) The Planning and Development Director shall transmit any unresolved administrative appeal re-quest and all related documentation to the City Clerk such that the administrative appeal re-quest can be considered by the City Council within 30 days of the filing of the appeal with the Planning and Development Director.
(d) The City Council shall consider the appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting that occurs at least 7 days after receipt of the Planning and Development Directors appeal documentation by the City Clerk, and may at its discretion hear from the appellant, the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken, or the Planning and Development Director.
(e) City Council authority.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1207 Appeals of an Administrative Decision.
12-15
The City Council is authorized to:
(1) Decide appeals from any order, determination, decision or other interpretation by any ad-ministrative official acting under authority of this Development Code, where a misinterpre-tation or misapplication of the requirements or other provisions of this Development Code is alleged;
(2) Interpret the use of words or phrases within the context of the intent of this Development Code;
(3) Determine the boundaries of the various zoning districts where uncertainty exists; and,
(4) Interpret such other provisions of this Development Code as may require clarification or ex-tension in specific or general cases.
(f) Decisions of the City Council.
(1) In exercising its powers on administrative appeals, the City Council may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination and to that end shall have all the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken.
(2) Decision final.
The decision of the City Council shall be final and may be appealed only to a court of com-petent jurisdiction. Such appeal must be taken within 15 days of the adoption of the minutes of the City Council meeting at which the decision was made.
City of Duluth UDC
12-16
BLANK PAGE
13-i
Article 13. Administration
Article 13 sets out the structure and responsibilities of the vari-ous administrative officers and boards for administering, amending and enforcing this Development Code, and sets out penalties for violations.
Table of Contents Page
Section 1301. Director of Planning and Development. ............................................................................. 13-1
1301.01 Delegation of Duties. ................................................................................................................................. 13-1
1301.02 Use Permit and Building Permit Required. ................................................................................................ 13-1
1301.03 Certificate of Occupancy Required. ........................................................................................................... 13-1
1301.04 Required Action; Time Period. ................................................................................................................... 13-2
Section 1302. Duluth Planning Commission. ............................................................................................ 13-2
1302.01 Duluth Planning Commission: Creation, Membership, Appointment and Terms of Office. ...................... 13-2
1302.02 Officers. ...................................................................................................................................................... 13-2
1302.03 Procedure. .................................................................................................................................................. 13-2
1302.04 Powers and Duties. .................................................................................................................................... 13-3
Section 1303. Zoning Board of Appeals. .................................................................................................. 13-3
1303.01 Zoning Board of Appeals Creation, Membership, Appointment, Terms of Office. .................................... 13-3
1303.02 Officers. ...................................................................................................................................................... 13-4
1303.03 Procedure. .................................................................................................................................................. 13-4
1303.04 Power and Duties. ...................................................................................................................................... 13-4
Section 1304. Schedules and Fees. .......................................................................................................... 13-4
Section 1305. Development Code Amendments. ..................................................................................... 13-4
1305.01 Amendments Authorized. .......................................................................................................................... 13-4
1305.02 Initiation of Code Amendments. ................................................................................................................ 13-4
1305.03 Code Amendment Process. ........................................................................................................................ 13-5
1305.04 Standards for Code Amendments. ............................................................................................................. 13-5
1305.05 Effect of Code Amendment Approval. ....................................................................................................... 13-6
Section 1306. Annexations. .................................................................................................................... 13-6
1306.01 Zoning Classification of Land upon Annexation. ........................................................................................ 13-6
1306.02 Review by Planning Commission. ............................................................................................................... 13-6
1306.03 Zoning Public Hearing. ............................................................................................................................... 13-6
Section 1307. Violation and Penalties. .................................................................................................... 13-6
1307.01 Violations. .................................................................................................................................................. 13-6
1307.02 Right of Inspection. .................................................................................................................................... 13-7
1307.03 Notice of Violation. .................................................................................................................................... 13-7
1307.04 Violations; Administrative Actions. ............................................................................................................ 13-7
1307.05 Penalties. .................................................................................................................................................... 13-9
1307.06 Other Remedies. ........................................................................................................................................ 13-9
Section 1308. Liability. .......................................................................................................................... 13-10
Section 1301 Director of Planning and Development. City of Duluth UDC
13-ii
BLANK PAGE
13-1
Article 13. Administration
Section 1301. Director of Planning and Development.
It shall be the duty of the Director of the Planning and Development Department who is hereby given the authority, to administer and enforce the provisions of this Development Code. The Director shall be such individual appointed by the City Council. Such person shall be an employee of the City of Du-luth.
1301.01 Delegation of Duties.
The Planning and Development Director may, in his or her discretion and administrative authority, delegate duties and responsibilities to designated employees of the Planning and Development De-partment as needed and appropriate for the administration and enforcement of this Development Code.
1301.02 Use Permit and Building Permit Required.
(a) A building permit shall be required if work entails more than painting, wallpapering, minor non-structural repairs or carpeting. No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered without a building permit issued by the Planning and Development Direc-tor or his or her designated Building Inspector. No building permit shall be issued for a building, structure or use that is not in conformance with the provisions of this Development Code.
(b) All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the sizes and the locations on the lot of any existing buildings or structures, the shape, size, height, use and the location on the lot of the building or structure to be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of this Development Code.
1301.03 Certificate of Occupancy Required.
(a) A Certificate of Occupancy issued by the Building Inspector is required in advance of the use or occupancy of:
(1) Any lot or a change in the use thereof.
(2) A building hereafter erected or a change in the use of an existing building.
(3) Any non-conforming use existing at the time of the enactment of this Development Code or any amendment thereto or that is proposed to be changed, extended, altered or built. The Certificate of Occupancy shall state specifically wherein the non-conforming use fails to meet provisions on this Development Code.
(b) No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued unless the lot or building or structure complies with the provisions of this Development Code and any other City Development Codes pertaining to the development, structure or site.
(c) A record of all Certificates of Occupancy shall be kept on file in the Office of the Building Inspec-tor and a copy shall be furnished on the request of any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved.
Section 1302 Duluth Planning Commission. City of Duluth UDC
13-2
1301.04 Required Action; Time Period.
(a) In each case in this Development Code where the issuance of a permit or other action by any of-ficial of Duluth is required and a time period for such action is specified, then the failure of the official responsible for same to take such action or issue such permit within the stated time pe-riod shall be deemed an approval of the matter or the issuance of the permit, as the case may be.
(b) If at any place in the Development Code an action is required by any such official and no time frame is provided herein, then such timeframe shall be deemed to be 45 calendar days and the failure to act to either approve or deny same or request further information shall be deemed an approval of the matter or the issuance of the permit, as the case may be.
Section 1302. Duluth Planning Commission.
1302.01 Duluth Planning Commission: Creation, Membership, Appointment and Terms of Office.
(a) The Planning Commission is hereby established, which shall consist of five members and one al-ternate, all of whom shall be residents of the City of Duluth or the owner or operator of a busi-ness located within the City of Duluth, provided the business is current in the payment of its City Occupational Tax and all other payments due to the City.,
(1) The five members and the alternate member are to be appointed by the City Council.
(2) Each of the five members shall vote on each matter before it (or may recuse themselves from voting in the case of a conflict of interest or other stated reason). In the absence of one of the five members, or in the case of the recusal of a member, the alternate member shall serve as a voting member and shall be counted for the purposes of establishing a quorum.
(b) The term of office for members shall be four years, said terms to be staggered, to begin on April 1 and end on March 31.
(c) Regardless of any other provision to the contrary contained in this Section, at all times at least four members of the Planning Commission shall be residents of the City of Duluth.
(d) Members of the Planning Commission may be removed for cause or for nonattendance at three consecutive meetings upon written charges and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled by Resolution of the City Council for the remainder of the term of the member affected.
(e) No member of the Planning Commission shall hold elected public office in Duluth.
1302.02 Officers.
The Chairman of the Planning Commission is selected from one of the existing five members and ap-pointed by the Mayor. The Planning Commission shall elect one of its members as Vice-Chairman, and a second as Secretary. The City Council may delegate the administrative and record keeping du-ties of the Planning Commission to an employee of the City of Duluth.
1302.03 Procedure.
(a) The Planning Commission shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs and in keeping with the provisions of this Development Code. All meetings shall be open to the public.
(b) The Planning Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each mem-ber upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep record
City of Duluth UDC Section 1303 Zoning Board of Appeals.
13-3
of its examination and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record and be immedi-ately filed in the Planning and Development Department.
1302.04 Powers and Duties.
The Planning Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
(a) To review applications and make findings and recommendations for zoning map amendments and special use requests as set forth in Article 11 of this Development Code in accordance with the review standards therein.
(b) To review applications and make findings and recommendations regarding Master Sign Plans as may be referred to the Planning Commission by the Director.
(c) To review proposals and make findings and recommendations for code amendments as set forth in Section 1305 in accordance with the review standards under Section 1305.04 therein.
(d) To initiate, direct and review, from time to time, a study of the provisions of this Development Code and to make reports of its findings and recommendations as to needed amendments to the City Council.
(e) To carry out such other duties, responsibilities or activities as may be requested by the City Council.
(f) To have final authority, at least three members must concur to approve an application. Each of-ficial action shall contain a statement of the grounds and findings forming the basis for said de-cision, and the text of the motion and record of members votes shall be incorporated in the minutes of the Planning Commission.
Section 1303. Zoning Board of Appeals.
1303.01 Zoning Board of Appeals Creation, Membership, Appointment, Terms of Office.
(a) A Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby established, which shall consist of five members and one al-ternate member, all of whom shall be residents of the City of Duluth or the owner or operator of a business located within the City of Duluth, provided the business is current in payment of its City Occupational Tax and all other payments due the City.
(1) The five members and the alternate member are to be appointed by the City Council, each for a term of four years, said terms to be staggered, to begin on April 1 and end on March 31.
(2) Each of the five members shall vote on each matter before it (or may recuse themselves from voting in the case of a conflict of interest or other stated reason). In the absence of one of the five members, or in the case of the recusal of a member, the alternate member shall serve as a voting member and shall be counted for the purposes of establishing a quorum.
(b) Regardless of any other provision to the contrary contained in this Section, at all times at least four members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be residents of the City of Duluth.
(c) Members of the Zoning Board of Appeals may be removed from office by the City Council for cause or for nonattendance at three consecutive meetings upon written charges and after a public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled by resolution of the City Council for the unexpired term of the member affected.
Section 1304 Schedules and Fees. City of Duluth UDC
13-4
(d) One member of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be a member of the Planning Commission. No other member of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold an elected or appointed public office in Duluth Government.
1303.02 Officers.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall elect one of its members, other than the member of the Planning Commission, as Chairman, a second one as Vice-Chairman, and a third as Secretary. The Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Secretary shall serve one year or until re-elected or until successors are elected. The City Council may delegate the administrative and record keeping duties of the Zoning Board of Appeals to an employee of the City of Duluth.
1303.03 Procedure.
(a) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs provided such rules are not in conflict with the provisions of this Development Code. Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. All meet-ings shall be open to the public.
(b) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep rec-ords of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record and be immediately filed in the Planning and Development Department.
1303.04 Power and Duties.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power and duty to consider and decide requests for spe-cial exceptions referred to it by the Director, hardship variances and floodplain management vari-ances, in accordance with the provisions and procedures contained in Article 12, Appeals.
Section 1304. Schedules and Fees.
(a) From time to time, the City Council may adopt fees for the issuance of permits, the submission of applications, and such other activities and authorizations as regulated by this Development Code, and may adopt schedules of dates, times and places as appropriate and necessary to regu-late the application, review and public hearing processes required by this Development Code.
(b) The schedule of fees shall be available in the Planning and Development Department office, and may be altered or amended only by the City Council.
(c) Until all applicable fees have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application, per-mit or appeal.
Section 1305. Development Code Amendments.
1305.01 Amendments Authorized.
This Development Code may be amended from time to time in whole or in part by the City Council, including the re-adoption or comprehensive amendment of the Official Zoning Map. Any amendment to or insertion of a new Article, Section, Subsection or Paragraph, or any comprehensive Zoning Map Amendment shall be considered and acted upon by the City Council under the provisions of this Sec-tion.
1305.02 Initiation of Code Amendments.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1305 Development Code Amendments.
13-5
Only the City Council may initiate a change to the text of this Development Code or a comprehensive amendment to the Zoning Map. Such an initiation may be in response to a request from the Director, the Planning Commission, the Board of Zoning Appeals, or any private citizen or property owner, or on its own motion, upon a determination that the public necessity, general welfare or good zoning practice justifies such action.
1305.03 Code Amendment Process.
No amendment to the text of this Development Code or comprehensive amendment to the Zoning Map (hereinafter referred to as a code amendment) shall become effective unless it shall have been submitted to the Planning Commission for review and recommendations.
(a) Public Notice.
Before enacting a code amendment to this Development Code, the city shall hold public hear-ings thereon. At least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to each public hearing, notice is to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The notice is to state the time, place and purpose of the hearing.
(b) Public Hearings; Procedures.
Public hearings by the Planning Commission and the City Council on a code amendment shall fol-low the same procedures as a public hearing for a rezoning or special use, as described under Article 11 of this Development Code.
(c) Decision on a Code Amendment.
(1) The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation for approval, denial or such other action it deems appropriate, no later than their next regularly scheduled meeting following their public hearing, or the proposed amendment shall go forward with no recommenda-tion. The report of the Planning Commission shall be forwarded in writing to the City Coun-cil for final approval or denial.
(2) The City Council shall hold its public hearing and take action on each code amendment at a regularly scheduled meeting for which adequate notice can be published.
(3) The Planning Director shall maintain a record and date of such amendments as approved or denied by the City Council, and shall update this Development Code or the Zoning Map as amended within 30 calendar days of the City Councils action.
1305.04 Standards for Code Amendments.
The Planning Commission and the City Council shall consider the following standards in reviewing any code amendment to this Development Code, giving due weight or priority to those factors that are appropriate to the circumstances of each proposal:
(a) Is the proposed amendment consistent with the purpose and intent of this Development Code as stated under Article 1?
(b) Does the proposed amendment further or is it compatible with the purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan?
(c) Is the proposed amendment required to adequately address new or changing conditions or to properly implement the Comprehensive Plan?
(d) Does the proposed amendment reasonably promote the public health, safety, morality or gen-eral welfare?
Section 1306 Annexations. City of Duluth UDC
13-6
1305.05 Effect of Code Amendment Approval.
(a) Approval of a code amendment shall be in full force and effect upon its approval by the City Council or upon the stated effective date thereof.
(b) For a property on which a use, building, structure or other improvements existed in conformity with this Development Code prior to the effective date of a text amendment affecting the prop-erty, any such use, building, structure or other improvements no longer in conformance shall be governed by the provisions for Nonconforming Development under Article 1 of this Develop-ment Code, as applicable.
(c) Construction of any use, building, structure, or other improvements for which a building permit has been issued in conformity with this Development Code prior to the effective date of a code amendment may continue to completion as though no change had occurred and, upon comple-tion, shall be governed by the provisions for Nonconforming Development under Article 1 of this Development Code, as applicable.
Section 1306. Annexations.
1306.01 Zoning Classification of Land upon Annexation.
(a) Any land subsequently annexed into the City shall be classified by the City Council as to the zon-ing district or districts at the time of annexation provided that before the zoning decision and annexation are approved, a public hearing is held concerning the zoning decision.
(b) The City Council in determining the zoning classification may take into account the use re-strictions on the land prior to annexation and the Land Use Plan and Comprehensive Plan.
1306.02 Review by Planning Commission.
The Planning Commission shall review the proposed annexation and shall report its recommendation for zoning of the property or properties involved to the City Council within 30 days of the request for a recommendation.
1306.03 Zoning Public Hearing.
(a) The public hearing held by the City Council concerning the zoning decision may be held in con-junction with the public hearing concerning annexation.
(b) A notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be published at least 15 days, but no more than 45 days, prior to said public hearing in the official legal organ of the City of Duluth. The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. The notice shall also include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property within Gwinnett County, and the proposed zoning classification of the property.
(c) A sign containing the same information as contained in the published notice shall be placed in a conspicuous location on the property by the property owner not less than 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing.
Section 1307. Violation and Penalties.
1307.01 Violations.
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this Development Code or any permit issued thereunder, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this Section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be
City of Duluth UDC Section 1307 Violation and Penalties.
13-7
abated by injunctive or other equitable relief, as described under Section 1307.06(a). The undertak-ing of any administrative enforcement action or the imposition of any of the penalties described be-low shall not prevent such equitable relief.
1307.02 Right of Inspection.
(a) The Planning and Development Director or the Directors designee, or other responsible en-forcement agents, officers or employees of the City shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their assigned and official duties under this Develop-ment Code and may take or cause to be made such examination, surveys or sampling as such enforcement officers or employees deem necessary.
(b) Law enforcement officials or other officials having police powers shall have authority to assist the Director in enforcement activities.
1307.03 Notice of Violation.
If the Planning and Development Director determines that an owner, occupant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the requirements and provisions of this Development Code, the Di-rector shall issue or direct the issuance of a written notice of violation to such owner, occupant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this Code without having first secured a permit authorizing the work, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner, oc-cupant or other responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site.
(a) The notice of violation shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the owner, occupant or other responsible person, if known;
(2) The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring;
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into com-pliance with this Code and the date for the completion of such remedial action;
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and
(6) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Planning and De-velopment Director by filing a written notice of appeal within 10 working days after the no-tice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient).
(b) If the identity of the owner, occupant or the responsible person cannot be determined, the no-tice of violation may be posted in a prominent and visible location on the property where the violation has occurred or is occurring. Such posting shall establish constructive and sufficient no-tice of the violation to such owner, occupant or responsible person regarding the violation.
1307.04 Violations; Administrative Actions.
(a) In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been complet-ed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, the City may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent or remedy such violation or attempted violation in lieu of or as a precedent to legal action.
(b) Before taking any of the following actions, the Planning and Development Director shall first no-tify the owner, occupant or other responsible person in writing of his or her intended action,
Section 1307 Violation and Penalties. City of Duluth UDC
13-8
and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than 10 working days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation.
(c) In the event the owner, occupant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the Planning and Development Director may take any one or more of the following actions:
(1) Stop work order.
The Planning and Development Director may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the owner, occupant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the owner, occupant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or viola-tions described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the owner, occupant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations.
(2) Cease and desist order.
The Planning and Development Director may issue a cease and desist order when appropri-ate to the type of violation of this Development Code.
(3) Withhold certificate of occupancy.
The Planning and Development Director may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for any building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the owner, occupant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein.
(4) Suspension, revocation or modification of permit.
The Planning and Development Director may suspend, revoke or modify the permit author-izing a development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the owner, occupant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, pro-vided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the Director may deem nec-essary) to enable the owner, occupant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations.
(5) Removal of illegal structures.
When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this Development Code, the violator may be required to remove the structure or bring said structure into compliance with this Development Code, at the discretion of the Planning and Develop-ment Director.
(6) Restoration of vegetative cover.
When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this De-velopment Code, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practical, at the discretion of the Planning and Development Director.
(7) Clean Water Act notifications.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1307 Violation and Penalties.
13-9
If the Director discovers a violation of this Development Code that also constitutes a viola-tion of provisions of the Clean Water Act as amended, the Planning and Development Di-rector may issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the landowner.
1307.05 Penalties.
(a) Civil penalties.
In the event the owner, occupant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within 10 working days, or such greater period as the Planning and Development Direc-tor shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the Director has taken one or more of the actions described above, the Director may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains un-remedied after receipt of the notice of violation.
(b) Criminal penalties.
(1) For intentional and flagrant violations of this Development Code, or intransigence on the part of the owner, occupant or other responsible person, the Planning and Development Director may issue a citation to the owner, occupant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon con-viction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for not more than 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any viola-tion shall occur shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) In addition to any criminal penalty imposed by the court, the City may recover all attorneys fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this Development Code from the convicted party or parties responsible for the violation.
1307.06 Other Remedies.
(a) Equitable relief.
(1) In any case in which a violation of this Development Code has occurred, the City Council, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may petition for a restraining order, injunction, abatement, or take any other appropriate legal action or proceeding through a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain or abate such unlawful use or activity.
(2) If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, con-verted, or maintained; or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of this Devel-opment Code, the City Council or any adjacent or other property owner who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, man-damus or other appropriate action in proceeding to stop the violation in the case of such building, structure or land use.
(b) Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this Development Code are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable Federal, State or local law and the City may seek cumulative remedies.
Section 1308 Liability. City of Duluth UDC
13-10
Section 1308. Liability.
(a) Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this Development Code, nor the issuance of a permit, nor the compliance with provisions of this Code, shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the City for damage to any person or property.
(b) Any permit or other authorization issued in error or otherwise issued contrary to the require-ments of this Development Code, or authorizing construction activity or use on a property not allowed by this Development Code, is null and void on its face and shall have no effect or stand-ing.
14-i
Article 14. Interpretation and Definitions
Article 14 describes how figures, words, and phrases used in this Development Code are to be interpreted, and provides a glossa-ry of all definitions specifically used in the text of this Develop-ment Code.
Table of Contents Page
Section 1401. Purpose ............................................................................................................................ 14-1
Section 1402. Interpretation. .................................................................................................................. 14-1
1402.01 Responsibility for Interpretation. ............................................................................................................... 14-1
1402.02 Use of Figures and Examples for Illustration.............................................................................................. 14-1
1402.03 Use of Words and Phrases. ........................................................................................................................ 14-1
1402.04 Meaning of Words and Phrases. ................................................................................................................ 14-3
Section 1403. Glossary of Definitions ...................................................................................................... 14-4
A ................................................................................................................................................................. 14-4
B ................................................................................................................................................................. 14-5
C ................................................................................................................................................................. 14-7
D ................................................................................................................................................................. 14-9
E ............................................................................................................................................................... 14-11
F ................................................................................................................................................................ 14-12
G ............................................................................................................................................................... 14-14
H ............................................................................................................................................................... 14-15
I ................................................................................................................................................................ 14-16
J ................................................................................................................................................................ 14-17
K ............................................................................................................................................................... 14-17
L ................................................................................................................................................................ 14-17
M .............................................................................................................................................................. 14-19
N ............................................................................................................................................................... 14-21
O ............................................................................................................................................................... 14-22
P ............................................................................................................................................................... 14-24
Q ............................................................................................................................................................... 14-27
R ............................................................................................................................................................... 14-27
S ................................................................................................................................................................ 14-29
T ............................................................................................................................................................... 14-38
U ............................................................................................................................................................... 14-41
V ............................................................................................................................................................... 14-42
W .............................................................................................................................................................. 14-42
X ............................................................................................................................................................... 14-43
Y ............................................................................................................................................................... 14-43
Z................................................................................................................................................................ 14-44
City of Duluth UDC
14-ii
BLANK PAGE
14-1
Article 14. Interpretation and Definitions
Section 1401. Purpose
This Article describes how figures, words and phrases used in this Development Code are to be inter-preted, and provides a glossary of all definitions specifically used in the text of this Development Code.
Section 1402. Interpretation.
1402.01 Responsibility for Interpretation.
(a) The Planning and Development Director shall be responsible for the interpretation of the re-quirements, standards, definitions, or any other provision of this Development Code.
(b) Interpretations of the Planning and Development Director may be appealed under the provi-sions of this Development Code relating to Appeals.
1402.02 Use of Figures and Examples for Illustration.
Figures or examples associated with defined terms or regulatory paragraphs in this Development Code are provided only for illustration and do not limit or change the meaning of the term as defined or the requirements of the regulation as written.
1402.03 Use of Words and Phrases.
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this Development Code have their customary dictionary definitions.
For the purposes of this Development Code, certain words or terms used herein shall be defined as follows:
(a) Words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular.
(b) Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
(c) The word structure includes the word building; a building is a type of structure.
(d) The word erected includes the words constructed, moved, located, or relocated.
(e) The word lot includes the words plot or parcel.
(f) The words zoning map or zoning atlas means the Official Zoning Map of the City of Duluth, Georgia.
(g) The words road, street, highway, and thoroughfare have the same meaning with regard to the requirements and restrictions of this Code.
(h) The word person includes the words individuals, firms, partnerships, corporations, associations, governmental bodies, and all other legal entities.
(i) The words shall, will, is to, and must are always mandatory and never discretionary.
(j) The words may and should are discretionary.
(k) The word and indicates that all of the conditions, requirements, or factors so connected must be met or fulfilled, while the word or indicates that at least one condition, requirement or fac-tor so connected must be met.
Section 1402 Interpretation. City of Duluth UDC
14-2
(l) The term such as is intended to introduce one or more examples in illustration of a require-ment or point, and is intended to mean including, but not limited, to the following.
(m) The terms include or including, when used to introduce a list of items, is not intended to be exclusive only to the items on the list, but is intended to mean including, but not limited to, the following.
(n) The verbs zone and rezone have the same meaning and refer to the act of amending the Of-ficial Zoning Map through the process established by this Development Code.
(o) The nouns zone, zoning district, and district have the same meaning and refer to the zon-ing districts established under this Development Code.
(p) The word day means a calendar day unless otherwise specified as a work day or business day, which means Monday through Friday exclusive of City-recognized holidays.
(q) The words used or occupied include the words intended, arranged, or designed exclusively to be used or occupied by a particular use or function.
(r) References to the City and to the City Council and any public officials or appointed bodies of the City not otherwise named by political jurisdiction or defined in this Development Code shall always mean the City of Duluth, Georgia, and its governing body, appointed or employed offi-cials, and appointed bodies as named. These include:
(1) The Planning Commission, created as such and appointed as such by the Duluth City Coun-cil.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals, created as such and appointed as such by the Duluth City Council.
(3) The City Manager, appointed as such by the Duluth City Council, or the City Managers de-signee.
(4) The City Attorney, appointed as such by the Duluth City Council, or the City Attorneys de-signee.
(5) The Planning and Development Director, the City official appointed as such, or the Planning and Development Directors designee.
(6) The Public Works Director, the City official appointed as such, or the Public Works Direc-tors designee.
(7) Other City officials or employees, such as a building inspector shall mean the City official or employee appointed as such by their respective department director.
(s) References to an administrative department or committee of the City of Duluth shall always mean the department or committee created by the City Council as such. These include:
(1) Department of Planning and Development: References to action by the Planning and De-velopment Department shall mean action by the Planning and Development Director or by that administrative official to whom responsibility for that action has been assigned by the Planning and Development Director.
(2) Public Works Department: A reference to action by the Public Works Department shall mean action by the Public Works Director by that administrative official to whom responsi-bility for that action has been assigned by the Public Works Director.
City of Duluth UDC Section 1402 Interpretation.
14-3
(3) City Engineer: A reference to action by the City Engineer shall mean action by that admin-istrative official to whom responsibility for that action has been assigned by the Planning and Development Director.
(t) References to other public officials, departments, or appointed bodies, unless otherwise speci-fied, shall always mean such persons or bodies having jurisdiction over or relative to the City of Duluth, Georgia. These include:
(1) The Clerk of the Superior Court of Gwinnett County, Georgia.
(2) The Gwinnett County Health Department, and its Environmental Services Division.
(3) The Atlanta Regional Commission (ARC).
(4) The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission.
(5) The Georgia Departments of Community Affairs (DCA), Transportation (GDOT), Human Re-sources (DHR), Natural Resources (DNR), and DNRs Environmental Protection Division (EPD).
(6) The United States Army Corps of Engineers, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
1402.04 Meaning of Words and Phrases.
(a) All words and phrases are to be interpreted within the context of the sentence, paragraph, sub-section, section, and Article in which they occur.
(b) Words and phrases specifically relating to a category of use of land or a structure that are de-fined in this Development Code shall be interpreted as defined herein without regard to other meanings in common or ordinary use, unless the context of the word or phrase indicates other-wise. Words and phrases not defined in this Development Code shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, the meaning of which may be further clarified by use of the word or phrase in the North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS) pub-lished by the U.S. Department of Commerce, 2012 Edition. See also the Interpretation of Uses Section of the Use of Land and Structures Article of this Development Code.
(c) Other words and phrases specifically defined in this Development Code shall be interpreted as defined herein without regard to other meanings in common or ordinary use, unless the context of the word or phrase indicates otherwise. Words and phrases not defined in this Development Code shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, the meaning of which may be further clarified by definition of the word or phrase in the New Oxford Ameri-can Dictionary, Third Edition or later.
(d) Definitions are clearly identified as such and are located throughout this Development Code in the Articles or Sections to which they most readily refer. All definitions, regardless of location within a particular Article of this Code, apply equally to the use of such terms throughout the Code. A Glossary of all defined terms is included in this Article for convenience. However, if dif-ferences in wording occur between definitions of a term in a particular Article and in the Glossa-ry of Definitions in this Article, the definition contained within a particular Article of this Code shall control.
City of Duluth UDC A Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions
14-4
Section 1403. Glossary of Definitions
A
Accessory Structures and Uses. A detached structure and/or use on the same lot with, and of a size and nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal structure and/or use of land.
Accidental Discharge. An illicit discharge that occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence.
Active Use. Any principal, conditional, or accessory use that by its nature does not require non-transparent walls facing a public street or involves the storage of goods or vehicles.
Addition (to an existing building). Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction.
Adult Entertainment Establishment. A commercial establishment licensed in accordance with the City's Adult Entertainment Ordinance, as amended, where adult entertainment, as defined in said Ordinance, is spon-sored, allowed, encouraged, condoned, presented, sold, or offered to the public.
Adult Entertainment. Adult entertainment, as defined in the City's Adult Entertainment Ordinance, as amended, by an employee(s) at a properly licensed adult entertainment facility.
Alteration of a Building. Any change, addition, or modification in construction of the structural members of a building, such as walls, partitions, columns, beams, or girders, any change that results in an addition to enclosed floor area of a building or the movement of the building from one location to another.
Antenna. (i) Communications equipment that transmits, receives, or transmits and receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services or other wireless communications; or (ii) Communications equipment similar to equipment described in part (i) used for the transmission, reception, or transmission and reception of surface waves. Such term shall not include television broadcast antennas, antennas designed for amateur radio use, or satellite dishes for residential or household purposes.
Apartment. See Multi-Family Dwelling.
Applicable Codes. Uniform building, fire, safety, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization to the extent such codes have been adopted by the State of Georgia or the City or are otherwise applicable in the City.
Applicant. Any person that submits an application.
Applicant (Stormwater). A person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval.
Application (Small Cell Wireless Facility). A written request submitted by an applicant to the City for a permit to: (i) collocate a small wireless facility in a right of way; or (ii) install, modify, or replace a pole or decora-tive pole in a right of way on which a small wireless facility is or will be located.
Aquifer. Any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well.
Architecturally Treated. A structure that is constructed of or covered with such materials as brick, stone, painted or treated wood, or stucco, or covered with artificial representations of such materials that are
City of Duluth UDC B Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions
14-5
visually undistinguishable from the natural materials and have a life expectancy of at least 20 years as evi-denced by a manufacturers warranty.
Area of Future-Conditions Flood Hazard. The land area that would be inundated by the 1%-annual-chance flood based on future-conditions hydrology (100-year future-conditions flood).
Area of Shallow Flooding. A designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from 1 to 3 feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.
Area of Special Flood Hazard. The land subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the future-conditions flood elevation, and all other flood prone areas as referenced in Section 833. All streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated.
Authority Pole. A pole owned, managed, or operated by or on behalf of the City. Such term shall not include poles, support structures, electric transmission structures, or equipment of any type owned by an electric supplier.
B
Banner. See Sign, Banner.
Basal Area. The cross-sectional area expressed in square inches, of a tree trunk at diameter breast-height (DBH) expressed herein in terms of units per acre.
Base Flood. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the one hundred-year flood.
Base Flood Elevation or BFE. The highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood.
Basement. The lower level of a building having a floor-to-ceiling height of at least 6 feet and a portion of its floor subgrade (below ground level) on at least one side.
Beacon. A stationary or revolving light that flashes or projects illumination, single or multi-colored, in any manner that is intended to attract or divert attention however, this term is not intended to include any kind of lighting device that is required or necessary under the safety regulations described by the Federal Avia-tion Administration or similar agencies.
Best Management Practices (BMPs). Sound conservation and engineering practices that prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted.
Block. A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public streets (other than alleys), railroads, or other rights-of-way, or boundaries of the development within which the block is located.
Board (DNR). The Board of Natural Resources.
Buffer:
(1) Construction Buffer. A type of buffer which is temporary and re-mains in effect during the construction of a project.
Example of a Natural Buffer
Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions B City of Duluth UDC
14-6
(2) Natural Buffer. Buffers that contain deciduous or perennial vegetation, including evergreen shrubs and trees suitable to local growing conditions that provide an opaque visual screen during all seasons of the year.
(3) Stream Buffer. The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of a stream in its existing or en-hanced state of vegetation.
(4) Structural Buffer. A buffer that creates a visual screen through construction of a solid wooden fence, decorative masonry wall, earthen berm, or combination of fence or wall with an earthen berm, which may be supplemented with vegetation, so as to present an opaque visual separation when viewed from one side to the other throughout the year.
(5) Watershed Buffer. A natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances, such as trails and picnic areas, located adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water sup-ply watershed.
(6) Zoning Buffer. Land area used to visibly separate one use from another through screening and dis-tance to shield or block noise, light, glare, or visual or other conditions, to block physical to non-similar areas, or to reduce air pollution, dust, dirt, and litter.
Buildable Area of Lot. The area of lot within the setback lines as defined by this Development Code.
Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods or material of any kind.
Building Canopy. See under Canopy.
Building Height. The height of a building is the vertical distance measured from the mean elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building to the highest point on the deck line of a mansard roof, the highest edge on a shed roof, or the ridge of a hip, gambrel or gable roof. For flat roofs, the height shall be measured to the top of the roof or parapet along the exterior building wall, whichever is higher.
Building Line. A line formed by the outer face of the exterior wall of a building, or portion thereof, and the surface of the ground.
Building, Main. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. Also referred to as a Principal Building.
Building Sign. A sign that is fastened to, (in any manner), projects from, or is placed upon the exterior wall, or a window, door, or roof of a building. The term building sign includes, but is not limited, to the following:
(1) Awning Sign. A sign imposed, mounted, or painted on an awning.
(2) Building Marker. A sign composed of concrete, bronze, or other permanent material that is built into the surface of the building at the time of its construction.
(3) Canopy Sign. A sign imposed, mounted, or painted on a canopy, as defined herein.
(4) Mansard Sign. A sign imposed, mounted, or painted on the fascia portion of a mansard roof.
(5) Marquee Sign. Any sign attached flat against or on a permanent marquee of a building.
(6) Projecting Sign. A sign affixed flat to a wall and extending more than 6 inches from the surface of such wall, or any sign attached to and extending at an angle from a wall surface (usually perpendicular).
(7) Roof Sign. A sign that is mounted on, applied to, or otherwise structurally supported by the roof of a building (other than the fascia portion of a mansard roof).
City of Duluth UDC C Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions
14-7
(8) Under-Canopy Sign. A display attached to the underside of a marquee or building canopy and protrud-ing over a pedestrian walkway.
(9) Wall (or Faade) Sign. A sign that is fastened to, painted, on or placed directly on the exterior wall of a building faade or building canopy, with the sign face parallel to the wall or canopy face.
(10) Window Sign. A sign that is applied, painted, or placed on, behind, or inside a windowpane or a glass door and intended to be viewed from outside the building.
Building Story. See Story, Building.
Business Park. One or more buildings located on a property in common ownership, management, or operation, of units that are owned, leased, or rented primarily for office, institutional, or light industrial purposes.
C
Caliper. A standard of trunk measurement for understory or replacement trees. Caliper inches are measured at the height of 6 inches above the ground for trees up to and including 4-inch caliper and 12 inches above the ground for trees larger than 4-inch caliper.
Canopy:
(1) Building Canopy. A permanent roof-like structure projecting from a building and open on at least one side for the purpose of shielding a pedestrian walkway from the elements.
(2) Freestanding Canopy. A freestanding roof-like structure supported by columns intended to shield a vehicular driveway or service area from the elements.
Certified Personnel. A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission.
Channel. A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
Character Area. A portion of the city designated as any one of the various character areas created within the Citys Comprehensive Plan and shown as to its boundaries and extent on the Future Development Map subtitled Character Areas included as a part of said Plan, and as may be amended from time-to-time by the City Council.
Chattahoochee Corridor. All land within 2,000 feet of the banks of the Chattahoochee River, including any impoundments thereon, or within the floodplain, whichever is greater, from directly below Buford Dam downstream to the downstream limits of Fulton and Douglas counties, including the entire bed of the river and any improvements and all islands therein.
City Separate Storm Sewer System. Any conveyance or system of conveyances which is:
(1) Owned or maintained by the City;
(2) Not a combined sewer; and,
(3) Not part of a publicly owned treatment works.
Clean Water Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.  1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
Clear Cutting. The broad removal of all trees and /or vegetation from a particular area.
Clearing. The removal of vegetation from a property, whether by cutting or other means.
Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions C City of Duluth UDC
14-8
Collocate or Collocation. To install, mount, modify, or replace a small wireless facility on or adjacent to a pole, decorative pole, or support structure.
Column Sign. See under Freestanding Sign.
Commercial Speech. The expression of an idea, opinion, or message that directs or attracts attention to a business operated for profit; or to a product, commodity, or service for sale, trade, barter, swap, or lease; or to any other commercial interest or activity.
Commission (GSWCC). The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission.
Communications Facility. The set of equipment and network components, including wires and cables and associated equipment and network components, used by a communications service provider to provide communications services.
Communication Services. Cable service as defined in 47 U.S.C.  522(6); telecommunications service as defined in 47 U.S.C.  153(53); information service as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 153(24), as each such term exist-ed on January 1, 2019; or wireless services.
Communication Services Provider. A provider of communications services.
Concealment Element. Any design feature, including but not limited to painting, landscaping, shielding requirements, and restrictions on location, proportions, or physical dimensions in relation to the surround-ing area or the structure which supports a Wireless Facility, that are intended to make a Wireless Facility or any supporting structure less visible to the casual observer.
Condominium. A multiple unit dwelling in which each dwelling unit is owned or financed by the occupant, but in which halls, entrance ways, common areas, and underlying lands are owned jointly.
Conifer Tree. Any tree with needle leaves and a woody cone fruit including, but not limited to, pine, juniper, and cedar species.
Conservation Easement. An agreement between a land owner and the (local jurisdiction) or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owners land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership.
Consolidated Application (Small Cell Wireless Facility). An application for the collocation of multiple small wireless facilities on existing poles or support structures or for the installation, modification, or replace-ment of multiple poles and the collocation of associated small wireless facilities.
Construction Activity. Activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
Construction Buffer. See under Buffer.
Conveyance. An aboveground or underground natural or manmade drainage feature, that provides for the collection and movement of stormwater, and shall include but not be limited to concrete or metal pipes, ditches, depressions, swales, roads with drainage systems, highways, city streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, drainage channels, reservoirs, rights-of-way, storm drains, culverts, street gutters, oil/water separators, modular pavements and other similar drainage structures.
Conveyor Car Wash. A commercial car wash where the car moves on a conveyor belt during the wash. The driver of the vehicle can remain in the vehicle or wait outside of the vehicle.
City of Duluth UDC D Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions
14-9
Corridor, Watershed. All land within the buffer areas established adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed and within other setback areas specified in this Code Division.
CPESC. Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, that is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc.
Critical Root Zone. The minimum area beneath a tree that must be left undisturbed in order to preserve a sufficient Critical Root Zone (CR) will typically be represented by a concentric circle centering on the trees trunk with a radius equal in feet to one times the number of inches of the trunk diameter. Example. The CRZ radius of a 20 inch diameter tree is 20 feet.
Customary Home Occupation. An occupation, service, profession or enterprise conducted entirely within a dwelling and which is carried on by a resident thereof and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential dwelling purposes.
Cut. A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation.
D
Daycare Facility. The use of a building or premises for the care and supervision of children (who do not reside on the property), for periods of less than 24 hours. Establishments are licensed or commissioned by the Georgia Department of Human Resources to care for infants and preschool children. Some offer pre-kindergarten education programs or provide care services for older children. Child day care facilities are classified as follows:
(1) Family Day Care. An accessory use to a private residence that operates as a daycare facility for up to six children, including the operator's own pre-school age children.
(2) Group Day Care Home. A daycare facility for 18 or fewer children.
(3) Day Care Center. A daycare facility for 19 or more children.
Days. The term days shall mean working days exclusive of holidays authorized by the Mayor and Council and weekends, unless the term is stated as calendar days or the context implies otherwise.
Decorative Pole (Small Cell Wireless Facility). An authority pole that is specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes.
Density. The number of dwelling units situated on or to be developed on a net acre (or smaller unit) of land, that shall be calculated by taking the total gross acreage and subtracting any land identified as a flood prone area as defined in the Floodplain Management section of the Environmental Protection Article of this UDC or within any electricity or gas transmission easement or right-of-way.
Density Factor. A unit of measure used to prescribe the calculated tree coverage on a site.
Department (DNR). The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR).
Design Professional. A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc.
Detention, Stormwater. The temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge.
Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions D City of Duluth UDC
14-10
Detention Facility. A detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates.
Developer. A person who undertakes land development activities.
Development:
(1) Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
(2) A land development or land development project.
Development Activity. Any alteration of the natural environment that requires the approval of a development or site plan and issuance of a development permit. Development Activity shall also include the thinning or removal of trees from undeveloped land in conjunction with a forest management program, and the re-moval of trees incidental to the development of land or to the marketing of land for development.
Development Permit. A permit issued by the City that authorizes Development Activity, and includes, but is not limited to, a soil erosion permit, clearing and grubbing permit, land disturbance permit or building permit.
Development Plans. The detailed and professional plans showing the layout and design, site work and construc-tion activities proposed for a project (other than architectural building plans) and including the Preliminary Plat or Site Plan (as applicable), Grading Plan, Tree Preservation/Replacement Plan, Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, Buffer and Landscape Plan, and construction drawings for streets, storm water drainage facili-ties, sanitary sewers, water supply facilities, and other site improvements.
Diameter Breast Height (DBH). The standard measure of overstory tree size (for trees existing on a site). The tree trunk is measured at a height of 4 feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below 4 feet, measure the trunk at its most narrow point beneath the split.
Director (DNR). The Director of the Environmental Protection Division or an authorized representative.
Discharge. The direct or indirect release of water, fluid, materials or other matter to a conveyance or surface that drains to a conveyance.
District. The 15th Soil and Water Conservation District.
Division (EPD). The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources.
Drainage Easement. An easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement.
Drainage Structure. A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes.
DRASTIC. The standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic settings described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600-2-87-035. (Note: the DRASTIC methodology is the most widely used technique for evaluating pollution susceptibility).
Drip Line. A line on the ground established by a vertical plane extending from a
trees outermost branch tips down to the ground; i.e. the line enclosing the area
directly beneath the trees crown from which rainfall would drip.
Duplex. See Two-Family Dwelling (Duplex).
City of Duluth UDC E Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions
14-11
Dwelling. Any building, or portion thereof, that is designed for or used for residential purposes.
Dwelling, Multi-Family. See Multi-Family Dwelling.
Dwelling, Single-Family Detached. See Single-Family Detached Dwelling.
Dwelling, Two-Family (Duplex). See Two-Family Dwelling (Duplex).
Dwelling Unit. A room or suite of two or more rooms that is designed for the occupancy, cooking, and sleeping of one person or more than one person living as a single household.
E
Electric Supplier. (Small Cell Wireless Facility). Any electric light and power company subject to regulation by the Georgia Public Service Commission, any electric membership corporation furnishing retail service in this state, and any municipality which furnishes such service within this state.
Electric Vehicle Charging Station. A public or private parking space that is served by electric vehicle supply equipment that has as its primary purpose the transfer of electric energy (by conductive or inductive means) to a battery in an electric vehicle.
Elevated Building. A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event.
Eligible Facilities Request (Small Cell Wireless Facility). An eligible facilities request as set forth in 47 C.F.R.  1.40001(b)(3), as it existed on January 1, 2019.
Erosion. The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity.
Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan:
(1) A plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities.
(2) A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a mini-mum, protections at least as stringent as the State General Permit, best management practices, and applicable requirements in Division I of Article 10.
Existing Construction. Any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before December 17, 1975.
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before December 17, 1975.
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of con-crete pads. FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Extended Detention. The detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater.
Extreme Flood Protection. Measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more.
Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions F City of Duluth UDC
14-12
F
Faade. The exterior vertical surfaces of a building that comprise the front, side or rear wall.
Family. One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single household, as distinguished from persons occupying a boarding house or motel, as herein defined.
FCC. The Federal Communications Commissions of the United States.
Feather Banner. A banner mounted on a pole. Such signs may be wind-activated (see sign, animated) or rigidly mounted in a stationary position.
Fee (Small Cell Wireless Facility). A one-time, nonrecurring charge based on time and expense.
FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Festoons. Strings of light bulbs or other lighted devices, and strings of ribbons, tinsel, pennants, streamers, pinwheels, or other similar devices designed to move in the wind.
Fill. A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation.
Final Stabilization. All soil-disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 % of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 % or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches, or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vege-tation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appro-priate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction.
Finished Grade. The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design.
Flag. A sign made of paper, woven natural, or synthetic fabric, thin plastic or similar lightweight pliable material that is normally displayed by flying from a pole as a wind-activated device, but is not otherwise defined herein as a banner, pennant, or feather banner.
Flood or Flooding:
(1) A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: a. the overflow of inland or tidal waters; or, b. the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
(2) A volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands.
Flood Hazard Boundary Map or FHBM. An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A.
Flood Insurance Rate Map or FIRM. An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administra-tion, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Examples of Feather Banners
City of Duluth UDC F Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions
14-13
Flood Insurance Study or FIS. The official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood.
Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to flooding.
Floodplain, 100 year. Those lands subject to flooding that have at least a 1% probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year, and specifically, the floodplain as shown on the Federal Emergency Management Agency Map (FEMA).
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facili-ties, structures and their contents.
Floodway or Regulatory Floodway. The channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas of the floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than 1 foot.
Floor Area, Gross. The sum of all floors of a structure as measured to the outside surfaces of exterior walls or the center of connected or common walls, including; common public areas (such as lobbies), restrooms and hallways, spaces devoted exclusively to elevator shafts but, excluding; internal parking and loading areas, attics, porches, balconies and other areas outside of the exterior walls of the building. Gross floor area is used to determine the building sizes for all but single-family dwellings and to determine required parking when floor area is the designated measure for a use.
Floor Area, Heated. The gross floor area of all spaces within a dwelling or dwelling unit that are heated by mechanical means, measured to the inside surfaces of exterior walls, excluding: porches, balconies, attics, unfinished basements, garages, patios, and decks.
Floor Area, Single-Family Dwelling. The floor area of a single-family dwelling is the gross horizontal area of several floors of the one-family residential structure, excluding carports, unfinished basements, attics, and open porches.
Floor, Ground. The floor of a building that is nearest the surrounding surface of the ground.
Flowing Stream. Any stream that is portrayed on the most current United States Geologic Survey 7.5 minute quadrangle for the affected area.
Fluorescent Color. A color that is intense, brilliantly colored, and seemingly emitting light, such as day glow (day-glo) colors.
Freestanding Canopy. See under canopy.
Freestanding Sign. A permanent sign that is attached to or part of a completely self-supporting structure, other than a building. The supporting structure shall be set firmly in or below the ground surface and shall not be attached to any building or any other structure, whether portable or stationary. The term freestanding sign includes, but is not limited to, the following:
(1) Pole Sign. A sign that is mounted on one or more freestanding stanchions or columns such that the sign body is elevated above the ground by such supporting stanchions or columns, and such supporting stanchions or columns are each less than 10% of the width of the sign body.
(2) Column Sign. A sign that is mounted on one or more freestanding stanchions or columns such that the sign body is elevated above the ground by such supporting stanchions or columns, and such supporting stanchions or columns are each 10% of the width of the sign body or more.
Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions G City of Duluth UDC
14-14
(3) Monument Sign. A freestanding sign in which the entire bottom of the base of the sign structure is in contact with the ground, providing a solid and continuous background for the sign from the ground to the top of the sign structure; the base of which is as wide as or wider than the total width of the sign body plus any supporting columns.
(4) Hybrid Monument Sign. A freestanding sign in which the entire bottom of the base of the sign struc-ture is in contact with the ground, but a solid and continuous background for the sign from the ground to the top of the sign structure is not provided; the base of which is as wide as or wider than the total width of the sign body plus any supporting columns.
Frontage, Lot. The distance over which the boundary line of the lot and the street line are coincident.
Functionally Dependent Use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water.
Future Conditions Flood. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood.
Future-Conditions Flood Elevation. The flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood elevation. The future-conditions flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood.
Future-Conditions Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood.
Future-Conditions Hydrology. The flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excava-tion.
G
Generalized Wetlands Map. The current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory maps for the City of Duluth, Georgia.
Grading:
(1) The placement, removal, or movement of earth by use of mechanical equipment on a property.
(2) Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling, and shaping (or any combination thereof) and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition.
Green Infrastructure. Stormwater management systems that mimic nature by soaking up and storing water.
Greenspace or Open Space. Permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state.
Ground Cover. Low growing, spreading plants, other than turf grass, such as, but not limited to, ivy, liriope, juniper, mondo grass, or sedge.
Ground Elevation. The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling.
Grubbing. The removal of stumps or roots from a site.
Guy or Guy Wire. A cable used to support or stabilize a freestanding pole or structure, such as a lattice telecom-munications or citizens band antenna, utility pole, or traffic signal stanchion.
City of Duluth UDC H Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions
14-15
H
Hardwood Tree. Any tree that is not coniferous (cone-bearing). This definition is based on the colloquialism, and does not necessarily reflect any true qualities of the tree.
Heated Floor Area. See Floor Area, Heated.
Heavy Truck. Any vehicle, (except recreational vehicles, vehicles displaying restricted plates, buses used in transportation of chartered parties, and government owned vehicles), used for the transportation of per-sons for hire or designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property and that is:
(1) A power unit having a gross vehicle weight in excess of 26,000 pounds;
(2) A power unit having three or more axles, regardless of weight; or
(3) Used in combination, when the weight of such combination exceeds 26,000 pounds gross vehicle weight.
Highest Adjacent Grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building.
Historic District (Small Cell Wireless Facility). (i) Any district, site, building, structure, or object included in, or eligible for inclusion in, the National Register of Historic Places maintained by the secretary of the interior of the United States in accordance with Section VI.D.1.a.i- v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified by 47 C.F.R. Part 1; (ii) any area designated as a historic district under Article 2 of Chapter 10 of Title 44, the Georgia Historic Preservation Act'; or (iii) any area designated as a historic district or property by law prior to April 26, 2019.
Historic Structure. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Depart-ment of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the require-ments for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
(5) By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior, or
(6) Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs.
Holiday or Seasonal Event. A day established as a legal holiday by federal, state or local law; a nationally recognized holiday such as Halloween or Mothers Day; a nationally recognized calendar season such as Fall or Spring; a religious day or term of days such as Easter, Yom Kippur or Christmas, or Lent, Ramadan or Hanukah.
Hotspot. An area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater.
Household. An individual living alone or a group of individuals living together in a single dwelling unit, sharing common use of and access to all living and eating areas, bathrooms, and food preparation areas, who mu-
Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions I City of Duluth UDC
14-16
tually combine their efforts and share responsibilities for domestic chores such as child rearing, cleaning and cooking in a permanent and long-term relationship. Hybrid Monument Sign. See under Freestanding Sign.
Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG). A Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff.
I
Illicit Discharge. Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the city separate storm sewer system.
Illegal Connection. Shall mean any of the following:
(1) Any pipe, open channel, drain or other conduit, whether natural or manmade, which is used exclusive-ly to drain a non-stormwater discharge to the City's separate storm sewer system; or
(2) Any pipe, open channel, drain or other conduit, whether natural or manmade, that was designed, installed or redirected for the purpose of draining a non-stormwater discharge into the City's separate storm sewer system; or
(3) Any pipe, open channel, drain or other conduit, whether natural or manmade, which is connected to the city separate storm sewer system and which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equiva-lent records and approved by the city regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or other conduit, whether natural or manmade, was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time the connection was made, or has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the city or any other authorized enforcement agency. "Illegal connection" expressly includes, without limi-tation, those connections made in the past.
Illuminated Sign. See Sign, Illuminated.
Impervious Cover. A surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface.
Impervious Surface. A man-made structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of storm water into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, or patios.
Incidental Sign. See Sign, Incidental.
Industrial Activity, Regulated. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, section 122.26(b)(14).
Industrial Stormwater Permit. A National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
Infiltration. The process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil.
Iridescent Color. A color that when seen at different angles has a play of lustrous rainbow-like colors; pearles-cent.
City of Duluth UDC J Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions
14-17
Inspection and Maintenance Agreement. A written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land devel-opment project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project.
J
Jurisdictional Wetland.
(1) An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
(2) An area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
Jurisdictional Wetland Determination. A delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C.  1344, as amended.
K
Kiosk. A freestanding sign structure, often cylindrical in shape, intended to be viewed from all sides and erected for the purpose of posting signs, notices, or other public announcements. Kiosks that are composed of flat faces are treated as multi-faced signs.
L
Land Development:
(1) (verb) All activities associated with the conversion of land or the expansion or replacement of an exist-ing use to any new use intended for human operation, occupancy or habitation, other than for agricul-tural purposes, devoted strictly to the cultivation of the land, dairying, or animal husbandry. Such ac-tivities include land disturbance (such as but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, re-moval of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land) and the construc-tion of improvements (such as, but not limited to, streets, driveways or parking areas, water or sewer mains, storm water drainage facilities, sidewalks) or other structures or impervious cover permanently placed on or in the property.
(2) (noun) Where appropriate to the context, the term development also may be used to denote a specific subdivision or project that is a single entity or intended to be constructed as in interrelated whole, whether simultaneously or in phases.
Land Development Activity. Those actions or activities that comprise, facilitate, or result in land development.
Land Development Project. A discrete land development undertaking.
Land Disturbance. Any activity that may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, clearing and grubbing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices. Includes the term Land-Disturbing Activity.
Land Disturbance Activity. Those actions or activities that comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance.
Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions L City of Duluth UDC
14-18
Land Disturbance Permit. Any permit (other than a Building Permit) issued by the City of Duluth that authorizes clearing or grading activities on a site or portion of a site. Said permit may be Clearing, Clearing and Grub-bing, Grading, or a Development Permit as defined and authorized under this Development Code.
Landscape Materials. Any combination of living plant materials, nonliving materials (such as rocks, pebbles, wood chips, mulch and pavers) and decorative features such as sculpture, patterned walks, fountains, and pools. This definition includes synthetic landscaping materials that are visually indistinguishable from natural materials.
Landscape Strip. Land area located within the boundary of a lot and required to be set aside and used for landscaping upon which only limited encroachments are authorized.
Large Water Supply Watershed. A watershed containing 100 square miles or more of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake.
Larger Common Plan of Development or Sale. A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this para-graph, plan means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot.
Law. Includes any and all federal, state, or local laws, statutes, common laws, codes, rules, regulations, orders, or ordinances.
Leased Sign. An agreement by which a property owner conveys (usually for a specified rent), to other persons, permission to erect and maintain a sign upon their property.
LED Sign. Any sign or portion thereof that uses light-emitting diode technology or other similar semiconductor technology to produce an illuminated image, picture, or message of any kind whether the image, picture, or message is moving or stationary. This type of sign includes any sign that uses LED technology of any kind, whether conventional (using discrete LEDs), surface-mounted (otherwise known as individually mounted LEDs), transmissive, organic light-emitting diodes (OLED), light-emitting polymer (LEP), organic electro polymer (OEL), or any other similar technology. An LED sign is considered to be a form of electronic changeable copy sign (see under Sign, Changeable Copy).
Local Issuing Authority (LIA). The Duluth City Council or its assigned or designated representative, which shall be responsible for administering this Development Code and has been certified pursuant to subsection (a)
O.C.G.A. 12-7-8.
Lot. A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon.
(1) Corner Lot. A lot that occupies the interior angle of two street lines that make an angle of less than 135 degrees with each oth-er.
(2) Double Frontage Lot. A lot other than a corner lot abutting upon two or more streets.
(3) Interior Lot. A lot having frontage on only one street.
(4) Flag Lot. A lot having a street frontage and initial lot width nota-bly less wide than the body of the lot (usually where the principal
City of Duluth UDC M Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions
14-19
building is intended to be located), such that the lot appears to be a flag on a pole extending to the street frontage.
Lot Area. The computed ground area bounded by the front, side, and rear lot lines.
Lot Building Area. The area of a lot encompassed by front, sides, and rear yard setbacks or building line as required by the Development Code.
Lot Coverage. The computed ground area that is covered by buildings, structures, accessory structures, driveways, parking areas, and any other impervious surface.
Lot Depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot measured within the lot boundaries.
Lot Line. The boundary dividing a given lot from the street or adjacent lots; the boundary defining the limit of ownership of a property.
(1) Front Lot Line. Any boundary line of a lot that abuts a street. A lot adjacent to more than one street will have more than one front lot line.
(2) Rear Lot Line. Any boundary line of a lot that does not intersect with a street right-of-way line and is not a front lot line.
(3) Side Lot Line. Any boundary line of a lot that intersects with a street right-of-way line and is not a front lot line.
Lot of Record. A lot or parcel whose existence, location, and dimensions have been recorded in the Office of the Clerk to Superior Court of Gwinnett County.
Lot Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured along the front principal building line.
Lowest Floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this article.
M
Manufactured Home:
(1) A structure, transportable in one or more sections that, in the traveling mode, is 8 body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and that is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes; plumbing, heating, air- conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein, except that such term shall include any structure that meets all of the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Devel-opment and complies with the standards established under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq., as amended. This definition ex-cludes travel trailers, recreational vehicles, and mobile homes as defined below.
(2) When used strictly in regard to floodplain management, a building, transportable in one or more sec-tions, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel
Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions M City of Duluth UDC
14-20
trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and in-tended to be improved property.
Manufactured Home Park. A tract of land in individual ownership that has been developed with all necessary facilities and services for the placement of two or more manufactured homes for non-transient use.
Marquee Sign. See under Building Sign.
Mean Sea Level. The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article the term is synonymous with national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) and/or the North American vertical datum (NAVD) of 1988.
Metropolitan River Protection Act. A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et seq., that addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins.
Micro Wireless Facility. A small wireless facility not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
Miscellaneous Building Sign. A building sign (as defined herein), other than a principal building sign, a temporary event sign, or an incidental sign, commonly found on the wall of a nonresidential use property.
Miscellaneous Freestanding Sign. A freestanding sign, other than a freestanding principal sign, temporary event sign, or incidental sign, commonly found on multi-family and nonresidential use properties located at en-trance and exit driveways, drive-through windows, internal driving lanes, parking lots, designated handicap parking spaces, etc.
Mobile Home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, that, in the travelling mode, is eight body feet or more in width, or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976.
Modular Home. A factory fabricated, transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a structure to be used for residential purposes. A mod-ular home shall be designed and constructed in compliance with Geor-gia State Minimum Standard One-and-Two Family Dwelling Code and shall be certified by the manufacturer to meet the approval of the State Building Administrative Board (SBAB) to meet the same requirements as an on site-built home within the City of Duluth. The term shall not in-clude manufactured homes as defined by the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Sec-tion 5401, et seq.
Monument Sign. See under freestanding sign.
Mobile Kitchens. Mobile Kitchens are motorized vehicles that provide the ability to independently cook, prepare, and sell food.
Multi-Family Dwelling. A residential building designed exclusively for occupancy by three or more families in separate dwelling units living independently of each other.
(1) Apartment. A multi-family dwelling in which a dwelling unit may be located above another.
(2) Townhouse. A multi-family dwelling in which the dwelling units may adjoin one another only at the vertical walls.
Illustrative Example of a Modular Home
City of Duluth UDC N Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions
14-21
(3) Triplex. A detached residential structure containing three dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than four families living independently of each other.
(4) Quadruplex. A detached residential structure containing four dwelling units, designed for occupan-cy by not more than four families living independently of each other.
N
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). As corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit. A permit issued by the state EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC  1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or gen-eral area-wide basis.
Natural Buffer. See under Buffer.
Natural Ground Surface. The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation, or filling.
Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU). Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present.
New Construction. Any structure (see definition in this Section) for which the "start of construction" com-menced after December 17, 1975 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure.
New Development. A land development activity on a previously undeveloped site.
New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after December 17, 1975.
NOI. A Notice of Intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the State General Permit.
Non-Development Activity. Any alteration of the natural environment that does not require development or site plan approval, but that would include the proposed removal or destruction of any trees. Any removal of trees that constitutes Development Activity as that term is herein defined shall not constitute Non-Development Activity.
Nonpoint Source Pollution. A form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
Non-Stormwater. Any surface flow, runoff, drainage, or discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater and which may include pollutants, but that excludes:
(1) Water from those sources described in this article; and/or,
(2) Any discharge permitted under NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the
Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions O City of Duluth UDC
14-22
discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other appli-cable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the city separate storm sewer system.
Nonresidential Use. See Use, nonresidential.
Nonstructural Stormwater Management Practice or Nonstructural Practice. Any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depres-sions, and vegetated channels.
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. A vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.
NOT. A Notice of Termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the State General Permit.
O
Off-Site Facility. A stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site.
On-Site Facility. A stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site.
Open Space. See Greenspace or Open Space.
Operator. The party or parties who have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifica-tions, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day opera-tional control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions.
Outdoor Lighting.
(1) Candela. A measure of luminous intensity in a certain direction. Useful in determining how much light is shining out of a fixture and in what direction. One candela is one lumen per steradian (lm/sr).
(2) Candela Diagram. Diagram of light power produced by a source and the value of luminous intensity is given directions. A picture of how much light is shining out of a fixture and in what direction.
(3) Candlepower. Luminous intensity expressed in candelas.
(4) Color Rendering Index (CRI). A measurement of the amount of color shift that objects undergo when lighted by a light source as compared with the color of those same objects when seen under a refer-ence light source of comparable color temperare. CRI values generally range from 0 to 100.
(5) Contrast. The ratio of the luminance of an object to that of its immediate background.
(6) Cut-off Angle. The angle, measured up from nadir, between the vertical axis and the first line of sight at which the bare source is not visible.
(7) Efficacy. A measurement of the ratio of light produced by a light source to the electrical power used to produce that quality of light, expressed in lumens per wall. Efficacy is an important determinant of energy efficiency in lighting equipment.
(8) Footcandle. A unit of illuminance. One foot footcandle is one lumen per square foot (lm/ft2).
City of Duluth UDC O Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions
14-23
(9) Floodlight. A light fixture designed to light an object to a luminance greater than its surroundings. The beam spread of floodlights may range from narrow field angles of 10 degrees to wide angles (more than 100 degrees). (10) Fluorescent Lamp. A lamp that produces light by means of electric arc that excites a phosphor coating deposited on the inside of a glass bulb.
(11) Glare. The sensation produced by luminances within the visual field that is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are adapted to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual perfor-mance or visibility.
(12) Glare, Blinding. Glare that is so intense that for an appreciable length of time after it has been re-moved, no object can be seen.
(13) Glare, Direct. Glare resulting from insufficiently shielded light sources or areas of excessive luminance within the field of view.
(14) Glare, Disability. The effect of stray light in the eye whereby visibility and visual performance are reduced.
(15) Glare, Discomfort. A Glare that produces discomfort. It does not necessarily interfere with visual performance or visibility.
(16) Glare, Reflected. A Glare resulting from reflections of high luminances in polished or glossy surfaces in the field of view.
(17) High Intensity Discharge (HID) Lamp. A lamp that generates large quantities of light with electric arch-es through small tubes. The tubes also contain phosphors that generate additional light output and color.
(18) Illuminance. The amount of light falling on a surface- measured in lux (lx) or foot-candles (fc).
(19) Illumination. An alternative term for illuminance. Commonly used in qualitative or general sense to designate the act of illuminating or the state of being illuminated.
(20) Lamp. A generic term for a man made source of light (e.g. bulb).
(21) Light. Radiant energy that is capable of exciting the retina and producing a visual sensation. The visible portion of the electromagnetic spectrum extends from about 380 to 770 nanometers.
(22) Luminaire. A complete lighting unit, consisting of a lamps, reflector, refractor, or lens, wiring, and sockets. Often referred as fixture.
(23) Light Loss Factor (LLF). The ratio of illuminance for a given area to the value that would occur if lamps operated at their initial rated lumen output and if no system variation or depreciation occurred.
(24) Light Trespass. A subjective perception of undesirable illumination including the following examples:
The classic light shining in a window
Unwanted light on an adjacent property
Excessive brightness in the normal field of vision (nuisance glare)
(25) Lumens. In physics, the SI unit of luminous flux. Photometrically, it is the luminous flux emitted per second within a unit solid angle (one steradian) by a point source having a uniform luminous intensity of one candela.
Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions P City of Duluth UDC
14-24
(26) Luminaire. A complete lighting unit consisting of one or more lamps (light sources) together with the parts designed to control the light distribution, and other mechanical and electrical components. (27) Luminaire, Cutoff. A luminaire light distribution is designated as cut off when candlepower per 1000 lamp lumens does not numerically exceed 25 (2.5%) at an angle of 90 above nadir (horizontal), and 100 (10%) at a vertical angle of 80 above nadir.
(28) Luminance. The emitted or reflected light from a surface; related directly to perceived brightness. The unit of luminance is the candela per square meter (cd/m2).
(29) Luminous Flux. Radiant flux (radiant power); the time rate of flow of radiant energy evaluated in terms of a standardized visual response.
(30) Luminous Intensity. The luminous flux per unit solid angle in the direction in question. May be ex-pressed in candelas or lumens per steradian (lm/sr).
(31) Lux. The SI unit of illuminance. One lux is one lumen per square meter (lm/m2).
(32) Nighttime. The hours between the end of evening civil twilight and the beginning of morning civil twilight. Civil twilight ends in the evening when the center of suns disk is 6 degrees below the hori-zon, and begins in the morning when the center of the suns disk is 6 degrees below the horizon.
(33) Spill Light. Light shining beyond a facility that may annoy occupants of the adjacent property.
(34) Watt. A unit used to measure electric power. One watt equals one joule/second.
Outfall. The location where storm water in a discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, (if there is a receiving water on site), becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water.
Overbank Flood Protection. Measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the 2-year through 25-year frequency storm events.
Overstory Tree. Those trees that compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and will generally reach a mature height of greater than 40 feet.
Owner. The legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in posses-sion, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site.
P
Parapet Wall. A building faade that extends above the eave line or edge of a roof.
Parcel. See Lot.
Pennant. A lightweight plastic, fabric, or similar material designed to move in the wind; pennants are often suspended from a rope, wire, or string in series. The term pennant shall not include a banner or a flag as regulated by this Development Code.
Perennial Stream:
(1) A watercourse having a source, terminus, banks, and channel through
which water flows on a continuous basis as depicted on the most recent United States Geological Sur-vey 7.5-minute quadrangle map (scale 1:24,000).
A Parapet Wall
City of Duluth UDC P Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions
14-25
(2) A stream that flows throughout the whole year as indicated on a USGS Quad map.
Permit, Land Disturbance. The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this Development Code.
Permit (Small Cell Wireless Facility). A written authorization, in electronic or hard copy format, required to be issued by the City to initiate, continue, or complete the collocation of a small wireless facility or the installa-tion, modification, or replacement of a pole or decorative pole upon which a small wireless facility is collo-cated.
Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, interstate body or any other legal entity.
Person (Small Cell Wireless Facility). An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization, including an authority.
Personal Care Home. A profit or non-profit facility, home, or structure licensed by the State of Georgia for the protective care of persons, both adult and adolescent, who need a watchful environment, but do not have an illness, injury, or disability that requires chronic or convalescent care, including medical and nursing services. Personal care facilities are categorized as follows:
(1) Congregate Personal Care Home. A personal care home for adults that offers care to more than 15 persons.
(2) Family Personal Care Home. A personal care home for adults that offers care to no more than six persons.
(3) Group Personal Care Home. A personal care home for adults that offers care to no more than 15 persons.
Personal (Noncommercial) Speech. The expression of an idea, opinion, or message that does not direct or attract attention to a business operated for profit; or to a product, commodity, or service for sale, trade, barter, swap, or lease; or to any other commercial interest or activity.
Pervious Surface:
(1) Materials that allow for water penetration such as mulch, crushed stone, elevated boardwalks with spacing be-tween boards, and specially formulated pervious con-crete designed to allow for water penetration;
(2) All that area of land that can be landscaped or planted, allows natural passage through by water, and is not cov-ered by man-made materials or structures such as build-ings or paving.
Phase or Phased. Sub-parts or segments of construction projects
where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site.
Planned Center. A single office, medical, commercial, or industrial property that is designed or intended for occupancy by two or more principal businesses that are separately owned and have no corporate relation-ship. A planned center may consist of a single building, such as a shopping center, or multiple buildings, such as an office condominium center.
Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions P City of Duluth UDC
14-26
Plantable Area. The pervious surface area (expressed in square footage) available for the preservation or planting of trees on a single-family subdivision lot. Plantable Area shall not include that portion of the lot that is covered by buildings and structures permitted pursuant to the maximum lot coverage standards of the Development Code.
Pocket Park. A pocket park or green is a landscaped area larger than 0.33 acres constructed for community gathering or play, or visual enhancement.
Pole (Small Cell Wireless Facility). A vertical pole such as a utility, lighting, traffic, or similar pole made of wood, concrete, metal, or other material that is lawfully located or to be located within a right of way, including without limitation a replacement pole and an authority pole. Such term shall not include a support struc-ture, decorative pole, or electric transmission structure.
Pole Sign. See under Freestanding Sign.
Pollutant. Shall mean anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; process waste water and wash water; sewage, fecal coliform and patho-gens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
Pollution. The manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, thermal and radiologi-cal integrity of water.
Pollution Susceptibility. The relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities in the recharge area.
Pollution Susceptibility Map. The relative vulnerability to pollution prepared by the Department of Natural Resources, using the DRASTIC methodology. (Georgia Department of Natural Resources Hydrologic Atlas 20: Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia.)
Portable Sign. See Sign, Portable.
Post-Development. The time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require.
Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
Pre-Development. The time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions.
Principal Building. The building in which is conducted the principal use of the parcel on which it is located. Parcels with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages, and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings.
Principal Building Setback Line. A line delineating the minimum allowable distance between a property line (or the right-of-way line) of an abutting street and a principal building on a lot.
City of Duluth UDC Q Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions
14-27
(1) Front Building Setback. The minimum allowable distance between the right-of-way line of any abut-ting street and any part of a principal building on a lot. The front setback distance is applied along the full length of the right-of-way line and is parallel to it.
(2) Rear Building Setback. The minimum allowable distance between a rear lot line and any part of a principal building on a lot. The rear building setback extends along and is parallel to the full length of the rear lot line.
(3) Side Building Setback. The minimum allowable distance between a side lot line and any part of a prin-cipal building on a lot. The side building setback extends along and is parallel to the side lot line be-tween the front building setback and a rear building setback (if any).
Principal Sign. See Sign, Principal.
Principal Use. The specific, primary purpose for which land or a building is used, such as residential living, professional services, retail sales or manufacturing.
Project, Development. The entire proposed development project, regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed.
Project Entrance Sign. See Sign, Project Entrance.
Properly Designed. Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conserva-tion Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the Manual as approved by the Commission up until the date of NOI submittal.
Protection Area or Stream Protection Area. With respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream.
Q
Quadruplex. A detached residential structure containing four dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than four families living independently of each other.
R
Rate (Small Cell Wireless Facility). A recurring charge.
Recharge Area. Any portion of the earth's surface, where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer.
Reconditioning Work (Small Cell Wireless Facility). The activities associated with substantially painting, reconditioning, improving, or repairing authority poles.
Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and,
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recrea-tional, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Recycled Water System. A water system that captures and reuses water previously used in wash or rinse cycles.
Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions R City of Duluth UDC
14-28
Redevelopment. A land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improve-ments which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution.
Regional Stormwater Management Facility or Regional Facility. Stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either elimi-nated or reduced.
Regulated Activity (Discharge). Any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S. excepting those activities exempted in Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act.
Repetitive Loss. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals, or exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Replace, Replacement, or Replacing (Small Cell Wireless Facility). to replace a pole or decorative pole with a new pole or a new decorative pole, similar in design, size, and scale to the existing pole or decorative pole consistent with 47 C.F.R.  1.40001(b)(7) as it existed on January 1, 2019, in order to address limitations of, or change requirements applicable to, the existing pole to structurally support the collocation of a small wireless facility.
Replacement Work. The activities associated with replacing an authority pole.
Replacement Planting. The planting of trees on a site that before development had more trees, and after development shall have fewer trees per acre.
Residential or Community Shelter. A facility licensed by the State Department of Human Resources for the purpose of receiving, on a temporary basis, persons who are subject to family violence as defined by Geor-gia Statutes 19-13-20 and 19-13-22.
Residential Use. See Use, Residential.
Right of Way (Small Cell Wireless). Generally, property or any interest therein, whether or not in the form of a strip, which is acquired for or devoted to a public road; provided, however, that such term shall apply only to property or an interest therein that is under the ownership or control of the City and shall not include property or any interest therein acquired for or devoted to an interstate highway or the public rights, struc-tures, sidewalks, facilities, and appurtenances of buildings for public equipment and personnel used for or engaged in administration, construction, or maintenance of public roads or research pertaining thereto or scenic easements and easements of light, air, view and access.
Right-of-Way. A portion of land over which a local or state government has designated a right of use.
Right-of-Way Line. The dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a continuous street, sidewalk, railroad, or other public right-of-way.
Riparian. Belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond, or impoundment.
Roadway. The paved portion of a street from back of curb to back of curb (or edge-to-edge of pavement for streets not having curbs) but excluding driveway aprons, bridges, and large single-and multi-cell culverts that in a hydrologic sense, can be considered to function as a bridge.
Roadway Drainage Structure. A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material (such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material) that conveys water under a roadway by
City of Duluth UDC S Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions
14-29
intercepting the flow on one side of the roadway (consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas), and carry-ing water to a release point on the other side. Roof Line. The top of a flat roof or the ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof.
Roof Sign. See under Building Sign.
Runoff. Stormwater runoff.
S
Screening. A method of shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby
structure or use from another by opaque fencing, walls, berms, densely planted vegetation, or the like.
Seasonal Event. See Holiday or Seasonal Event.
Sediment. Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion.
Sedimentation. The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice, or gravity.
Semi-Trailer. A trailer with a set or sets of wheels at the rear, the forward portion of which is designed to be supported by the truck tractor or towing vehicle. For the purpose of this definition, flatbeds designed to be hauled by truck tractors are included as semi-trailers.
Setback. The distance between a street line or lot line and the building line of a principal building or structure.
Setback, Minimum. The shortest distance allowed between a street line or lot line and any principal or accessory building on a lot. Minimum setback requirements for buildings are associated with the type of lot line from which the setback is taken; for instance, a side yard setback is measured from a side lot line.
(1) Front Building Setback. The minimum allowable distance between a street line or lot line and the front building line of a principal building or structure, projected to the side lines of the lot and including driveways and parking areas, except where otherwise prohibited by this Code.
(2) Rear Building Setback. The minimum allowable distance between a rear lot line and the building line. The rear building setback extends along and is parallel to the full length of the rear lot line.
(3) Side Building Setback. The minimum allowable distance between a side lot line and the building line. The side building setback extends along and is parallel to the side lot line between the front building setback and a rear building setback (if any).
Setback, Stream. With respect to a stream, the area (established by the Stream Buffer Protection provisions of Article 8) extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream.
Shopping Center. See Planned Center.
Shrub:
(1) A self-supporting woody plant that may reach a height of less than 15 feet, such as but not limited to, azalea, boxwood, yew, hawthorn, hydrangea, holly, nandina, or camellia.
(2) A woody plant of relatively low height, as distinguished from a tree by having stems and branches rather than a single trunk.
Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions S City of Duluth UDC
14-30
Site (of Development). The parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located.
Sign. Any structure, device, object, design or display that is used or intended to be used to attract the attention of or to convey information to the public, and that is placed in such a way, whether outdoors, indoors, or
near a window, as to be in the view of the general public from the exterior of any building on the property.
Sign, A-frame, Sidewalk, or Sandwich. A temporary, movable sign not secured or attached to the ground or surface which it is located. This type of sign is typically A shaped or in some variation thereof (including a sign displayed on an easel) is usually double sided.
Sign, Aggregate Area. The combined area of all sign faces of a particular category on a single parcel. For example the aggregate sign area of all freestanding signs on a parcel is the sum total of the sign face areas of all freestanding signs on such parcel.
Sign, Animated. A sign that has moving parts or includes action, motion, or color changes, or the optical illusion of action, motion, or color changes, including signs using elec-
tronic ink, signs set in motion by wind or by mechanical means such as the blowing of air or motorized parts, or made up of a series of sections that turn, including any type of screen using animated or scrolling displays such as an LED (light-emitting diode) screen or any other type of video display.
Sign, Banner. A sign of fabric, thin plastic, or similar lightweight material that is mounted to a pole or a building at one or more edges and is intended or displayed as commercial speech. Flags displaying noncommercial speech shall not be considered to be banners.
Sign, Billboard. Any monument sign erected on undeveloped property.
Sign Body. Portion of a sign structure that is intended or designed primarily to support or display the sign face, exclusive of the signs base or deco-rative cap, if any.
Sign, Building Marker. See under building sign.
Sign, Canopy. See under building sign.
Sign, Changeable Copy. A type of animated sign that is capable of
changing the position or format of texts or other displays on the sign face or change the visible display of words, numbers, symbols and graphics by the use of a matrix of electric lamps, movable discs, movable panels, light apertures or other methods, provided these changes are actuated by either a control mecha-nism or manually on the face of the sign. Changeable copy signs include the following types:
(1) Manually Activated: A sign whose alphabetic, pictographic, or symbolic informational content can be changed or altered by placing such letters or other message elements directly on the sign face by hand.
(2) Electronic: A sign whose alphabetic, pictographic, or symbolic informational content can be changed and is displayed electrically or electronically. See also LED sign.
A-Frame Sign
City of Duluth UDC S Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions
14-31
Sign, Channeled Letter. Signs that have their letters cut out of the sign face or raised above the sign face, described as:
(1) Internally Channeled Letters: Letters or other symbols cut into a sign face and located above a re-cessed background surface, often designed for the background surface to be illuminated by an artifi-cial light source.
(2) Reverse-Channeled Letters: Letters or other symbols raised above a background surface designed to be illuminated from behind and within the letters or symbols by an artificial light source.
Sign Copy. The words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors or other design elements that are used to convey the message, idea or intent for which a sign has been erected or placed.
Sign, Dilapidated/Deteriorated. A sign that is structurally unsound, has defective parts, or is in need of painting or other maintenance.
Sign, Double-Faced. A sign structure with two sign faces that are parallel (back-to-back) or that form an angle to one another of no more than 60 degrees, where each sign face is designed to be seen from a different direction and the two sign faces are separated from each other at their nearest point by no more than 12 inches. Sign faces or sign modules on a single sign structure that are separated by more than 12 inches are treated as separate signs.
Sign Face. Portion of the surface of a sign structure where words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements are or may be located in order to convey the message, idea, or intent for which the sign has been erected or placed. The sign face may be composed of two or more modules on the same surface that are separated or surrounded by portions of a sign structure not intended to contain any adver-tising message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature.
Sign, Flag. See flag.
Sign, Height. The vertical distance from the ground to the highest point of the sign structure, as measured from the adjacent finished grade at the base of the sign.
Sign, Illuminated. Any sign or portion thereof that is illuminated by artificial light, either from an interior or exterior source, including outline, reflective, or phosphorescent light, whether or not the source of light is directly affixed as part of the sign, and shall also include signs with reflectors that depend upon sunlight or automobile headlights for an image.
(1) Direct or Internal Illumination. A sign illuminated by an internal source.
(2) Indirect or External Illumination. A sign illuminated by an external light source directed primarily toward such sign.
Sign, Incidental. A small sign, emblem, or decal no larger than 1 square feet in area. Such signs are normally located on doors, windows, and gas pumps, or in parking lots or loading areas, may be freestanding or building signs, and are generally not readily visible or legible from public rights-of-way.
Sign, Inflatable. A sign that is either expanded to its full dimensions through mechanical means of an air blower or supported by gasses contained within the sign, or sign parts, at a pressure greater than atmospheric pressure.
Sign, Kiosk. See Kiosk.
Sign, Marquee. See under Building Sign.
Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions S City of Duluth UDC
14-32
Sign, Mobile. See Vehicular Sign.
Sign Module. Each portion or unit of a sign face that is clearly separable from other such units by virtue of its individual or independent construction or framing.
Sign, Monument. See under Freestanding Sign.
Sign, Multi-Faced. A single freestanding sign structure consisting of two sign faces (see Double-Faced Sign) or three or more sign faces that are separated from each other at their nearest point by no more than 12 inches. Sign faces or sign modules on a single sign structure that are separated by more than 12 inches are treated as separate signs.
Sign, Neon. An illuminated sign containing a glass tube filled with neon or phosphors, which is bent to form letters, symbols or other shapes, or otherwise used to highlight, decorate or outline the sign.
Sign, Nonconforming. A sign legally existing at the time of its placement or erection that could not have been approved under the terms of this Development Code.
Sign, Permanent. Any sign that is securely affixed to the ground or to a building and not readily removable. Temporary signs are not considered to be permanent signs.
Sign, Pole. See under Freestanding Sign.
Sign, Portable. A sign whose principal supporting structure is intended, by design and construction, to be used by resting on the ground for support and may be easily moved or relocated for reuse. Portable signs shall in-clude, but are not limited to, signs mounted on a trailer, bench, wheeled carrier, or other non-motorized mobile structure with or without wheels. See also Sign, A-Frame, Sidewalk, or Sandwich.
Sign, Pre-Permanent. A temporary sign used for signage by a new business until the permanent sign is installed.
Sign, Principal. The main, most prominent or largest freestanding or building sign on a propertys street frontage or principal building, other than a project entrance sign as defined in this Article. Such signs are of perma-nent construction and not placed as temporary signage.
Sign, Prohibited. Any sign, other than a non-conforming sign, not conforming to this Article.
Sign, Project Entrance. A permanent freestanding sign located at an entrance designed and permitted for vehicular access into a multi-family development, or into a development containing multiple lots, such as, but not limited to, a particular single-family residential subdivision, a townhouse condominium subdivision, or a commercial subdivision such as an office park or industrial park where buildings are located on sepa-rate lots.
Sign, Projecting. See under Building Sign.
Sign, Roof. See under Building Sign.
Sign, Temporary. Any sign, the use of which is short-term in nature, that is affixed to or placed on the ground or to a building but is readily removable and not intended for permanent installation.
Sign, Under Canopy. See under Building Sign.
Sign, Wall. See under Building Sign.
Significant Recharge Areas. Those areas mapped by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition.
Single-Family Detached Dwelling. A detached building containing one dwelling unit. See also Manufactured home, Modular home, and Site-Built Single-Family Detached Dwelling.
City of Duluth UDC S Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions
14-33
Site. The parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located.
Site-Built Single-Family Detached Dwelling. A single-family detached dwelling constructed on the building site
from basic materials delivered to the site, in contrast to assembly of pre-constructed and which is constructed in accordance with all requirements of the construction codes as adopted by the City of Duluth.
Slope. The degree of deviation of a surface from horizontal, measured in a numerical ratio, percent or degrees. Expressed as a ratio or percentage, the first number is the vertical distance (rise) and the second is the horizontal distance (run), as 2:1 or 200 percent (200%). Expressed in degrees, it is the angle of the slope from the horizontal plane with a 901 slope being vertical (maximum) and 451 being a 1:1 slope.
Small Cell Wireless Facility. A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: (i) all antennas shall either be enclosed in a canister with a combined maximum height of 4 feet and a maximum total volume of 15 cubic feet, and (ii) all other wireless equipment shall, to the extent feasible, be contained within the pole or support structure, but if mounted externally, shall not exceed a maximum volume of 23 cubic feet, and must be attached to the pole. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunica-tions demarcation box, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services.
Small Wireless Facility. Radio transceivers; surface wave couplers; antennas; coaxial, fiber optic, or other cabling; power supply; backup batteries; and comparable and associated equipment, regardless of techno-logical configuration, at a fixed location or fixed locations that enable communication or surface wave communication between user equipment and a communications network and that meet both of the follow-ing qualifications: (i) each wireless provider's antenna could fit within an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume; and (ii) all other wireless equipment associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in volume, measured based upon the exterior dimensions of height by width by depth of any enclosure that may be used. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of the volume of all other wireless equipment associated with any such facility: electric meters; concealment elements; telecommunications demarcation boxes; grounding equipment; power transfer switches; cut-off switches; and vertical cable runs for connection of power and other ser-vices. Such term shall not include a pole, decorative pole, or support structure on, under, or within which the equipment is located or collocated or to which the equipment is attached and shall not include any wireline backhaul facilities or coaxial, fiber optic, or other cabling that is between small wireless facilities, poles, decorative poles, or support structures or that is not otherwise immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a particular antenna.
Softwood Tree. Any coniferous (cone bearing) tree. This definition is based on the colloquialism, and does not necessarily reflect any true qualities of the tree.
Soil and Water Conservation District Approved Plan. An erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control plan approved in writing by the 15th Soil and Water Conservation District.
Special Event Facility. An establishment where special events including, but not limited to, weddings, wedding receptions, private parties and similar events are held and which provides meals for food services in con-nection with such events and which meets the definition in Chapter 3 of the Duluth Code of Ordinances.
Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions S City of Duluth UDC
14-34
Special Use. The term applied to those uses specifically identified and approved by the City Council under the requirements set forth herein.
Specimen Tree. Any tree which has been determined by the Citys Landscape Architect to be of high value because of its type, size, age, and/or of historical significance, or other professional criteria, and has been so designated in administrative standards established by the City. This is usually a plant with desirable form, foliage, fruit, or flower that can be emphasized although isolated.
Stabilization. The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity.
Start of Construction. The date a permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, recon-struction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or foot-ings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and in-cludes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erec-tion of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are not exempt from any article requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
State. The State of Georgia.
State General Permit. The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the states authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30.
State Waters. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia that are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation.
Stormwater. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, but which also includes:
(1) Water from those sources described in this Article; and/or,
(2) Any discharge permitted under NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other appli-cable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the city separate storm sewer system.
Stormwater Better Site Design. Nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a sites impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management.
City of Duluth UDC S Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions
14-35
Stormwater Management. The collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare.
Stormwater Management Design Manual. The most recent version of the Gwinnett County, Georgia, Stormwater Design Manual.
Stormwater Management Facility. Any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff.
Stormwater Management Measure. Any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice.
Stormwater Management Plan. A document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this ordinance.
Stormwater Management System. The entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the storm-water runoff from a site.
Stormwater Retrofit. A stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site.
Stormwater Runoff. The flow of surface water resulting from precipitation.
Story, Building. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor above it. If there is no floor above it, a room, suite, or story with more than one-half of its height below grade shall not be consid-ered a story for the purposes of height regulations. One-story measures 12 feet in height. The first floor of a two or multi-story building shall be deemed the story
that has no floor immediately below it that is designed for living quarters or for human occupancy but has at least  of its height on one side below grade. Those stories above the first floor shall be numbered con-secutively.
Stream. Any stream, beginning at:
(1) The location where the normal stream flow has wrested the vegetation. The normal stream flow is any flow that consists solely of base flow or consists of both base flow and direct runoff during any period of the year. Base flow results from the groundwater that enters the stream channel through the soil. This includes spring flows into streams. Direct runoff is the water entering stream channels promptly after rainfall or snow melts; or,
(2) A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 20 acres or more; or,
(3) Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 20 acres, the Planning and Development Department may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream.
Stream Bank. The confining cut of a stream channel.
Stream Buffer. See under Buffer.
Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions S City of Duluth UDC
14-36
Stream Channel. The portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream.
Stream Protection Area. See Protection Area.
Street. A public thoroughfare, that affords the principal means of access to abutting property. Various types of streets may be defined as follows:
(1) Arterial. A Principal Arterial, Major Arterial, or Minor Arterial street as defined and designated in the Comprehensive Plan of Gwinnett County.
(2) Major Thoroughfare. Any public street, existing or proposed, that is shown in the Comprehensive plan as an arterial or collector.
(3) Minor Collector. A through street having the primary function of connecting subdivisions or other areas to Major Collector streets or other major thoroughfares, or functioning as a central route within a subdivision channeling traffic from the local streets to an abutting major thoroughfare or another Minor Collector street. For the purposes of these Regulations, a central but non-through route within a subdivision or other project will be considered a Minor Collector, if the Average Daily Traffic generat-ed by the development on the route will exceed 2,000 trips.
(4) Marginal Access Street. A local street that is parallel to and adjacent to a major thoroughfare and that provides access to adjacent properties and protection from through traffic.
(5) Local Nonresidential Street. A surface street intended primarily to provide local access to adjacent existing or planned commercial or industrial development and not for through traffic.
(6) Local Residential Street. A surface street intended primarily to provide local access to adjacent resi-dential development and not for through traffic.
(7) Cul-De-Sac. A street having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated within the development by a vehicular turnaround. For the purpose of designation, a cul-de-sac street shall be in-terpreted to begin at the intersection of two or more streets nearest to the vehicular turnaround.
(8) Alley or Service Drive. A minor, permanent, public service-way that is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side for properties otherwise abutting on a street.
(9) Driveway. A vehicular access way in private ownership, other than a Private Street, that provides access primarily to only one property.
Street Line. The dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street.
Street, Private. Any right-of-way or area set aside to provide vehicular access within a development that is not dedicated or intended to be dedicated to the city, and that is not maintained by the city; An access way similar to and having the same function as a public street, providing access to more than one property, but held in private ownership (as distinct from a "driveway"). Private streets shall be classified as local streets for purposes of determining building setbacks.
Street, Public. A right-of-way dedicated to and accepted by the City of Duluth for vehicular traffic or over which the City of Duluth may hold a prescriptive easement for public access, and including designated and num-bered U. S. and State Highways. For the purposes of this Development Code, the term "public street" shall be limited to those that afford or could afford a direct means of vehicular access to abutting property, and exclude limited access roadways that abut a property but from which direct access may not be allowed under any circumstances.
Street, Right-of-Way. The dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a street right-of-way.
Structural Buffer. See under Buffer.
City of Duluth UDC S Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions
14-37
Structural Erosion, Sedimentation, and Pollution Control Practices. Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either chang-ing the surface of the land or storing, regulating, or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. Structural Stormwater Control. A structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to something on the ground, including, but not limited to: buildings, signs, gasoline pumps, parking lots, patios, pools, decks, manufactured homes, gas or liquid storage tanks, and canopies.
Subdivider. Any person, individual, firm partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, or any other group or combination acting as a unit dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as herein defined, including an agent of the subdivider.
Subdivision:
(1) (verb) Any division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel od land, regardless of its existing or future use, into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or building sites. The term, "subdivision" shall mean the act or process of dividing property.
(2) (noun) Where appropriate to the context, the term "subdivision" also may be used in reference to the aggregate of all lots or building sites held in common ownership at the time of division.
Substantial Damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means:
(1) The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or,
(2) In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.
(3) This term includes structures, which have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial im-provement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other struc-tural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to com-ply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project.
Substantially Improved. Existing manufactured home park or subdivision is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.
Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions T City of Duluth UDC
14-38
Subtenant. A natural person, business, or other entity that subleases or is otherwise allowed to occupy a portion of land or a building, the majority of which is also occupied by a tenant. For the purposes of this Develop-ment Code, a subtenant is not treated as a tenant as defined herein.
Support Structure (Small Cell Wireless Facility). A building, billboard, water tank, or any other structure to which a small wireless facility is or may be attached. Such term shall not include a decorative pole, electric transmission structure, or pole.
T
Telecommunications:
(1) Accessory Equipment. Any equipment serving or being used in conjunction with a wireless facility or wireless support structure and includes, but is not limited to, utility or transmission equipment, power supplies, generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings, cabinets, and storage sheds, shelters, or similar structures.
(2) Antenna. Communications equipment that transmits, receives, or transmits and receives electromag-netic radio signals used in the provision of all types of wireless communication services.
(3) Base Station. A structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass a tower as defined in this Glossary or any equipment associated with a tower.
(a) The term includes, but is not limited to, equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless ser-vices and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.
(b) The term includes, but is not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including Distributed Antenna Systems and small-cell networks).
(c) The term includes any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the City of Duluth under the Wireless Telecommunications Section of Article 3 of this UDC, supports or houses equipment described under a) and b) of this definition that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary pur-pose of providing such support.
(d) The term does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the City of Duluth under the Wireless Telecommunications Section of Article 3 of this UDC, does not support or house equipment described under a) and b) of this definition.
(1) Collocate or Collocation. The placement or installation of new wireless facilities on previously ap-proved and constructed wireless support structures, including monopoles and towers, both self-supporting and guyed, in a manner that negates the need to construct a new freestanding wireless support structure. Such term includes the placement of accessory equipment within an existing equipment compound.
(2) Eligible Support Structure. Any base station as defined in this Glossary; or, any tower built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services
City of Duluth UDC T Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions
14-39
and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site. Eligible support struc-tures are further defined as existing at the time the relevant application is filed with the City of Duluth under the Wireless Telecommunications Section in Article 3 of this UDC. (3) Equipment Compound. An area surrounding or adjacent to the base of a wireless support structure within which accessory equipment is located.
(4) Modification or Modify. The improvement, upgrade, expansion, or replacement of existing wireless facilities on an existing wireless support structure or within an existing equipment compound, provid-ed such improvement, upgrade, expansion, or replacement does not increase the height of the wire-less support structure or increase the dimensions of the equipment compound.
(5) Registry. Any official list, record, or register maintained by local governing authority of wireless facili-ties, equipment compounds, or wireless support structures.
(6) Substantially Change. A modification that substantially changes the physical dimensions of an eligi-ble support structure as defined in this Glossary if it meets any of the following criteria:
(a) For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it increases the height of the tower by more than 10 percent or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it increases the height of the structure by more than 10 percent or more than 10 feet, whichever is greater. (Changes in height should be measured from the original support structure in cases where deployments are or will be separated horizontally, such as on buildings rooftops; in other circumstances, changes in height should be measured from the dimensions of the tower or base station, inclusive of originally approved appurtenances and any modifications that were approved prior to the passage of the Spectrum Act.)
(b) for towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than 6 feet;
(c) for any eligible support structure, it involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four cabinets; or, for towers in the public rights-of-way and base stations, it involves installation of any new equip-ment cabinets on the ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than 10 percent larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure;
(d) it entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site;
(e) it would defeat the concealment elements of the eligible support structure; or
(f) it does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure or base station equipment, provided however that this limitation does not apply to any modification that is non-compliant only in a manner that would not exceed the thresholds identified in a) through d) of this definition.
(1) Utility. Any person, corporation, municipality, county, or other entity, or department thereof or entity related or subordinate thereto, providing retail or wholesale electric, data, cable, or telecommunica-tions services.
Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions T City of Duluth UDC
14-40
(2) Wireless Facility. The set of equipment and network components, exclusive of the underlying wireless support structure, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and accessory equipment, used to provide wireless data and wireless telecommunication services.
(3) Wireless Support Structure. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole, tower, either guyed or self-supporting, or suitable existing or alternative structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Such term shall not include any telephone or electrical utility pole or any tower used for the distribution or transmission of electrical service.
Temporary Event. An activity having a specific duration or the end of which is related to a specific action, usually lasting for only a few days or months at a time.
Tenant. A natural person, business, or other entity that occupies land or buildings by ownership, under a lease, through payment of rent, or at will; the primary occupant, inhabitant, or dweller of a place. See also sub-tenant.
Tenant Frontage. The horizontal distance in feet between the walls that delimit an exterior faade of a tenant space. A tenant space may be a standalone building with a single occupant, or a portion of a planned center that is separated from all other tenant spaces for occupancy by a single tenant.
Timber Harvesting. The felling, loading, and transporting of timber products (pulpwood etc.). The term timber harvesting may include both clearcutting and selective cutting of timber.
Trail, Multi-use. A hard surface (concrete, asphalt, boardwalk, etc.) transportation structure specifically constructed for alternative transportation such as walking, biking, roller blading, etc., and not intended to transport motorized vehicles such as cars, trucks, or motorcycles.
Tree. Any living, self-supporting woody or fibrous plant that normally obtains a Diameter Breast Height of at least 3 inches, and typically has one main stem or trunk and many branches.
Tree Removal or Removal of Trees. Any act that causes a tree to die within two years after commission of the act, including, but not limited to, damage inflicted upon the root system or trunk as the result of:
(1) The improper use of machinery on the trees;
(2) The storage or materials in or around the trees;
(3) Soil compaction;
(4) Altering the natural grade to expose the roots or to cover the trees root system with more than 4 inches of soil;
(5) Causing the infection or infestation of the tree by pests, fungus, or harmful bacteria;
(6) Pruning judged to be excessive by the Director or not in accordance with the standard set forth by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA);
(7) Paving with concrete, asphalt, or other impervious surface within such proximity as to be harmful to the tree or its root system; or,
(8) Application of herbicides or defoliants to any tree without first obtaining a permit.
Tree Density Standard (TDS). The minimum number of Tree Density Units per acre that must be achieved on a property after development.
Tree Density Unit (TDU). A credit assigned to a tree, based on the diameter of the tree, in accordance with tables contained in this Ordinance.
City of Duluth UDC U Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions
14-41
Tree Diameter. The widest cross-sectional dimension of a tree trunk measured at diameter breast height (DBH) or at a point below DBH for new trees or multi-trunked species, but in no case less than 6 inches from the ground.
Tree Preservation/Replacement Plan (TP/RP). A plan that identifies Tree Protection Areas on a property where existing trees are to be preserved and where proposed replacement trees are to be planted to meet mini-mum requirements, as well as methods of tree protection to be undertaken on the site and other pertinent information.
Tree Protection Area (TPA). Any portion of a site wherein are located existing trees that are proposed to be preserved in order to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance. The Tree Protection Area shall in-clude no less than the total area beneath the tree canopy as defined by the drip line of the tree or collective group of trees.
Tree Save Area. An area designated for the purpose of meeting tree density requirements, saving natural trees, and/or preserving natural buffers.
Tree-Thinning. Selective cutting or thinning of trees only for the clear purpose of good forestry management in order to protect said forest from disease or infestation and in no way shall be constructed as clear-cutting.
Triplex. A multi-family dwelling containing three dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than three families living independently of each other.
Trout Streams. All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a selfsustain-ing population of rainbow, brown, or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First-order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs.
Two-Family Dwelling (Duplex). A building containing two single-family dwelling units totally separated from each other by an unpierced wall extending from basement to roof.
U
Understory. Those trees that grow beneath the overstory, and will generally reach a mature height of less than 40 feet.
Use:
(1) Any purpose for which, a building, structure, or a tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained, or occupied; or,
(2) Any activity, occupation, business, or operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in a building or other structure or on a tract of land.
Use, Nonresidential. A principal use that is a business engaged in the sale of goods or the provision of personal, professional, business, entertainment, or other services; an institutional or nonprofit organization; a busi-ness engaged in the fabrication, manufacture, or production of durable or non-durable goods; an activity for the administration or support of a business or organization; or a place of lodging for the travelling pub-lic, such as a hotel, motel, or bed and breakfast.
Use, Residential. A principal use that is intended for occupancy by an owner or lessee as their permanent abode.
Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions V City of Duluth UDC
14-42
Utility. A public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, storm water systems, and railroads or other utilities identified by the Planning and Development Department.
Utility Pole. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part for the purpose of carrying electric distribution lines or cables or wires for telecommunications, cable or electric service, or for lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function regardless of ownership, including city-owned poles. Such term shall not include structures supporting only Wireless Facilities.
V
Vegetative Erosion and Sedimentation Control Measures. Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with:
(1) Permanent seeding, sprigging, or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or,
(2) Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or,
(3) Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass.
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia.
Vehicular Sign. Any sign placed, mounted, painted on, or affixed to a motor vehicle or to a freight, flat-bed or storage trailer or other conveyance, whether motorized or drawn.
W
Wall Sign. See under Building Sign.
Watercourse. Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater.
Watershed Buffer. See under Buffer.
Water Supply Watershed. The area of land upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake.
Watershed. The land area that drains into a particular stream.
Way. A street or alley or other thoroughfare or easement permanently established for passage of persons or vehicles.
Way, Pedestrian. A right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use, intended primarily for pedestrians and from which motor vehicles are excluded.
Wetlands. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and simi-lar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation.
Window Sign. See under Building Sign.
Wireless Facility. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, including: (i) equipment associated with wireless communications; and (ii)
City of Duluth UDC X Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions
14-43
radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and compara-ble equipment, regardless of technological configuration. The term includes small call wireless facilities. The term does not include the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocat-ed. Wireless Infrastructure Provider. Any person, including a person authorized to provide telecommunications services in this state, that builds, installs, or operates small wireless facilities, poles, decorative poles, or support structures on which small wireless facilities are or are intended to be used for collocation but that is not a wireless services provider.
Wireless Provider. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider.
Wireless Services. Any services provided to the public using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile.
Wireless Services Provider. A person that provides wireless services.
Wireline Backhaul Facility. An aboveground or underground wireline facility used to transport communications data from a telecommunications demarcation box associated with small wireless facility to a network.
X
Y
Yard (with principal building). An area that lies between the principal building on a lot and the nearest lot line.
(1) Front Yard. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, measured between the front lot line and the front line of the main building. Corner lots shall be considered to have two front yards or one ex-terior side and one front yard.
(2) Rear Yard. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, measured between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the main building.
(3) Exterior Side Yard. A yard between the building and attached structures, and the adjacent street right-of-way line along the lot extending from front yard to rear yard.
(4) Interior Side Yard. A yard between the building and attached structures, and adjacent sideline of the lot adjoining another lot, and extending from the front yard to the rear yard.
Examples of Required Yards in Corner Lots
Section 1403 Glossary of Definitions Z City of Duluth UDC
14-44
Yard (no principal building). An area beginning from the nearest lot line or street right-of-way line, as described below, to the interior of a lot.
(1) Front Yard. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, measured at a point beginning from the adjacent street right-of-way line. Corner lots shall be considered to have two front yards or one side and one front yard.
(2) Rear Yard. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, measured at a point beginning from the rear line of the lot. The rear line shall be opposite the street right-of-way line used to designate the front yard.
(3) Side Yard. A yard that is not a front yard or rear yard.
(4) Interior Side Yard. A yard between the building and attached structures, and adjacent sideline of the lot adjoining another lot, and extending from the front yard to the rear yard.
Z
Zero Lot Line. The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more of the buildings sides rest directly on a lot line, such as patio homes or fee simple town-house condominiums.
Zoning Buffer. See under Buffer.
Examples of Required Yards in Irregular Shaped Lots
Example of Zero Lot Line:
Patio Homes
City of Duluth UDC
14-45
BLANK PAGE
 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
 This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section  Section 
this Code D-154  8-11-75 1, 2 8-41, 8-42 83-11-1 11-14-83 101 4-51 102 4-54 103-106 4-56-4-59 107 4-55 108 4-60 109, 110 4-52, 4-53 111 4-61 83-11-2 11-14-83 101-110 7-451-7-460 83-11-3 11-14-83 101, 102 5-31, 5-32 103, 104 5-34, 5-35 105 5-33 83-11-4 11-23-83 101 5-55 102-106 5-57-5-61 121, 122 5-62, 5-63 123(a)-123(d) 5-64-5-67 124 5-72 125 5-68 125(a)-125(c) 5-69-5-71  9-24-70(1) 104 8-86 106-113 8-87-8-94  9-24-70(4) 13 10-1 19, 20 10-2, 10-3 21(a)-21(c) 9-1-9-3 27 10-4 27(c) 10-5 33 10-6 35 10-7 38 10-8  2- 8-71 art. I,  1- 13-1-13-4 art. I,  4 art. II,  1- 13-5-13-14 art. II,  10 art. III,  1- 13-36-13-43 art. III,  8  6-10-74 1-10 6-41-6-50 14-26 6-1-6-13 27 8-28 28 6-14 30-32 6-15-6-17  7-14-75(1) 1 2-56 2, 3 2-58, 2-59  6- 8-81 1-7 7-96-7-102 8(a)-8(d) 7-103-7-106 9 7-107 12-13-82 1, 2 5-1 3, 4 5-2, 5-3 10-10-83 1 7-131 2 7-132, 7-133 10-11-83 1-3 7-156-7-158 4, 5 7-161, 7-162 6 7-160  4-8-85 I 10-9  4-8-85 I-III 11-81-11-83  4-8-85 16-81  7-14-86 1, 2 3-214.1 10-13-86 8-27 12- 8-86 I-XI 7-321-7-331 XII 7-332, 7-333  4-13-87(1) 1 7-391 2 7-406 3 7-407, 7-408 4-7 7-409-7-412 8 7-426 7-429 9, 10 7-413, 7-414 11-15 7-392-7-396 16 7-426 17 7-428 18 7-427 19 7-430  4-13-87(2) 1 7-186 2 7-201 3 7-202, 7-203 4 7-204 5 7-206 6 7-208 7 7-205 8 7-207 9 7-209 10 7-222 11-13 7-188-7-190 14 7-187 15 7-221 16-18 7-223-7-225 12-21-87 1, 2 14-1, 14-2 3(1)-(3) 14-3 3(4) 14-4 3(5) 14-3 4-8 14-8-14-12 9 14-5 14-13, 14-14 10 14-6 12 14-7  2- 8-88 5-151  5-23-88 9-3001, 9-3002 4-1, 4-2 9-3003(a)-9-3003(e) 4-9-4-13 9-3004-9-3019 4-14-4-29 9-3020 4-8 9-3021 4-7 9-3022 4-6 9-3023 4-5 9-3024 4-4 9-3025 4-3  9-12-88 8-27(a)(2)  9-12-88 9-61-9-65 9-67, 9-68  9-12-88 1.1 9-31 1.2-1.5 9-35-9-38 1.6 9-34 1.7 9-32, 9-33 12-27-88 2-46  5- 8-89(1) 1-1001-1-1007 3-1-3-7 1-2001-1-2015 3-36-3-50 1-3001-1-3020 3-71-3-90 1-4001-1-4023 3-111-3-133 1-5001-1-5003 3-156-3-158 1-6001-1-6011 3-181-3-191 1-7001-1-7015 3-211-3-225 1-8001, 1-8002 3-246, 3-247 1-9001-1-9008 3-271-3-278  5- 8-89(2) 1(B), 1(C) 7-277 1 7-249 2 7-246 7-249 3 7-247 7-249 4 7-249 5 7-276 6-19 7-250-7-263 21-26 7-278-7-283 27-30 7-283-7-286 31-35 7-296-7-300 36 7-264 37 7-277 38 7-266 39 7-248  6-12-89 1-5 7-501-7-505 10- 9-89(1) I-III 12-1-12-3 IV 12-12 V(A) 12-36 V(B)(1)-V(B)(5) 12-37-12-41 V(C) 12-42 V(D)(3), V(D)(4) 12-44, 12-45 VI 12-4 VII(A)-VII(D) 12-5-12-8 VIII(A), VIII(B) 12-9, 12-10 IX(C) 12-11 10- 9-89(2) 1 7-103-7-106 2 7-103-7-106 3 7-107 12-11-89 1-14 7-356-7-369  1- 8-90 11-83(5)  1- 8-90 1-5 15-26-15-30 6a 15-31 6b 15-32 6c 15-33 7-20 15-34-15-47  4- 9-90(2) 8-43  4- 9-90(3) 1-3 11-51-11-53 4 11-54 11-57 5 11-63 6, 7 11-55, 11-56 8-12 11-58-11-62  4- 9-90(4) 1, 2 11-26, 11-27 3 11-29 3(a) 11-28 4 11-30  5-29-90 1, 2 8-66(a), (b) 3, 4 8-66(d), (e)  6-18-90 1 7-26 2(a), 2(b) 7-27, 7-28 3 7-29  6-18-90(2) 1, 2 7-51, 7-52 3-7 7-66-7-70 8, 9 7-53, 7-54 10, 11 7-71, 7-72 12 7-72 13 7-55  9-21-90 2 2-57 11-12-90 1-14 8-116-8-129 11-26-90 11-1 12-17-90 1 3-3 2 3-190 3 3-272 12-27-90 3-156  1-14-91 7-53  2-25-91(1) 7-204 7-223  2-25-91(2) 7-409 7-428  2-25-91(3) 3-156(b)  3-25-91 2 12-9  4- 8-91 5-56  8-12-91 11-26-11-30  8-12-91 13-2, 13-44 11-25-91 Adopting Ordinance, p. vii  1-13-92 5-101-5-108  1-13-92 Art. I, 1-4 13-1-13-4 Art. II,  1-11 13-5-13-15 Art. III,  1-5 13-36-13-40 Art. III,  6(A), (B) 13-41, 13-42 Art. III,  7 13-43 Art. IV,  1 13-16  3- 9-92 1 8-66(a) 2-4 8-66(c)-(e)  3-23-92 11-1  4-20-92(Mo.) 8-66  4-27-92 7-413  4-27-92 15-42.1  5-11-92 I 10-9  6- 8-92 A       Rnbd 8-66(c)(4)       as 8-66(b)(4) B 8-66(c)(7) 10-12-92 1 7-156 2 7-158 11- 9-92 13-2, 13-16, 13-40  1-25-93 1 3-89(a) 2 3-89(c)  3- 8-93 7-27  3- 8-93       Rpld 7-263  4- 5-93 2-47  4-26-93 3-123  4-26-93 Art. I 7-601 2-1, 2-2 7-621, 7-622 3-1-3-4 7-631-7-634 4-1-4-7 7-641-7-647 5-1 7-651 6-1 7-661 7-1, 7-2 7-671, 7-672 8-1-8-4 7-681-7-684  4-26-93 Art. 1(1.1-1.3) 14-51-14-53 Art. 2(2.1) 14-61 Art. 3(3.1-3.3) 14-71-14-73 Art. 4(4.1-4.4) 14-81-14-84 Art. 5(5.1-5.5) 14-91-14-95 Art. 6(6.1-6.3) 14-101-14-103 Art. 7(7.1-7.5) 14-111-14-115 Art. 8(8.1-8.3) 14-121-14-123 Art. 9(9.1-9.4) 14-131-14-134  4-26-93 1 10-10  6-14-93 11-1  7-12-93 1 3-226  8- 9-93(Mo.) 3-78  9-13-93 1-9 13-44  9-27-93 7-328(a), 7-329 11- 8-93       Rpld 3-121, 7-99       Added 3-121 11- 8-93 9-61, 9-65(3), 9-65(9) 11-22-93 2-56, 2-57(a), 2-57(c), 2-58, 2-59 12-13-93 2-47  2-14-94 2-96-2-98  2-28-94 1 7-328(b) 2 7-328(a)(6)  8-22-94       Added 2-1  8-22-94 I-VI       Added 2-71-2-76  9-30-94       Added 2-85-2-90 10-24-94 14-122, 14-131 11-14-94 I-IX 12-1-12-12, 
12-36-12-46 12-12-94 100-137       Added 2-1-2-25.13 139-143       Added 2-25.14-2-25.18  7-24-95 3-501-3-567  7-24-95 3-601-3-664  7-24-95 3-701-3-758  7-24-95 1, 2 3-504 3 3-504.5 4, 5 3-519, 3-520 6 3-557(e) 7 3-535(e) 8       Added 3-516.5 9 3-525(b) 10 3-528 11 3-562(b) 12 3-561(a) 13 3-511(e) 14 3-536  7-24-95 1, 2 3-604 3       Added 3-604.5 4 3-617 5 3-618(b) 6 3-654(f) 7 3-632(e) 8       Added 3-615.5 9 3-623(b) 10 3-626 11 3-658(b) 12 3-657(a) 13 3-609(e) 14 3-633  7-24-95 1, 2 3-704 3       Added 3-704.5 4 3-720 5 3-721(b) 6 3-724(h) 7, 8 3-749 9-11       Added 3-731.1-3-731.3 12 3-732 13, 14 3-714 15 3-726(b) 16 3-728(b) 17 3-753(a) 18 3-752(b) 19 3-709(e)  7-24-95 1 3-726(b) 2 3-623(b) 3 3-525(b)  7-24-95 1 3-753(c) 2 3-749(f) 3 3-753(e) 4 3-658(c) 5 3-654(g) 6 3-562(c) 7 3-557(f)  7-24-95 1 3-753(h) 2 3-658(i) 3 3-562(h)  8-14-95 1 7-70 2, 3 7-100, 7-101 4       Rpld 7-102 5 7-186 6 7-359 7 7-503 8 Ch. 7, Art. XIV, 
Div. 3 (tit.) 9 7-631 10 7-633  9-11-95 5-55-5-61       Added 5-61.1-5-61.5  9-11-95 I-IX 12-1-12-12, 
12-36-12-46 10- 9-95 1 3-639(e), (f) 10- 9-95 1 Ch. 7, Art. XIV (tit.) 2, 3 7-621, 7-622 4-6 7-631-7-633 7, 8 7-641 9-11 7-642-7-644 12, 13 7-646, 7-647 14-19 7-651 20 7-661 12-11-95 7-156-7-162  2-12-96 2-47(a)(3)  2-12-96 2-87  2-12-96 1 3-629  2-12-96 1 7-25.18  2-12-96 1 7-204  2-12-96 1 7-283(a)  2-12-96 1 7-322  2-12-96 1 7-360  2-12-96 1 7-409  2-12-96 1       Rpld 2-96-2-98       Added 2-96-2-99  3-11-96 5-55-5-61.5, 6-41  3-25-96       Added 8-66(c)(8)  5-13-96       Added 13-45  6- 3-96 1 3-656.5  6- 3-96 7-13  6-24-96 5-55-5-61.5, 6-41  6-24-96       Added 7-685-7-694  7- 8-96 3-520(a)  9- 9-96 13-2, 13-36(2), 
13-44(d)(4) 10-14-96 1       Rpld 3-544 10-14-96 1       Rpld 3-645 10-14-96       Added 15-61-15-75 10-28-96 1 2-87 10-28-96 1 3-510(d) 10-28-96 1 3-608 10-28-96 1 3-708(d) 11-11-96       Added 2-106, 2-107 11-25-96 1 7-25.1 11-25-96 15-72  1-13-97       Added 2-26  3-24-97 1 3-602 2 3-628 3 3-646 4 3-647(c), (d) 5 3-656.5  3-24-97       Added 10-11  4-28-97 1       Added 3-628.5 2, 3 3-661, 3-662  6- 9-97 5-55-5-61.5, 6-41       Added 7-95  6- 9-97 12-8       Added 12-12(f)  6-23-97 1 7-11 2 7-16  8-11-97 1-3       Added 10.5-1-10.5-3 4-21       Added 10.5-21-10.5-38 10-13-97 1-34       Rpld 7-601 7-621, 7-622 7-631-7-634 7-641-7-647 7-651, 7-661 7-671, 7-672 7-681-7-684       Added 7-601-7-633 10-13-97 290-5-58.02-       Added 9-81-9-83 290-5-58.04 11-10-97 1 3-602 2       Added 3-636.5 3 3-628 11-10-97 1 7-53 11-24-97 1 3-637  1-12-98 2-26  2- 9-98 5-151  2-23-98 1-12       Added 7-711-7-722  4-13-98       Added 2-2  6-22-98 14-61       Rpld 14-91-14-95       Added 14-91-14-100.7  7-13-98 1, 2 7-53(d)  9-14-98       Added 2-3 10-26-98 14-96, 14-98 12-14-98       Rpld 3-500-3-567       Added 3-500-3-566 12-14-98       Rpld 3-600-3-664       Added 3-600-3-673 12-14-98       Rpld 3-700-3-758       Added 3-700-3-762 12-14-98       Added 3-1100-3-1134 12-14-98       Added 3-1200-3-1235  1-25-99 1       Added 3-846(c)  2-22-99 2-56, 2-57(a), (b)  2-22-99 13-2, 13-36, 
13-42  3-22-99 14-61  4-26-99 Art. 1(1.1-1.5)       Added 5-201-5-205 Art. 2(2.1-2.5)       Added 5-211-5-215 Art. 3(3.1-3.7)       Added 5-221-5-227 Art. 4(4.1-4.4)       Added 5-231-5-234 Art. 5(5.1)       Added 5-241  8-23-99 3-537, 3-640 3-735  9-27-99       Added 10-13 12-13-99       Added 8-67  1-24-00 2-47(a)(3)  6-28-00 3-509  8-14-00       Added 8-68 10- 9-00 I-VII       Added 16-21-16-27 10- 9-00 I-V       Added 16-41-16-45 10- 9-00 I-VI       Added 16-61-16-66 10-23-00 I-VIII, IX(c)       Rpld 12-1-12-12 12-36-12-46       Added 12-1-12-8 12-11-00 2-106  1- 2-01 2-47(3)  2-26-01 2-47(3)  3-26-01 5-55 5-57-5-61.1 6-41  4-23-01       Added 10-14  4-23-01       Added 10-15  7-23-01 3-602 3-630(b) 3-634 3-673       Added 3-635(c)  7-30-01 7-602 7-614(a), (c) 7-616, 7-624 7-625       Rpld 7-614(a)(18), (19) 7-615(b)       Added 7-634, 7-635  9-10-01 ch. 5, art. V(tit.) 5-151  9-24-01 I-IX 12-1-12-9 10-22-01       Rpld 7-156-7-162       Added 7-156-7-161 11-26-01 2-48 11-26-01       Added 10.5-39  1-14-02 2-47  1-14-02       Added 4-10.1  1-14-02       Added 10.5-40  1-28-02 10.5-1, 10.5-28  2-25-02 2-96(b)  2-25-02 7-453(a) 7-455  3-25-02 2-96(a)  4- 8-02       Added 2-110-2-114  4-22-02 3-702 3-729       Added 3-730(7) 3-760(5)  4-22-02       Added 8-69  5-13-02 9-65(3)  5-13-02 1 14-61 2       Added 14-96(f)  5-28-02       Rpld 7-611(c)  5-28-02 10.5-28  7-22-02 3-602       Added 3-670(10)  8-26-02       Added 2-200-2-207 10-28-02       Added 14-94.5 12- 9-02 14-71  1-27-03       Added 7-730-7-732  2-10-03 2-96(e) 2-99  2-10-03       Rpld 15-26-15-47       Rnbd 15-61-15-75       as 16-90-16-104  2-24-03       Added 3-645(e)  4-28-03 3-540(a)  4-28-03 7-8  5-12-03 5-55-5-61.1 5-61.3-5-61.5 6-41, 7-95       Added 5-61.6, 5-61.7  5-27-03       Rpld 4-1, 4-2 4-4-4-29       Added 4-1, 4-2 4-4-4-23 4-71-4-81  7-14-03       Added 8-51-8-58  7-14-03       Rpld 14-81(1)(b)       Rnbd 14-81(1)(c)       as 14-81(1)(b)       Rpld 14-83  8-25-03       Added 2-208 10-27-03 2-47(2) 11-10-03       Added 7-750-7-769 12- 8-03       Added 2-209 12- 8-03 13-42  2- 9-04       Rpld 7-356-7-369 7-501-7-505 7-685-7-694       Added 7-356-7-370  3- 8-04 I-IX 12-1-12-9  3- 8-04 101-104       Rpld 
201-210 
301-310       Added 
401 13-1-13-16 
13-36-13-45 
13-1-13-4 
13-21-13-31 
13-41-13-49 
13-61  3- 8-04 1-8       Rpld 16-90-16-104       Added 16-90-16-97  3- 8-04 1.1-1.6       Added 16-111-16-116 1.8       Added 16-117 1.11       Added 16-118  3-22-04 7-362  3-22-04       Added 11.5-1-11.5-15  3-29-04 3-602       Added 3-670(11)  4-12-04 2-110  4-12-04 11-54-11-56  4-26-04       Added 3-645(f)  3- 8-04 2-96(b) 10-11-04 11.5-2-11.5-5 11.5-9, 11.5-11       Added 11.5-13.5 11- 8-04 3-730 12-13-04 2-47(2)  1-24-05       Added 2-27  4-11-05 arts. 1-11       Added 16-131-16-141  4-25-05 2-209  7-11-05       Rpld 8-54(b)  8- 8-05 2-96(b)  8- 8-05 7-25.15 10-10-05 2-209 10-24-05 14-100.4       Added 14-83 11-14-05       Rpld 5-201-5-205 5-211-5-215 5-221-5-227 5-231-5-234 5-241       Added 5-201-5-205 5-211-5-221 5-231-5-254 5-266-5-273 5-281 12-12-05       Added 11.5-10(f) 12-30-05 3-602, 3-629 3-742       Rnbd 3-632-3-673       as 3-633-3-674       Added 3-632  2-27-06 11.5-4(5)  3-27-06 2-48(a), (e)(1)  4-24-06       Added 7-800-7-816  5- 8-06 6-7  5-22-06 8-53(e)-(j)  6-12-06 2-47(2)  7-10-06       Added 11-31  7-24-06 2-96(a), (b)  8-14-06 2-86-2-90  8-14-06 3-520, 3-618 3-720  9-25-06       Rpld 16-111-16-118       Added 16-100-16-112 16-113-16-129 10- 9-06 3-602, 3-635       Added 3-620(a)(18) 3-629(b)(10) 3-632.5, 3-671(12) 10-23-06 3-502, 3-602 3-702, 3-760(5) 11-13-06 7-357       Added 7-367(14) 12-11-06 2-47(2) 12-11-06       Added 9-84-9-87 12-29-06 3-648  2-26-07       Added 5-222  2-26-07       Rpld 7-750-7-769       Added 7-750-7-781  2-26-07 10-2  2-26-07       Rpld 13-1-13-4 13-21-13-31 13-41-13-49 13-61       Added 13-1, 13-2 13-20-13-26 13-40  3-26-07 2-87  4-23-07       Added 3-561(e) 3-668(e) 3-757(e) 3-1129(e) 3-1230(e)  5-14-07 5-272, 5-273  6-11-07 2-96(b)  6-11-07       Added 2-221-2-231 10- 8-07 8-51 12- 3-07 1       Added 7-900, 7-901 12-17-07 2-47(2) 12-17-07 2-96  6- 9-08 7-3(a), 7-4  6-30-08 2-47(2)  6-30-08       Added 7-920-7-934  7-28-08 3-650       Rnbd 3-664-3-674       as 3-665-3-675       Added 3-555(f) 3-662(f) 3-664 3-751(f) 10-13-08       Rpld 2-26 10-27-08 1, 2       Added 7-950, 7-951 12-22-08 3-502, 3-602 3-702, 3-1102 3-1202 12- 8-08 2-47(2)  2-23-09       Added 1-6(c)  3-23-09 1       Rpld 16-97  4-13-09 3-519(i), 3-564(3) 3-617(h), 3-672 3-719(h), 3-760(3)       Rpld 3-518(c), 3-522(4) 3-616(c), 3-620(4) 3-625, 3-674(c)(5) 3-718(c), 3-721(4) 3-1115(b), 3-1117(4) 3-1215(b), 3-1217(4)  6- 8-09 2-96(c)  6-22-09 1-6(c)  7-27-09 2-250-2-260  7-27-09       Added 16-150  9-14-09 10.5-39 11-23-09 7-21(b)  3- 8-10 3-634  4-12-10       Added 2-4  4-12-10 2-47(2)  5-10-10 2-96(c)  5-10-10       Rpld 11-81-11-83       Added 11-81-11-86  6-28-10 I-X ch. 12(tit.) 12-1-12-10  7-12-10 7-17(c), 7-27  8- 9-10       Rpld 3-500-3-566 3-600-3-675 3-700-3-762 3-1100-3-1134 3-1200-3-1235       Added 3-100-3-109 3-115, 3-200-3-212 3-215, 3-220-3-228 3-240, 3-241 3-250-3-268 3-280-3-283 3-300-3-311 3-320-3-330 3-335, 3-336 3-340-3-342 3-350, 3-360-3-364 3-370, 3-371 3-375, 3-380-3-384 3-900, 3-901 3-910-3-915  8- 9-10 8-66  9-13-10 10.5-28 10-11-10 3-264 11- 8-10       Rpld 8-86-8-94       Added 8-86-8-96 11- 8-10 12-5(b) 12-13-10 3-240(a) 12-13-10       Added 16-155, 16-156  1-24-11 3-253(b)  3-14-11 3-252  3-14-11       Rpld 7-246-7-262 7-264-7-266 7-276-7-286 7-296-7-300       Added 7-246-7-261  4-11-11 3-253(b)  4-11-11 3-259(a)  5- 9-11 7-156, 7-157  5- 9-11 8-66(b)  6-13-11 1-6(c)  6-13-11       Added 15-1-15-16  6-13-11       Added 15-20  7-11-11 3-103, 3-383  8- 8-11       Rpld 7-1-7-25.18       Added 7-1-7-25.11 7-26-7-29 7-67, 7-69, 7-72  7-11-11 1 3-282 2 3-310 11-14-11 pt. I 3-103 pt. II 3-256 pt. III 3-335 11-14-11 3-900(g), 3-901 12-12-11 pt. I 3-250 pt. II       Added 3-269 pt. III 3-335 12-12-11 1-3       Added 10.5-51-10.5-53  2-13-12 3-115(d)  3-12-12       Added 3-216  5-14-12       Rpld 7-246-7-261       Added 7-246-7-266  5-14-12 3-103  6-11-12 2-96  6-11-12 2-87  6-11-12       Added 2-49  6-11-12 2-228  6-11-12 3-115  7- 9-12 15-20  8-13-12       Rpld 3-100-3-109, 3-115, 3-200-3-212, 3-215, 3-216, 3-220-3-228, 3-240, 3-241, 3-250-3-269, 3-280-3-283, 3-300-3-311, 3-320-3-330 3-335, 3-336, 3-340-3-342, 3-350, 3-360-3-364, 3-370, 3-371, 3-375, 3-380-3-384, 3-900, 3-901, 3-910-3-915       Added 3-100-3-112, 3-115, 3-200-3-213, 3-215, 3-216, 3-220-3-228, 3-240, 3-241, 3-250-3-273, 3-280-3-282, 3-300-3-307, 3-320-3-328 3-335, 3-336, 3-340-3-342, 3-350, 3-360-3-364, 3-370, 3-371, 3-375, 3-380-3-384, 3-390 3-900, 3-901, 3-910-3-915  9-10-12       Added 5-283-5-290 10- 8-12 3-252 10- 8-12 3-221, 3-240, 3-260, 3-266 10- 8-12 3-111 12-10-12 3-240 12-10-12 3-271 12-10-12 pt. I 3-112 pt. II 3-203 pt. III 3-204 pt. IV 3-205 pt. V 3-221 pt. VI 3-228  8-13-12 2-47  2-11-13 art. I,  1-3       Added 18-1-18-3 art. II,  1-5 18-11-18-15 art. III,  1-3 18-21-18-23 art. V 18-31 art. VI 18-41 art. VII 18-51 art. VIII,  1, 2 18-61 art. IX,  1-4 18-71 art. X,  1-4 18-81-18-84  3-11-13       Added 2-270-2-272  3-11-13 1 3-103 2       Added 3-274 3 3-342 4       Added 3-335(28)  3-11-13 3-267  3-11-13 1 3-270 2 3-271  3-11-13 9-65  3-11-13 11.5-7(2), 11.5-11(v)  5-13-13 3-103 10-14-13 2-270 10-14-13 1       Rpld 7-95-7-107       Added 7-95-7-112 10-14-13 11-84 12- 9-13 1-6 12- 9-13 pt. I 3-111(b) pt. II 3-112(c) pt. III 3-204(e) pt. IV 3-215, 3-216 pt. V 3-251(a) pt. VI 3-253(a) pt. VII       Rpld 3-303       Added 3-303 pt. VIII 3-281 pt. IX 3-255, 3-265  2-24-14       Rpld 5-55-5-61.7       Added 5-55-5-61.5  4-14-14 3-206(c), (d)  5-12-14       Added 2-280, 2-281 12- 8-14 2-89(a), (b)  1-12-15 2-1  2- 9-15 pt. I 3-251 pt. II 3-240(b) pt. III 3-267 pt. IV 3-252(c) pt. V 3-253 pt. VI 3-204(d) pt. VII 3-335  3- 9-15 pt. I 3-103 pt. II       Added 3-342(d) pt. III       Added 3-275  6- 8-15 B       Rnmd Ch. 17 C(1)       Rpld 5-101-5-108, 
5-151 C(2)       Rpld 11.5-1-11.5-15 C(3)       Rpld 12-1-12-10 C(4)       Rpld 14-51-14-53, 
14-61, 
14-71-14-73, 
14-81-14-84, 
14-91-14-100.7, 
14-101-14-103, 
14-111-14-115, 
14-121-14-123, 
14-131-14-134 C(5)       Rpld 7-451-7-460 C(6)       Rpld 16-21-16-27, 
16-41-16-45, 
16-61-16-66, 
16-81, 
16-90-16-96, 
16-100-16-129 
16-131-16-141, 
16-150, 
16-155, 16-156  9-14-15       Rpld 4-1-4-24, 
4-71-4-81       Added 4-1, 4-2  9-14-15 7-609  9-14-15 pt. I 3-111  9-14-15 pt. I 3-264 pt. II 3-265(b) pt. III 3-341 pt. IV 3-266 pt. V 10-4  9-14-15 pt. I 3-102 pt. II 3-103 pt. III 3-206(d) pt. IV 3-112(b) pt. V 3-250 pt. VI       Rpld 3-251 pt. VII 3-252 pt. VIII 3-253(c) pt. IX 3-255 pt. X 3-256 pt. XI 3-260 pt. XII       Rpld 3-272 pt. XIII 3-274 pt. XIV       Rpld 3-280       Added 3-280 pt. XV       Added 3-283 pt. XVI 3-281(a) pt. XVII 3-300 pt. XVIII 3-301 pt. XIX 3-303 pt. XX 3-324 pt. XXI 3-364(f) pt. XXII 3-911(e) pt. XXIII 3-914(b)  9-14-15       Rpld 3-370, 3-371  9-14-15 pt. I 3-221(b) pt. II 3-228(a) pt. III 3-240(b)  9-14-15 pt. I 3-268 pt. II 3-364 pt. III 3-115(b)  1-11-16 1       Rpld 4-51-4-61  1-11-16 1 2-96(b)  1-11-16 1       Rpld 7-186-7-190, 7-201-7-209, 7-221-7-225 2       Rpld 7-391-7-396, 7-406-7-414, 7-426-7-430  3-14-16 3-262       Rpld 3-263  3-14-16 7-327, 7-328  3-14-16       Added 7-952-7-962  4-11-16 pt. I 2-47 pt. II 2-48  4-11-16 7-248(c)  5- 9-16 3-268  5- 9-16 pt. I 3-103 pt. II 3-250 pt. III 3-259  5- 9-16 15-20(b)  7-11-16 pt. I 3-900(c) pt. II 3-901(c)  8- 8-16 pt. I 3-261 pt. II 3-341(f) pt. III 3-342  8- 8-16 3-205  8- 8-16 2-209  8- 8-16 3-255       Added 3-255.1       Added 3-365 11-14-16 3-11 11-14-16 pt. I 3-103 pt. II 3-256 pt. III 3-281 12-12-16 2-272   3-13-17 5-55-5-61.5   8-14-17 2-209(b)   9-18-17       Added 2-290-2-292   2-12-18 2-27   2-12-18 3-103 3-335 3-250(b) 3-240(f)       Added 3-329 3-204   3-12-18 2-270-2-272   8-13-18 7-359-7-361 7-363 7-367(4)   8-13-18       Added 5-101-5-106  8-13-18       Rpld 5-1-5-3, 5-31-5-35       Added 5-1-5-3, 5-21-5-46 11-13-18 1 3-112  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
 This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
O.C.G.A. 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-7 1-4 1-3-1(d)(3) 1-2 1-3-2 1-2 1-3-3 1-2 1-4-1 1-2 2-10-105 7-13 tit. 3 Ch. 3 3-101 3-3-2.1 3-255.1 3-364 3-2-3.1(a)(1) 3-255.1 3-3-21 7-102 3-3-23 3-364 10-15 3-4-133 3-901 3-5-24.1 3-250 3-329 3-5-36(2)(D) 3-256 3-5-81 3-329 3-6-4 3-261 3-341 3-11-3 3-260 tit. 8 Ch. 5 9-11-6 1-2 12-8-20 et seq. Ch. 13 tit. 16 Ch. 10 16-5-71 7-751 16-5-71.1 7-751 16-7-51(6) 13-2 tit. 16, ch. 6 7-261 tit. 6, ch. 9, art. 20(J) 5-34 16-11-34 Ch. 8, Art. V 16-12-5 7-751 16-12-20(2) 7-96 16-12-20(3) 7-97 16-12-35 7-105 16-12-35(a)-(k) 7-96 16-12-35(c) and (d)(1)(2)       7-103 16-12-35(b), (c) or (d)       7-98 16-12-35(d)(1)(B), (C)       7-98 16-12-35(e), (f), or (g)       7-107 17-6-51 7-719 17-6-52 7-719 17-6-53 7-719 17-10-3 10-9 10-14 10-15 21-3-64(d) 2-46 tit. 22 Char.,  1.13 tit. 25 Ch. 6 25-3-4 6-41 25-9-6 18-23 26-2-25 7-732 31-3-4 7-751 tit. 31, ch. 5 7-751 7-779 tit. 31, ch. 9 7-773 tit. 31, ch. 40 7-751 7-755 7-758 7-771 7-779 31-40-1(1) 7-753 32-4-42(6) 18-1 tit. 33 Ch. 7, Art. VI 33-3-5 7-156 33-8-8 et seq. 7-13 tit. 35 Ch. 11 35-3-35(a)(1.2) 7-248 35-9-1 Ch. 11, Art. II 36-1-20 18-1 36-30-4 Ch. 8, Art. IV 36-32-10 10-15 36-71-2(8) 7-2 36-82-62 15-2 tit. 40 Ch. 8 tit. 40, ch. 6 8-26 40-1-1 8-26 40-6-1-40-6-395 8-26 40-6-7 Ch. 8, Art. V 40-6-20(a) 8-53 40-6-20(f)(7) 8-53 40-6-206 Ch. 8, Art. IV 40-6-183 Ch. 8, Art. II, Div. 2 40-6-253(2) 3-261 3-341 40-6-371 Ch. 8 40-6-371(a)(1) Ch. 8, Art. III 40-6-371(a)(10) Ch. 8, Art. II, Div. 2 40-6-372 8-26 40-6-373-40-6-376 8-26 40-11-1 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. IV 8-91 tit. 41 Ch. 9 43-8-1 7-51 43-8-1(3) 7-98 43-8-1 et seq. Ch. 7, Art. III 43-17-5 7-356 43-17-9 7-356 43-24A-1 et seq. 7-246 7-247 43-24A-3 7-247 43-24A-4 7-247 43-24A-19 7-264 43-24A-22(a) 7-247 tit. 43, ch. 34 7-752 7-755 7-770 7-773 43-34-126 10-14 43-40-1 7-6 44-1-13 Ch. 3, Art. IV 44-12-90 Ch. 11, Art. III 44-12-136 Ch. 7, Art. IX 46-3-1 et seq. 7-13 46-5-1 7-950 7-951 46-7-15 7-13 tit. 48 7-26 48-5-355 7-13 48-5-356 7-13 48-5-359 2-1 48-6-90 et seq. Ch. 7, Art. V 48-6-93 7-13 7-131 7-132 tit. 48, ch. 8 7-922 43-12-1 et seq. 7-13 48-13-1 et seq. Ch. 7, 7-4 48-13-5 5-102 48-13-5-48-13-26 7-2 48-13-7 7-4 48-13-9 7-2 7-25.11 48-13-9(b)(17) 7-246 7-247 48-13-9(c)(1) 7-5 48-13-9(c)(1)-(18) 7-5 48-13-50 et seq. 7-800 7-816 48-13-52 7-810 48-13-55 7-13 50-27-70 7-98 50-27-70(b)(2)(A) and (B)       7-98 50-27-71 7-106 50-27-71(a.1) and (b)       7-106 50-27-78 7-106 50-27-84(b)(1) 7-104 50-27-84(b)(2) 7-103 50-27-70(b)(2)(A) and (B)       7-98 50-27-86(1) 7-103  
