CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF DECATUR, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 1995 by Order of the City Commission 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
DECATUR, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Elizabeth Wilson 
Mayor 
____________ 
Anne J. Branscome 
Bill Floyd, Mayor Pro Tem 
Andrew J. Harris, Jr. 
Bill Mealor 
City Commission 
____________ 
Peggy Merriss 
City Manager 
____________ 
Thomas O. Davis 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Karen M. desIslets 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Decatur, Georgia. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1967 Code, as supplemented through August 1990, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city commission. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1967 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 RELATED LAWS INDEX RLi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Supervising Editor, and Robert MacNaughton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Karen M. desIslets, City Clerk, and Mr. Thomas O. Davis, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Decatur, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Decatur, Georgia. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Decatur, Georgia. 1995. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ordinance 
Number Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supplement 
Number O-10-09 12- 6-10 Included 10 O-08-11  8- 4-08 Included 10 O-11-10 11-21-11 Included 11 O-12-05  7- 3-12 Included 12 O-12-07 11- 5-12 Included 13 O-12-Z-08  8-20-12 Included 13 O-12-Z-09  8-20-12 Included 13 O-12-Z-10 10-15-12 Included 13 O-12-Z-15 12- 3-12 Included 13 O-12-Z-16 12- 3-12 Included 13 O-12-Z-17 12- 3-12 Included 13 O-12-Z-18 12- 3-12 Included 13 O-12-Z-19 12- 3-12 Included 13 O-12-Z-20 12- 3-12 Included 13 O-12-Z-21 12- 3-12 Included 13 O-12-Z-22 12- 3-12 Included 13 O-12-Z-28 12-17-12 Included 13 O-13-01  2- 4-13 Included 13 O-13-02  2- 4-13 Included 13 O-13-03  2-19-13 Included 13 O-13-04  2-19-13 Included 13 O-13-Z-03  3-18-13 Included 13 O-13-07  5- 6-13 Included 14 O-13-16 12-16-13 Included 14 O-14-06  5- 5-14 Included 14 O-14-15  7- 7-14 Included 14 O-15-11  7-20-15 Included 14 O-14-07  5-19-14 Included 15 O-14-Z-26 11-17-14 Included 15 O-15-01  1-20-15 Included 15 O-15-Z-01  1-20-15 Included 15 O-15-09  7- 6-15 Omitted 16 O-15-12 10- 5-15 Included 16 O-15-13 10- 5-15 Included 16 O-15-14 10- 5-15 Included 16 O-15-15 10-19-15 Included 16 O-15-16 11-16-15 Omitted 16 O-15-Z-19 12-21-15 Included 16 O-16-01  2-16-16 Included 16 O-16-02  2-16-16 Included 16 O-16-08  5-16-16 Included 16 O-16-09  5-16-16 Included 16 O-16-Z-09  6-20-16 Included 16 O-16-12  9-19-16 Included 16 O-16-13 10-17-16 Included 16 O-16-Z-13  8-15-16 Included 17 O-17-02  3-20-17 Included 17 O-17-03  3-29-17 Included 17 O-17-04  5-15-17 Included 17 O-17-08  5-15-17 Omitted 17 O-17-09  6-19-17 Included 17 O-17-10  6-19-17 Included 17 O-17-13 12-18-17 Included 18 O-18-01  3- 5-18 Included 18 O-18-03  4- 2-18 Included 18 O-18-04  5-21-18 Included 18 O-18-13  7-16-18 Included 19 O-18-14  7-16-18 Included 19  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Decatur, GA, as adopted by the city commission on February 5, 2001, and effective on July 1, 2001. Amendments to the Charter will be indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION; BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 1.10. - Incorporation. 
    The City of Decatur, in DeKalb County, Georgia, originally incorporated as the "Town of Decatur" on December 10, 1823 is reincorporated by the enactment of this Charter and is constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name of the "City of Decatur." References in this Charter to "the city" or "this city" refer to the City of Decatur, Georgia. The city shall have perpetual existence. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
    The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of this Charter, with such alterations as may be made by local act or in any other manner provided by general state law. The boundaries of this city shall be shown at all times on a map, a written description or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be, as the "Official (Map and/or Description) of the Corporate Limits of the City of Decatur, Georgia." Photographic, typed or other copies of such map or description, certified by the mayor, shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map or description. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL POWERS 

Sec. 2.10. - Generally. 
(a)  The city shall have all rights, powers, privileges, titles, property, easements and hereditaments, within or without its corporate limits, existing on the effective date of this Charter and belonging to or in any way pertaining to the city, or possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state, as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. The city may in its corporate name sue and be sued, contract and be contracted with, plead and be impleaded, and have and use a common seal. The city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this Charter or by general law. 
(b)  The city commission may define, regulate and prohibit any act, practice, conduct or use of property that is detrimental to the inhabitants of the city and may provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
(c)  The city commission may adopt and enforce any and all ordinances, resolutions, bylaws, rules, regulations and restrictions, consistent with state law, that it may consider advisable and necessary: 
(1)  For the government of the city commission and the transaction of its business, and the regulation of the administrative and judicial services of the city; 
(2)  For the health, sanitation, cleanliness, prosperity, comfort, safety, security, good order, welfare or proper government of the city and the inhabitants thereof; 
(3)  To foster and promote virtue and good morals in the city; 
(4)  To suppress disorderly conduct; and 
(5)  To carry out and execute the powers granted to the city and to the city commission under this Charter. 
(d)  The city commission may enforce such ordinances by such penalties as are authorized by law and may do any and all other acts and exercise all other powers conferred upon it by this Charter, or that may be done or exercised under the laws of this state conferring powers on municipal corporations. 
Sec. 2.11. - Property. 
(a)  The city may purchase, hold, rent, lease, sell, exchange, enjoy, possess and retain in perpetuity or for any term of years any property, estate or estates, real or personal, lands, tenements and hereditaments of whatsoever kind inside or outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The government, control, management and protection of the real property of the city, as it exists on the effective date of this Charter or as it may be enlarged or extended by purchase, gift or otherwise, and the disposition of any portions thereof, are continued and vested exclusively in the city commission. 
Sec. 2.12. - Rights and liabilities. 
    The city, as incorporated in this Charter, shall succeed to all the rights of and is hereby expressly made responsible, as a body corporate, for the legal debts, liabilities, contracts and undertakings of the City of Decatur and its governing body, as a body corporate, as incorporated in acts enacted before the effective date of this Charter. This Charter shall not impair the effect of any valid subsisting contract, in existence on the effective date of this Charter, between the City of Decatur as heretofore incorporated and any person, firm, company or corporation, and the city, as incorporated in this Charter, shall enjoy all the rights of the City of Decatur, as heretofore incorporated, under and by virtue of any such contract, and shall assume the obligations undertaken in any such contract. 
Sec. 2.13. - Public improvements; assessment of costs. 
(a)  The city commission shall have the power to: 
(1)  Provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation and maintenance of streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways, parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, squares, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities; 
(2)  Provide any other public improvements inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; 
(3)  Regulate the use of public improvements; and 
(4)  Acquire property by condemnation, in the manner prescribed in O.C.G.A. tit. 22, as amended, or such other applicable laws as have been or may be enacted, for the purposes described in subsections (a)(1)-(3) of this section or for the purposes of widening, straightening and grading streets, alleys or sidewalks, or in any way changing street lines or sidewalks. When the city commission desires to exercise the power and authority as to condemnation granted in this subsection, it may be done, whether the land to be condemned is in the hands of an owner, trustee, executor, administrator, guardian or agent. The city commission may abandon or discontinue such proceedings at any time upon payment of accrued costs. 
(b)  The city commission shall have full power and authority to remove, or cause to be removed, any buildings, steps, fences, trees, gates, posts or other obstructions or nuisances in the streets, alleys, lanes, sidewalks or other public places in the city, and to enforce the provisions of this section by appropriate ordinance. 
(c)  The city commission may levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs of grading, regrading, paving, repaving, macadamizing and remacadamizing of streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places or ways, and the construction, reconstruction and altering of curbing, guttering, storm sewers, turnouts, water mains, and water, gas or sewer connections therein, and to cover the costs of any other public improvements. 
Sec. 2.14. - Public utilities; extensions; costs. 
    The city may acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, gas works, electric plants, transportation facilities, public airports and any other public utility; and may fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations and penalties therefore; and may provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay therefore; and may make or authorize extensions of electrical distribution systems and other utility systems, and all necessary appurtenances by which such utilities are distributed, inside and outside the corporate limits of the city; and may provide utility services to persons, firms and corporations inside and outside the corporate limits of the city as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.15. - Use of streets, sidewalks and public grounds. 
    The city commission may provide for and regulate the curbs and gutters that empty into the sidewalks or streets of the city; may regulate or prohibit (except as such power may be restricted by general law) the use of the streets, alleys, sidewalks and public grounds for signs, signposts, awnings, telegraph or telephone poles, wires for telegraph, telephone or electric lighting or power purposes, electric light or power poles and for posting bills and advertising matter; may regulate or prohibit the carrying of handbills, banners or placards on the streets, sidewalks or other public places of the city, and the gathering or holding of public meetings for any purpose therein or thereon. The city commission may compel any telegraph, telephone or electric light or power company, having previously erected poles and wires in the city, to remove such poles and wires to any location designated by the city commission. If the company fails to remove any poles and wires within ten days after written notification by the city, the city may remove such poles and wires at the expense of such company and may collect such expenses by execution. The city commission may require that only pedestrians use public sidewalks. The city commission may regulate the use of whistles and other signals by stationary engines and factories. 
Sec. 2.16. - Nuisances. 
    The city commission may declare what shall be deemed a nuisance in the city and may provide for the abatement of nuisances. 
Sec. 2.17. - Disorderly conduct and other disturbances. 
    The city commission, by ordinance, may protect all places of divine worship and all schools and colleges within the city and may prohibit loitering or idling in or about such schools and colleges or the grounds thereof or any conduct tending to disturb the classes, services or duties being carried on or performed therein or the occupants of such institutions or the grounds thereof. The city commission, by ordinance and within the confines of the United States Constitution and the Georgia Code, may prohibit disorderly conduct and breaches of the peace and may restrict gatherings on the streets, sidewalks, alleys, other public places, buildings or vacant property, or in or about or near any residence in the city. 
Sec. 2.18. - Fire prevention. 
    The city commission may enact any and all ordinances, rules and regulations necessary to lay out a fire district in the city and may enlarge, change or modify such fire district; may prescribe how and of what materials buildings within the fire district may be erected, how thick the walls shall be; the manner in which chimneys, flues and stovepipes shall be constructed; and may make such reasonable rules, regulations and requirements as it may deem necessary to so far as possible protect the city from danger from fire; and may prevent conflagrations. The city commission may also order changes in the construction or arrangements of chimneys, stovepipes or flues, or the removal thereof when, in the judgment of the city commission, they are dangerous or likely to be so, or to compel the owner or occupant to make the changes or alterations ordered, by proper ordinance, and collect any expenses incurred by the city, under any ordinance passed carrying out the powers granted under this section by execution as in the case of collecting other costs due the city. 
Sec. 2.19. - Building regulations. 
    The city commission may regulate and license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures in a manner that is consistent with general law, and may regulate all housing and building trades, except as otherwise provided by general law. 
Sec. 2.20. - Flood control. 
    The city commission may control and regulate the flow of surface water within the limits of the city, whether occasioned by floods, freshets or otherwise. In the exercise of the power conferred in this section, the city commission may utilize the power of eminent domain and proceed by condemnation under and according to the provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 22 and the acts amendatory thereof. 
Sec. 2.21. - Public safety. 
    The city commission may provide for the inspection of steam boilers in the city, may regulate or prevent the storage of gunpowder, tar, pitch, rosin, coal, benzine, naphtha, nitroglycerin, turpentine, cotton, petroleum, kerosene oil, dynamite or other combustible or explosive substances, materials or liquids within the city limits; may regulate or prohibit fireworks, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1; may regulate or prohibit the discharge or other use of firearms and other weapons; and may prohibit every kind of hunting within the corporate limits of the city. 
Sec. 2.22. - Cemeteries. 
    The city commission may adopt ordinances, rules and regulations relating to city cemeteries, including, without limitation, provisions on burials in such cemeteries, disposition of lots, protection and preservation of property and punishment of violations. Such authority shall be extended over any additions to such cemeteries, whether within or without the corporate limits of the city. 
Sec. 2.23. - Roadside areas. 
    The city commission may prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings and any and all other structures and obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, inside or abutting the corporate limits of the city, and may prescribe penalties and punishments for the violation of such prohibitions and regulations. 
Sec. 2.24. - Parking lots; parking meters. 
(a)  The city may operate and maintain lots, buildings and other areas for the parking of vehicles. 
(b)  The city may purchase, acquire, rent or lease property of all kinds and may construct buildings on, and equip such lots for, the purposes set forth in subsection (a) of this section and may install parking meters on such lots and operate such parking meters. For those purposes, the city may enter into contracts, appropriate funds and borrow money. The city may make and collect such charges for the use of such parking lots as the city commission may deem proper, and the city commission may adopt all ordinances that it deems necessary or expedient to carry into effect the provisions of this section. 
Sec. 2.25. - Water and sewer contracts. 
    The city may enter into contracts with other municipalities and other governmental entities: 
(1)  To furnish to the city an adequate supply of pure water for the use of the city for any and all municipal purposes, and also for the use of the citizens of the city for all domestic purposes; may fix in such contracts such price or sum to be paid for the supply of water for the city and its citizens as may be agreed upon by the city and such municipalities and other governmental entities; and may stipulate in such contracts all of the terms and conditions upon which such supply or supplies of water are to be furnished to the city for municipal purposes and for the domestic use of its citizens. 
(2)  To furnish to such municipalities and other governmental entities an adequate supply of pure water for the use of such municipalities and other governmental entities for any and all municipal and other governmental purposes, and also for the use of the citizens of such municipalities and other governmental entities for all domestic purposes; may fix in such contracts such price or sum to be paid for the supply of water to be furnished such municipalities and other governmental entities and their citizens as may be agreed upon by the city and such municipalities and other governmental entities; and may stipulate in such contracts all of the terms and conditions upon which such supply or supplies of water are to be furnished to such municipalities and other governmental entities for municipal and other governmental purposes and for the domestic use of their citizens. 
(3)  To furnish to the city sewer connections and sewer facilities for the disposal of the sewage of the city; may fix in such contracts the price or sum to be paid for such sewer connections and sewer facilities for the disposal of the sewage of the city, as may be agreed upon by the city and such municipalities and other governmental entities; and may stipulate in such contracts all of the terms and conditions upon which such sewer connections and sewer facilities shall be furnished to the city. 
(4)  To furnish to such municipalities and other governmental entities sewer connections and sewer facilities for the disposal of the sewage of such municipalities and other governmental entities; may fix in such contracts the price or sum to be paid by such municipalities and other governmental entities for such sewer connections and sewer facilities for the disposal of the sewage of such municipalities and other governmental entities, as may be agreed upon by the city and such municipalities and other governmental entities; and may stipulate in such contracts all of the terms and conditions upon which such sewer connections and sewer facilities shall be furnished to such municipalities and other governmental entities. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY COMMISSION 

Sec. 3.10. - Created; number of commissioners; election. 
    The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city commission to be composed of five city commissioners. City commissioners shall be elected by receiving a plurality of the votes cast in the election district in which he or she qualified. City commissioners shall exercise their powers in such manner as may be prescribed by this Charter and the Constitution and applicable laws of the State of Georgia, or if not prescribed, in such manner as may be prescribed by the duly established ordinances of the city. 
Sec. 3.11. - Qualifications. 
(a)  No person shall be eligible for the office of city commissioner of the city unless he or she: 
(1)  Has resided in the city not less than one year immediately preceding or his/her election; 
(2)  Is a qualified voter in municipal elections for officers of the city; and 
(3)  Has not been convicted and sentenced for any violation of the criminal laws of Georgia involving moral turpitude, unless such person has received a full pardon or has all rights of citizenship restored. 
(b)  All city commissioners shall continue to reside within the city and within their election district, if any, during their terms of office as city commissioners. 
Sec. 3.12. - Compensation; expenses. 
    The mayor and the other city commissioners shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance and in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 
Sec. 3.13. - Election districts; election dates. 
(a)  (1)  For the purpose of electing city commissioners, the city is divided into two election districts consisting of the described territory of the City of Decatur contained in the description attached to this Charter and made a part hereof and further identified as "Plan: dec1". 
(2)  There shall be a post A and a post B for each such district. 
(3)  The election districts provided for in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall not affect any city commissioners in office on the effective date of this subsection but shall apply to all elections held after the effective date of this subsection. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  The term "tract" means and describes the same geographical boundaries as those provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Whenever the description of any district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city, as shown on the census maps for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. 
(3)  Any part of the City of Decatur which is not included in any election district described in this section shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. 
(c)  Those persons in office as city commissioners on April 1, 2000, shall serve out the remainder of the terms to which they were elected. Two city commissioners shall be elected from each of the two elections districts provided for in subsection (a) of this section, and one city commissioner shall be elected from the city at large. The at-large city commissioner may reside anywhere within the city and shall be elected by the electors of the city. A city commissioner elected from an election district must reside within the election district from which elected and shall be elected by the electors residing within the election district. 
(d)  The first city commissioners elected under this Charter shall be elected on the first Tuesday next following the first Monday in November 2001. Such city commissioners shall be the city commissioners from post A of each election district. They shall take office on the first Monday in January 2002 and shall serve terms of four years and until their successors are elected. 
Successors to such city commissioners shall be elected at the general municipal election held on the first Tuesday next following the first Monday in November 2005 and quadrennially thereafter for terms of office of four years. 
(e)  City commissioners shall be elected to post B of each election district and the at-large post on the first Tuesday next following the first Monday in November 2003. Such city commissioners shall take office on the first Monday in January 2004 and shall serve terms of four years and until their successors are elected. Successors to such city commissioners shall be elected at the general municipal election held on the first Tuesday next following the first Monday in November 2007 and quadrennially thereafter for terms of office of four years. 
(f)  A person offering for election as a district city commissioner shall designate the election district and post for which the person is offering. A person offering for election as the at-large city commissioner shall designate that the person is offering for such position on the city commission. The regular city election of the City of Decatur shall be held on the first Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of each odd-numbered year. 
(g)  All commissioners shall serve until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(h)  Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city commission offices, and all names of candidates for such offices shall be listed without party designation. 
(Ord. No. O-03-04, §§ 1, 2, 5-19-03) 
Sec. 3.14. - First meeting each year; commissioners' oath. 
    The city manager shall call to order the first meeting of the city commission in each calendar year. The city commissioners, before entering upon the duties of their office, shall take and subscribe the following oath or affirmation: 
"I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will well and truly demean myself as city commissioner of the City of Decatur for the ensuing term, and that I will faithfully enforce the Constitution and laws of the United States of America and of the State of Georgia, and the Charter and ordinances of the City of Decatur, to the best of my ability and without fear or favor, and in all my acts as city commissioner, I will act as I believe for the best interest of this city (so help me God)." 
Any city commissioner who is absent from such meeting shall take and subscribe the oath or affirmation as soon as possible. 
Sec. 3.15. - Election, term of mayor. 
    At the first regular meeting of the city commission in each calendar year, the city commission shall elect one of its members to serve as mayor for one year from the time of his/her election as mayor until or her successor shall have been elected and qualified. 
Sec. 3.16. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
    The mayor shall: 
(1)  Be recognized as the head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes, and by the governor for purposes of military law. 
(2)  Have no veto power, but shall have the same power to vote upon all questions passed upon as other city commissioners. 
(3)  Serve as the chair of the meetings of the city commission. He/she shall have the power to convene the city commission in extra session whenever, in his/her judgment, it becomes necessary, and shall do so whenever requested by three city commissioners in writing. 
Sec. 3.17. - Election, term, duties, absence of mayor pro tempore. 
    At the first regular meeting of the city commission in each calendar year, the city commission shall elect one of its members to serve as mayor pro tempore for one year from the time of his/her election as mayor pro tempore until his/her successor shall have been elected and qualified. The mayor pro tempore shall serve as the chair of the meetings of the city commission in the event of the absence or disability of the mayor. In the event of the absence or disability of both the mayor and the mayor pro tempore, the city commission shall elect a city commissioner to serve as chair of the meeting. The city commission shall declare the absence or disability of the mayor or the mayor pro tempore by majority vote. 
Sec. 3.18. - Meetings. 
(a)  The city commission shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as shall be prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city commission shall be held upon call of the mayor or three city commissioners. Notice of a special meeting shall be served on all other members of the city commission personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to members of the city commission shall not be required if the mayor and all city commissioners are present when the special meeting is called. Notice of a special meeting may be waived by a member of the city commission in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at such a meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice as to any business transacted in such member's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at a special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city commission shall be public to the extent required by law, and notice to the public of special meetings shall be given as required by law. 
(d)  The city commission shall adopt rules to govern its procedures and order of business, consistent with the provisions of this Charter, and shall provide for the keeping of a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(e)  All committees, committee chairs and officers of the city commission other than the mayor shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Sec. 3.19. - Quorum; roll call vote. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the mayor, or the mayor pro tempore, and two city commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and a majority of votes cast shall determine questions before the city commission. On any question, any city commissioner may demand a roll call vote, and on such demand the vote shall be so taken and recorded in the minutes. 
(b)  If vacancies in office result in less than a quorum of commissioners holding office, the remaining city commissioners in office shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city commission. A vote of a majority of the remaining city commissioners shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution or motion. 
(c)  Once a quorum is established, the quorum cannot be defeated by the subsequent departure of a city commissioner. 
Sec. 3.20. - Supervision of administration. 
    The city commission, at any time, may appoint one or more city commissioners or other persons to investigate the conduct and business of any officer, employee, department or other agency of the city, may compel the presence of persons or the production of books and papers and may swear all persons summoned, as may be necessary or pertinent to the investigation. 
Sec. 3.21. - Boards, commissions and authorities generally. 
(a)  The city commission may, by ordinance or resolution, create boards, commissions and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial or quasi-legislative function that the city commission deems necessary and shall, by ordinance or resolution, establish the composition, period of existence, duties and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city commission in such manner and for such terms of office as shall be provided by ordinance or resolution, except where other appointing authority, terms of office or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by general law. 
(c)  The city commission, by ordinance or resolution, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission or authority. 
(d)  Any vacancy on a board, commission or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for the original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by general law. 
(e)  No member of a board, commission or authority shall assume office until or she has executed and filed with the city clerk an oath obligating or her to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of or her office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance or resolution and administered by the mayor. 
(f)  Every member of a board, commission or authority shall serve at will and may be removed from office by a vote of three members of the city commission. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter or by general law, each board, commission and authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chair and one of its members as vice-chair, and may elect as its secretary one of its members, or it may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission or authority of the city may establish such bylaws, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, the ordinances of the city or general law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules and regulations shall be filed with the city clerk. 
Sec. 3.22. - Planning commission. 
    The city commission may appoint a commission to be known as a planning commission to recommend to the city commission the boundaries of various zoning districts to be laid out and to recommend the adoption of appropriate regulations and restrictions to apply to the lands, buildings and structures in such zoning districts. The members of the planning commission, the number of members constituting such commission, the duties of such commission, the terms for which the members of such commission shall serve and any compensation that such members may receive for their services shall be determined by the city commission. The acts of the planning commission shall be advisory only. 
Sec. 3.23. - Removal. 
(a)  The mayor or any other city commissioner shall be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Incompetence, misfeasance or malfeasance in office; 
(2)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Failure at any time to possess any qualification of office as provided by this Charter or by law; 
(4)  Knowingly violating any express prohibition of this Charter; or 
(5)  Abandonment of office or failure or neglect to perform the duties thereof as required by this Charter or by state law. 
(b)  Removal of the mayor or any other city commissioner under this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  By a vote of four city commissioners, which may include the mayor, after an investigative hearing. The person under investigation shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal, and to a public hearing that shall be held not less than ten days after the service of the written notice. The person under investigation shall have such rights as are provided by law; or 
(2)  By an order of the superior court of DeKalb County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the city. 
Sec. 3.24. - Vacancies. 
(a)  The office of mayor or city commissioner shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or by the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Upon the suspension from office of the mayor or of a city commissioner in any manner authorized by the general laws of the State of Georgia, the city commission or the remaining city commissioners shall appoint a successor for the duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, the office shall become vacant and shall be filled as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  If the office of mayor or city commissioner shall become vacant, the city commission or the remaining city commissioners shall call a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; however, if such vacancy occurs within six months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city commission or the remaining city commissioners shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 4.10. - City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
    By majority vote, the city commission shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and shall fix his/her compensation. The city manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his/her executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practices with respect to the duties of his/her office. At the time of his/her appointment, the city manager need not be a resident of the city or the state, but during his/her tenure of office, he/she shall reside within the city. 
Sec. 4.11. - Powers and duties of city manager. 
    The city manager shall: 
(1)  Be the chief executive officer and the chief administrative officer of the city. 
(2)  Be responsible to the city commission for the administration of all municipal affairs placed in his/her charge by the city commission or by or under this Charter. 
(3)  Appoint and, when he/she deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees in accordance with such general personnel rules, regulations, policies or ordinances that the city commission may adopt, except that the heads of the city departments shall be nominated by him/her and confirmed by the city commission. 
(4)  Have the power to authorize the head of a department or office to appoint, suspend or remove subordinates in such department or office. 
(5)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, subject to the general direction and control of the city commission. 
(6)  Attend all meetings of the city commission and shall have the right to take part in discussion and to recommend any measures that he/she deems expedient, but he/she may not vote. He/she shall be entitled to notice of all regular and special meetings of the city commission. 
(7)  See that all laws of the state, provisions of this Charter and the ordinances, resolutions, regulations and other acts of the city commission are faithfully executed and duly enforced within the city. 
(8)  Prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the city commission, together with a message describing the important features, and shall be responsible for the administration of such budgets after adoption. 
(9)  Submit to the city commission and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year. 
(10)  Make such other reports as the city commission may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices and agencies subject to his/her direction and control. 
(11)  Recommend to the city commission a standard schedule of pay for each appointive office and position in the city service, including minimum, intermediate and maximum rates. 
(12)  Recommend to the city commission the adoption of such measures as may be deemed necessary or expedient for the health, safety or welfare of the inhabitants of the city or for the improvement of administrative services. 
(13)  Consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under his/her jurisdiction, with the approval of the city commission. He/she may be the head of one or more departments. 
(14)  Investigate the affairs of the city or any department or division thereof. He/she shall investigate all complaints concerning the administration of the city government and the services provided by the public utilities of the city, and shall see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed. 
(15)  Devote his/her entire time to the discharge of his/her official duties. 
(16)  Keep the city commission fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the city commission concerning the affairs of the city as he/she deems desirable. 
(17)  Divide the operations and activities of the city government into departments. At the head of each department there shall be a director, except that one or more departments may be under the control of the same director, and one or more offices may be held by the same person, as determined by the city manager. 
(18)  Perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or as may be required or authorized by the city commission. 
Sec. 4.12. - Acting city manager. 
    By letter filed with the city clerk, the city manager shall designate, subject to the approval of the city commission, a qualified administrative officer of the city to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the city manager during his/her temporary absence or disability. During this absence or disability, the city commission may revoke that designation at any time and appoint another administrative officer of the city to serve as acting city manager until the city manager returns or his/her disability ceases. 
Sec. 4.13. - Removal of city manager. 
(a)  The city commission may remove the city manager from office in accordance with this section. 
(b)  The city commission shall adopt by an affirmative vote of a majority of all of its members a preliminary resolution which must state the reasons for the removal of the city manager and may suspend the city manager from duty for not more than 45 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the city manager. 
(c)  Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the city manager, he/she may file with the city commission a written request for a public hearing. Such hearing shall be held within 30 days after the request is filed. The city manager may file with the city commission a written reply not later than five days before the hearing. 
(d)  If the city manager has not requested a public hearing within the time specified in subsection (c) of this section, the city commission may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all of its members. If the city manager has requested a public hearing, the city commission may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all of its members, at any time after the public hearing. 
(e)  The city manager shall continue to receive his/her salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal. 
Sec. 4.14. - Interim city manager. 
    When the position of city manager is vacant, the city commission shall designate an interim city manager to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the city manager until the vacancy is filled. The interim city manager shall be qualified to hold such office, as provided in section 4.10 of this Charter. 
Sec. 4.15. - Mayor or city commissioner serving as city manager. 
    Neither the mayor nor any other member of the city commission shall be eligible for appointment as city manager or acting or interim city manager during his/her term of office and for a period of one year after the end of his/her term as mayor or city commissioner. 
Sec. 4.16. - Responsibilities of directors of departments. 
    The directors of departments shall be immediately responsible to the city manager for the proper administration of their departments. Such directors shall make regular reports concerning the work of their departments to the city manager and shall furnish him/her at all times with such information as he/she may desire concerning their departments. Any director who has received notice of removal from office may request a hearing as described in section 4.13(c), and the city manager, in his/her discretion, may grant such request. 
Sec. 4.17. - Appointments to city positions. 
(a)  Every appointment of a director of a department of the city shall be made solely on the basis of his/her administrative and professional qualifications. Every appointment to any other position in the city government below the level of city manager shall be made solely on the basis of fitness. 
(b)  No appointment shall be made to any administrative position in the city of any person related to the mayor, to any other city commissioner or to the city manager nearer than the fourth degree by affinity or sanguinity. 
ARTICLE V. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 5.10. - Creation; judges. 
(a)  There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Decatur, Georgia. 
(b)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time or substitute judges as shall be provided by ordinance, who shall serve for terms of not more than two years. Municipal judges shall be able to serve successive terms. 
(c)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless he/she shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia and shall be a resident of said city. All judges shall be appointed by the city commission. 
(d)  The compensation of the judge or judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(e)  Judges may be removed for cause by an affirmative vote of three members of the city commission. 
(f)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath or affirmation, given by the mayor, that he/she will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his/her office to the best of his/her ability and without fear, favor or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city commission. 
Sec. 5.11. - Powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this Charter, all city ordinances and such other violations as are or shall be provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have the authority to preserve order and to punish persons in its presence for contempt or for disobedience to any [of] its mandates, provided that the punishment shall not exceed a fine of $200.00 or imprisonment for ten days, or both, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for violations of the Charter or any ordinance of the city, or other violations as provided by law, not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for six months, or both such fine and imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. Terms of imprisonment shall be served in the city jail, or in the DeKalb County jail pursuant to an arrangement with the county authorities. Any fines imposed may be collected by execution. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have the authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the actual cost of meals, transportation and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court may: 
(1)  Establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of persons charged with violations before such court; 
(2)  Imprison the accused pursuant to law to await trial; or 
(3)  Accept cash or personal or real property as a surety bond for the appearance of persons charged with violations. 
Whenever any person shall give bail for [his] or her appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, [his] or her bond may be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time, and an execution shall be issued thereon after serving the defendant and his/her sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi, requiring him/her to show cause why the bond should not be forfeited. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to order and compel the production of books, papers and other evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that state law has been violated. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas and warrants that may be served and executed by any officer authorized by this Charter or by law. 
(i)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(j)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to municipal courts, and particularly by such laws that authorize the abatement of nuisances and the prosecution of traffic violations. 
Sec. 5.12. - Certiorari. 
    Any person convicted in the municipal court of a violation of any city ordinance or state statute, or of a failure to comply therewith, shall have the right of certiorari to the superior court of DeKalb County, in accordance with the laws of Georgia regulating the granting and issuing of writs of certiorari. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 6.10. - City books and accounts. 
    The city accounts shall be kept in such manner as to show fully at all times the financial condition of the city, and the books shall be open to the public for inspection during regular office hours. The city manager shall see that the city's accounts are kept in the most approved fashion, including all necessary balance sheets in detail, and in summary, revenue and expense statements, operation statistics and other reports necessary to show completely each month the state of the city's finances. 
Sec. 6.11. - Expenditures. 
(a)  Generally accepted accounting and management practices shall be followed to ensure that all payroll expenditures and other expenditures by the city are appropriate and proper. 
(b)  Expenditures shall be legal only on the basis of appropriations in the budget, for which expenditures warrants shall be issued by the city manager or his/her designee. Except in cases of emergency, such warrants shall be countersigned by the city manager and the mayor. Such emergency shall be declared by the city commission, the facts being stated by resolution. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any elected official, appointed officer or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies to be interested, directly or indirectly, in any transaction with, sale to, work for or contract of, the city or any department or service of the government of the city, involving the expenditure of any public funds of the city, that is incompatible with the proper discharge of [his] or her official duties or that would tend to impair the independence of [his] or her judgment or action in the performance of [his] or her official duties. 
Sec. 6.12. - Deposit of city's funds. 
    The city manager or his/her designee shall see that all monies belonging to the city are deposited with such responsible banks as may be designated by the city commission. 
Sec. 6.13. - Annual audit. 
    The accounts of all departments of the city shall be audited at least once each year by a disinterested certified public accountant designated by the city commission. A summary of the audit shall be published in the official newspaper of the city. 
Sec. 6.14. - Taxation generally. 
(a)  For the purpose of raising revenues for the support and maintenance of the city, the city commission shall have full power and authority to assess, levy and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property, within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to taxation by the state and county, at a rate not to exceed 18 mills upon such taxable property. 
(b)  The city commission is authorized and empowered to assess, levy and collect, annually, a tax on all taxable property of the city, as other taxes are assessed, levied and collected, to pay the annual interest on the bonded indebtedness of the city and to provide a sinking fund to pay off and discharge such bonds as they fall due according to the terms upon which they were issued. The tax collected for the purposes described in this subsection shall be used solely for such purposes. 
(c)  The tax described in subsection (a) of this section shall be exclusive of the taxes for public schools, authorized by law, and the taxes required and sufficient to pay the annual interest on the bonded indebtedness of the city and to provide a sinking fund for the purpose of paying the principal of such bonded indebtedness as required by law, as described in subsection (b) of this section. The ad valorem tax authorized in subsection (a) of this section for general purposes, the public school tax, and the bonded interest and sinking fund tax, described in subsection (b) of this section, shall be levied under separate ordinances, each specifying the purpose for which levied, and all proceedings for collecting such taxes shall show the amount due on each of such tax levies. The city commission shall have power and authority to provide by ordinance for the returns and assessments of all taxable property in the city and to provide penalties for neglect or refusal to comply with such ordinances, as provided in this Charter. 
Sec. 6.15. - Occupation taxes; regulatory fees. 
    The city commission, by ordinance, may levy such occupation taxes and regulatory fees as are not prohibited by law. 
Sec. 6.16. - Sanitary and health service fees. 
    The city commission by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges and tolls for sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as delinquent taxes are collected. 
Sec. 6.17. - Contracts and purchases. 
    Contracts shall be awarded by the city manager, only after bona fide competitive bidding, to the lowest responsible bidder, where the amount to be paid by the city exceeds $10,000.00. All purchases of supplies shall be made through a central purchasing agent at the lowest obtainable prices. Any violation of section 6.11(c) shall nullify and render void all contracts related to such violation. 
ARTICLE VII. - EDUCATION 

Sec. 7.10. - Public schools generally. 
(a)  The public school system in operation in the city on the effective date of this Charter, established and continued under an Act of the General Assembly approved September 12, 1889, "to authorize the establishment of a system of public schools in the City of Decatur," as amended, is hereby continued under this Charter. The Board of Education of the City of Decatur that exists on the effective date of this Charter (sometimes referred to in this Charter as the "board of education") is continued in existence. 
(b)  The Board of Education of the City of Decatur, so continued, shall continue to have the powers, duties, rights, obligations and liabilities of the Board of Education of the City of Decatur that exist on the effective date of this Charter and shall be subject to all constitutional and statutory provisions relating to boards of education that are not in conflict with this Charter. 
(c)  The Board of Education of the City of Decatur shall be a body corporate and politic and shall be empowered to engage in legal process and to enact such policies, bylaws, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the laws of this state or of the United States, for the government of the members of the board of education, the superintendent of schools and teachers and students of such schools, as the board may deem proper. 
(d)  The members of the Board of Education of the City of Decatur who are serving on such board of education on the effective date of this Charter, and any person selected to fill a vacancy in any such offices, shall continue to serve as such members until their terms of office expire. The Board of Education of the City of Decatur shall continue to consist of five members, four of whom shall be elected from election districts described in this subsection, and one member who shall be elected at large. For the purpose of electing the four district members of the board of education, the City of Decatur School District is divided into two election districts. The districts shall consist of the described territory of the City of Decatur School District contained in the description attached to this Act and made a part hereof as further identified as "Plan: dec1". 
(e)  For the purposes of subsection (d) of this section: 
(1)  The term "precinct" is synonymous with the term "voting precinct" and means a geographical area, established in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-260 et seq., within which all electors vote at one polling place. 
(2)  The terms "tract," "block" and "VTD" shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. 
(3)  Whenever the description of any election district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map of the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. 
(4)  Precinct names and designations following VTD designations are included for convenience only; and if the description of any election district contains a conflict between the geographical boundaries of any VTD and the boundaries of the subsequently named precinct, the geographical boundary as shown on the census maps for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia shall control. 
(5)  Any part of the City of Decatur School District that is not included in any election district described in subsection (d) of this section shall be included within the election district contiguous to such part that contains the least population according to the United State Decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. 
(6)  Any part of the City of Decatur School District that is described in subsection (d) of this section as being included in a particular election district shall nevertheless not be included within such election district if such part is not contiguous to such election district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that election district contiguous to such part that contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. 
(f)  Two members shall be elected from each election district provided for in subsection (d) of this section. The members elected from an election district shall be elected solely by the voters of the election district voting in an election thereon. There shall be a Post A and a Post B in each election district, and each candidate must designate the post for which the candidate is offering. A candidate for the board of education from an election district shall have been a resident of the district from which the candidate is offering for at least one year prior to the election. A member elected to the board of education from an election district shall remain a resident of the respective district during the term for which elected. 
(g)  A candidate for the at-large office on the board of education may reside anywhere within the City of Decatur School District and shall be elected by the voters of the City of Decatur School District voting in an election thereon. 
(h)  All candidates for office on the board of education shall be at least 21 years of age. Persons employed by the City of Decatur School System shall not be eligible to be members of the board of education. 
(i)  The first members of the Board of Education of the City of Decatur elected under this Charter shall be elected on the first Tuesday next following the first Monday in November 2001. Such members shall be the persons elected to Post A of Election District 1, Post A of Election District 2 and the at-large post. They shall take office on January 1, 2002, and shall serve terms of four years and until their successors are elected. Successors to such members shall be elected at the general municipal election held on the first Tuesday next following the first Monday in November 2005 and quadrennially thereafter for terms of office of four years. 
(j)  Members shall be elected to Post B of Election District 1 and Post B of Election District 2 on the first Tuesday next following the first Monday in November 2003. Such members shall take office on January 1, 2004, and shall serve terms of four years and until their successors are elected. Successors to such members shall be elected at the general municipal election held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November 2007 and quadrennially thereafter for terms of office of four years. 
(k)  Political parties shall not conduct primaries for board of education offices, and all names of candidates for such offices shall be listed without party designation. 
(l)  The person receiving a plurality of the votes cast for any office on the board of education shall be elected. 
(m)  Any vacancy in the board of education as a result of death, resignation, removal from the city, removal from an election district or otherwise, except for the expiration of a term of office, shall be filled as provided in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-54.1. 
(Ord. No. O-03-04, §§ 3, 4, 5-19-03) 
Sec. 7.11. - General powers and duties of board of education. 
(a)  The chair and the vice-chair of the board of education shall be elected from the membership of the board of education at its first meeting in each calendar year, and such members shall serve as chair and vice-chair for terms of one year. A member may succeed himself/herself as chair or vice-chair. 
(b)  The board of education shall make such by-laws, policies, rules, regulations and orders for its government as it deems wise. The board of education shall have the entire supervision, direction and control of the public school system of the city and may make such changes therein as it deems proper; provided, that the board of education shall not have the power or authority to contract any debt for or on account of the city. However, the board of education may contract on its own behalf for short-term debt whose repayment is pledged by specific tax receipts. The city may transfer to the board of education, and the board of education may accept from the city, title to property for the use of the school system, especially including but not limited to title to the properties known as Clairemont Elementary School, College Heights Elementary School, Fifth Avenue Elementary School, Glennwood Elementary School, Oakhurst Elementary School, Westchester Elementary School, Winnona Park Elementary School, Renfroe Middle School and Decatur High School. 
(c)  The board of education shall have the exclusive right, power and authority to: 
(1)  Prescribe the curriculum of the public school system of the city; 
(2)  Appoint and employ a superintendent of schools and all other employees of such school system at the recommendation of the superintendent of schools, and to fix their compensation; 
(3)  Suspend or remove the superintendent of schools, or any other employee at the recommendation of the superintendent, for cause satisfactory to it. 
(4)  Make such by-laws, policies, rules, regulations and orders for the government, discipline and conduct of the school system and of the superintendent of schools, employees and students as it may deem proper and not in conflict with the laws of Georgia; and 
(5)  Generally to have power and authority to do and perform all acts necessary to and in promotion of the best educational interests of the city, not in conflict with this Charter or the laws of this state. 
(d)  No member of the board of education may serve in the office of superintendent of schools or in the position of employee in such schools. 
(e)  The treasurer of the board of education shall give bond in such sum as the board may fix. 
(f)  The board of education shall cause to be kept regular minutes of all its proceedings, which shall be open to inspection. 
(g)  The board of education shall upon request submit to the city commission, a report for the scholastic year ending June 30, showing: 
(1)  The condition of the public schools; 
(2)  The attendance therein with resident and nonresident students shown separately; 
(3)  The receipts and expenditures for the scholastic year; and 
(4)  Such other information that the city commission may call for or that the board of education may deem proper and such recommendations as the board of education may desire to make. 
The report, or so much thereof as the city commission shall order, shall be published in the city. 
(h)  The board of education shall provide schools for children, which schools shall be kept open and free for not less than nine scholastic months in each year. 
(i)  When there are vacant seats in the city schools of Decatur not needed for children of the city as mentioned in this article, the board of education may provide for the admission of children whose parents or guardians are not residents of the city upon terms and conditions as the board of education may prescribe. 
Sec. 7.12. - Per diem and expenses of board of education. 
    The members of the board of education shall receive compensation and reimbursement for expenses necessarily incurred in connection with their services as provided by resolution adopted by the board of education and not inconsistent with the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. O-18-04, 5-21-18) 
Sec. 7.13. - Reserved. 
Sec. 7.14. - Educational funds; school tax. 
(a)  On or before March 1 of each year, or another date specified by the city commission, the Board of Education of the City of Decatur shall provide to the city commission the rate of the ad valorem tax levy, on taxable property in the city, necessary for the support, maintenance and operation of the public schools of the city. Such rate shall not exceed 25 mills. The city commission shall assess, levy and cause to be collected such ad valorem tax as provided by the board of education upon all property subject to taxation in the city. 
(b)  The city commission may provide for the payment of the school tax described in this section in installments as in the case of the collection of the general ad valorem tax levied in the city, but such school tax shall be paid over to the board of education, as collected, at the close of each month during which received. 
(c)  No part of the school fund derived from the school tax described in this section shall be used for purposes other than: 
(1)  Support and maintenance of the schools and the school system; 
(2)  Contracting for or erecting schools or school related buildings and additions thereto, or providing furniture and other necessary equipment thereof; or 
(3)  Repairs and upkeep of the buildings and grounds of the schools. 
ARTICLE VIII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8.10. - Powers and duties of police. 
    The police officers of the city may make arrests in the manner provided by law. Such officers are authorized, to the same extent as sheriffs of this state, to execute warrants placed in their hands charging any person with violating the criminal laws of this state. Such officers may arrest, anywhere within this state, any person charged with violating any ordinance of the city; provided, when the arrest is not made within 24 hours after the offense is committed, such officers are not authorized to arrest the offender outside the corporate limits of the city except in obedience to a written warrant signed by a judge of the municipal court. Bonds and recognizances may be accepted and forfeited as provided by law. The city commission may authorize and direct any police officer of the city to summon any or all bystanders to aid in the arrest of any persons violating any ordinance of the city or any criminal law of the state, and may provide punishment for any persons failing or refusing to provide such aid. 
Sec. 8.11. - Criminal procedure and incarceration. 
(a)  Any person who violates an ordinance of the city and flees from the jurisdiction thereof may be apprehended and arrested, whenever found in the state, and the warrants of the judge of the municipal court shall be sufficient authority for such person's return and trial upon the charge resting against such person. Any person who escapes after trial and conviction may be apprehended or arrested whenever found in this state, and the warrant of the judge of the municipal court shall be sufficient authority for his/her arrest and return. 
(b)  The city commission may provide for the city a safe and suitable jail for the keeping and detention of inmates and of persons charged with a violation of the ordinances of the city before or after conviction, and may appoint a person or persons to operate such jail. 
Sec. 8.12. - Charter as defense for official actions taken. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, if the mayor, any other commissioner or any other officer of the city is sued for any acts or things done in his/her official capacity under and in accordance with this Charter and the ordinances passed in pursuance hereof, he/she may be justified under this Charter, and the provisions of this Charter may be pleaded and shall be a full defense to any action brought against such officer. 
Sec. 8.13. - Existing legislation to remain in effect. 
    All ordinances, resolutions, bylaws, rules and regulations adopted by the city commission before the effective date of this Charter that are in force on such date and not inconsistent with nor repugnant to any provision of the Constitution and laws of Georgia or this Charter shall remain in full force and effect under this Charter until repealed, altered or amended by the city commission. 
Sec. 8.14. - Continuation of powers. 
    Authority to carry out and effectuate the provisions of this Charter by ordinance, and to provide for violations thereof, whenever the city commission may deem it necessary, and all further powers granted to the city, as reincorporated under this Charter, are expressly conferred on the members of the city commission in office on the effective date of this Charter, and their successors. 
Sec. 8.15. - Powers consolidated; former acts repealed. 
    All local Acts of the General Assembly passed before the effective date of this Charter incorporating and conferring powers on the city are consolidated into and superseded by this Charter. All laws or parts of laws in conflict with this Charter, or any provision hereof, are repealed. 
Sec. 8.16. - Effective date. 
    This Charter shall become effective on July 1, 2001. 
CHARTER ORDINANCES COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Charter 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Charter  2- 5-01 1.10-8.16       Added 1.10-8.16 O-03-04  5-19-03 1 3.13(a)(1) 2 3.13(b)(1)-(3) 3 7.10(d) 4 7.10(e)(2)-(6) O-18-04  5-21-18 7.12  
PART II - RELATED LAWS 
ARTICLE I. - PARKING AUTHORITY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is 1968 Ga. Laws, page 2892 which created and established the City of Decatur Parking Authority. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Code reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 98. 

Section 1. - Short title. 
    This may be cited as the "City of Decatur Parking Authority Act." 
Section 2. - City of Decatur Parking Authority. 
    There is hereby created a body corporate and political, to be known as the City of Decatur Parking Authority, which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, and a public corporation by that name and style; said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, complain and defend in all courts of law and equity. The Authority shall consist of 3 members. 
    The original members of the Authority and their initial terms of office shall be as follows: 
James F. Davis 
433 Glenndale Avenue 1 year term Wiley S. Ansley 
179 Pinecrest Avenue 1 year term Dr. J. Davison Philips 
344 S. Candler Street 1 year term  
    The "initial" terms of office shall extend from the organizational meeting of the Authority in 1968 until its annual meeting in 1969. All subsequent terms of office shall be for four years. All vacancies in the membership of the Authority, whether caused by expiration of term of office, death, resignation, or otherwise, shall be filed by the governing Authority of the City of Decatur, Georgia, upon nomination by the Chairman of the City Commission or the Chief Executive officer and confirmation by the governing body of said city. Any member of the Authority may be elected to succeed himself. All members, duly appointed, shall hold office until his or her successor shall be appointed and duly qualified. Any member, appointed to fill an unexpired term, shall serve for only the term of the member he or she replaced. 
    The Authority shall elect one of its members as chairman, and another member as vice-chairman, both of whom shall be elected for a term of one (1) year, the first chairman and vice-chairman to serve from the organizational meeting of the Authority in 1968, and until the annual meeting in 1969, or until their successors are elected and qualified. Subsequent chairmen and vice-chairmen shall be elected at the annual meeting of the Authority for a term of one (1) year. It shall also elect a secretary and treasurer who does not necessarily have to be a member of the Authority and, if not a member, he or she will have no voting rights and shall be elected for such term as may be determined by the Authority. If a member of the Authority is elected to serve as secretary and treasurer, he or she will be elected in the same manner and for the same term as the chairman and vice-chairman. No member of the Authority shall hold more than one office except that of secretary and treasurer. Two members of the Authority eligible to vote shall constitute a quorum. A majority of the quorum is empowered to exercise all of the rights and perform all the duties of the Authority and no vacancy on the Authority shall impair the right of the quorum to act. The members of the Authority shall serve without compensation, except that they shall be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. The Authority shall make rules and regulations for its own government. It shall have perpetual existence. 
Section 3. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Act, the words and terms in this section shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  The word "Authority" shall mean the City of Decatur Parking Authority created in section 2 of this Act. 
(b)  The words "Projects" or "Project" shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition, construction, equipping, maintenance, and operation of parking lots, parking garages, parking deck or similar improvements and the usual facilities related thereto, with the usual and convenient facilities appertaining to such undertakings and extensions and improvements of such facilities, acquiring the necessary property therefor, both real and personal, in the lease or sale of any part of all of such facilities, including real and personal property, so as to assure the efficient and proper development, maintenance and operation of such facilities and area, deemed by the Authority to be necessary, convenient or desirable. 
(c)  The term "cost of the project" shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of lands, properties, rights, easements and franchises acquired and the cost of all conveyances in fee simple of the Authority's title thereto and leases thereof, the cost of preparing the land, including the installation of storm and sanitary sewers, the cost of all machinery, equipment and furnishings related to the operation of any project or projects, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction, and for six months after completion of construction, cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal and legal expenses and other expenses necessary and incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized and the cost of placing any project in operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as part of the "cost of the project or projects" and may be paid or reimbursed out of funds of the Authority including the proceeds of any revenue bonds issued under provisions of this Act for such project or projects. 
(d)  The terms "revenue bonds," "bonds" and "obligations" as used in this Act, shall mean revenue bonds as defined and provided for in the Revenue Bond Law (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761, as amended) and such type of obligations may be issued by the Authority as authorized under said Revenue Bond Law and any amendments thereto; and, in addition, shall also mean obligations of the Authority, the issuance of which are hereinafter authorized in this Act. 
(e)  Any project shall be deemed "self-liquidating" if, in the judgment of the Authority, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the Authority therefrom and all properties used, leased and sold in connection therewith will be sufficient to pay the principal and interest of the revenue bonds which may be issued to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of such project or projects. 
Section 4. - Powers. 
    The Authority shall have the powers: 
(a)  To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure; 
(b)  To acquire by gift, purchase, lease or otherwise, and to hold, lease and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(c)  To appoint, select and employ officers, agents and employees, including engineering, architectural and construction experts, fiscal agents and attorneys, and fix their respective compensations; 
(d)  To make contracts, leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be erected or acquired, and to dispose by conveyance of its title in fee simple of real and personal property of every kind and character, and any and all persons, firms and corporations, all cities, towns and counties, and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions or agencies of the State are hereby authorized to enter into contracts, leases or agreements with the Authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable; 
(e)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, furnish, operate and manage projects, as hereinabove defined, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of revenue bonds or other funds of the Authority or from such proceeds or other funds made available to the Authority; 
(f)  To accept loans and/or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America of such agency or instrumentality, may impose; 
(g)  To accept loans and/or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency or instrumentality or political subdivision may impose; 
(h)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to execute evidences of such indebtedness and to secure the same and to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(i)  To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of this State; 
(j)  The Authority and any trustee acting under any trust indenture, are specifically authorized from time to time to sell, lease, grant, exchange or otherwise dispose of any surplus property, both real and personal, or interest therein not required in the normal operation of and usable in the furtherance of the purpose of which the Authority was created, except as such right and power may be limited as provided in section 18 hereof; 
(k)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this Act. 
Section 5. - Revenue bonds-Generally. 
    The Authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties and liabilities vested in the Authority created hereby shall have the power and is hereby authorized at one time, or from time to time, to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds, for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost, as herein defined, of any one or more projects. The principal and interest of such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund herein provided for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed in the Revenue Bond Law or any amendment thereto, shall be payable semiannually, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding thirty (30) years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payments as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the Authority, and may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the Authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the Authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. Such revenue bonds or obligations shall be issued pursuant to and in conformity with the Revenue Bond Law (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761, as amended), and all procedures pertaining to such issuance and the conditions thereof shall be the same as those contained in said Revenue Bond Law and any amendments thereto. 
Section 6. - Same-Form; denominations; registration; place of payment. 
    The Authority shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denominations or denomination of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company within or without the State. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the Authority may determine and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone and also as to both the principal and interest. 
Section 7. - Same-Signature; seal. 
    All such bonds shall bear the manual or facsimile signature of the chairman or vice-chairman of the Authority, which shall be attested to by the secretary of and the treasurer of the Authority and the official seal of the Authority shall be affixed thereto. Any coupons attached thereto, shall bear the facsimile signature of the secretary and treasurer of the Authority. In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if he had remained in office until such delivery. 
Section 8. - Same-Negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
    All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall have and are hereby declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the negotiable instruments law of the State. Such bonds are declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental purpose and the said bonds and the income thereof shall be exempt from all taxation within the State. 
Section 9. - Same-Sale; price. 
    The Authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the Authority, but no such sale shall be made at a price less than par as provided in the Revenue Bond Law, unless said Revenue Bond Law be hereafter amended to permit the sale of such bonds at less than par. 
Section 10. - Same-Proceeds of bonds. 
    The proceeds of such bonds shall be used solely for the payment of the cost of project or projects, and unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in any trust indenture, additional bonds may in like manner be issued to provide the amount of any deficit, which unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in any trust indenture shall be deemed to be of the same issue and shall be entitled to payment from the same fund without preference or priority of the bonds first issued for the same purpose. If the proceeds of the bonds of any issue shall exceed the amount required for the purpose of which such bonds are issued, the surplus shall be paid into such funds as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in any trust indenture. 
Section 11. - Same-Interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
    Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the Authority may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates or temporary bonds, with or without coupons, exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
Section 12. - Same-Replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
    The Authority may also provide for the replacement of any bond which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
Section 13. - Same-Conditions precedent to issuance; object of issuance. 
    Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things than those proceedings, conditions and things which are specified or required by this Act. In the discretion of the Authority, revenue bonds of a single issue may be issued for the purpose of any particular project. Any resolution, providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this Act shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special or adjourned meeting of the Authority by a majority of the quorum as in this Act provided. 
Section 14. - Same-Credit not pledged. 
    Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of any city or county in the State of Georgia but such bonds shall be payable solely from the fund hereinafter provided for and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly or contingently obligate any city or county in said state to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make an appropriation for their payment, and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this Section. 
Section 15. - Same-Trust indenture as security. 
    In the discretion of the Authority, any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the Authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or outside of the state. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, rents, tolls, revenues and earnings to be received by the Authority, including the proceeds derived from the sale, from time to time, of any surplus property of the Authority, both real and personal. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the Authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation repair and insurance of the property, and the custody, safeguarding and application of all monies, including the proceeds derived from the sale of property of the Authority, both real and personal, and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the Authority and satisfactory to the original purchasers of the bonds issued therefor, and may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depository of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or other monies be satisfactory to such purchasers, and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the Authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee, and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the Authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
Section 16. - Same-To whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
    The Authority shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who, or any agency, bank or trust company which shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purpose hereof, subject to such regulations as this Act and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. 
Section 17. - Same-Sinking fund. 
    The revenues, fees, tolls and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued and any monies derived from the sale of any properties, both real and personal, of the Authority, unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the Authority to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the Authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument may provide, and such funds so pledged from whatever source received, which said pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture, into a sinking fund which said sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payments of (1) the interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due, (2) the principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due, (3) the necessary charges of paying agent or agents for paying principal and interest, and (4) any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase as hereinabove provided. The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in any trust indenture, but, except as indenture, such sinking fund shall be a fund for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in any trust indenture, surplus monies in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be cancelled and shall not again be issued. 
Section 18. - Same-Remedies of bondholders. 
    Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by any trust indenture may, either at law or in equity, by suit or by action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted hereunder or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this Act or by such resolution or trust indenture, to be performed by the Authority or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging and collecting of revenues, bonds, fees, tolls and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
Section 19. - Same-Refunding bonds. 
    The Authority is hereby authorized to provide by resolution for the issue of revenue refunding bonds of the Authority for the purpose of refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon. The issuance of such revenue refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof and the duties of the Authority in respect to the same, shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this Act insofar as the same may be applicable. 
Section 20. - Same-Venue and jurisdiction. 
    Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this Act or any suit or action against such Authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of DeKalb County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall likewise be brought in said court, which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
Section 21. - Same-Validation. 
    Bonds of the Authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure of the Revenue Bond Law. The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action any municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality of the State of Georgia or the United States Government or any department or agency of the United States Government, if subject to be sued, which has contracted with the Authority for the services and facilities of the project for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated and such municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any, why such contract or contracts and the terms of and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the validity of the terms thereof be determined and the contract or contracts adjudicated as security for the payment of any such bonds of the authority. The judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds, against the Authority issuing the same, and against any municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality of the State of Georgia or the United States government, if a party to the validation proceedings, contracting with the City of Decatur Parking Authority. 
Section 22. - Same-Interest or bondholders protected. 
    While any of the bonds issued by the Authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties or existence of said Authority, or of its officers, employees or agents, shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, and no other entity, department, agency, or authority will be created which will compete with the Authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds. The provisions of this Act shall be for the benefit of the Authority and the holders of any such bonds, and upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions hereof, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
Section 23. - Monies received considered trust funds. 
    All monies received pursuant to the authority of this Act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, revenues, incomes, fees and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act. 
Section 24. - Purpose of the authority. 
    Without limiting the generality of any provisions of this Act, the general purpose of the Authority is declared to be that of acquiring, constructing, equipping, maintaining and operating parking lots, parking garages, parking decks, and the usual facilities related thereto and the usual convenient facilities appertaining to such undertaking, and the extensions and improvements of such facilities; the extensions and improvement of such facilities; acquiring the necessary property therefor, both real and personal, with the right to contract for the use of or to lease or sell any or all of such facilities, including real property, and to do any and all things deemed by the authority, necessary, convenient, and desirable for and incident to the efficient and proper development and operation of such types of undertakings. 
Section 25. - Rates, charges and revenues; use. 
    The Authority is hereby authorized to prescribe for and fix and collect rates, fees, tolls and charges, and to revise from time to time, and collect such rates, tolls, fees and charges for the services, facilities or commodities furnished, including leases, concessions or subleases of its lands or facilities, or contracts for the use of the its land and facilities, and to determine the price and terms at and under which its lands or facilities may be sold, and, in anticipation of the collection of the revenues and income of such undertakings or projects, is authorized to issue revenue bonds as herein provided to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, equipment, betterment or extension of its lands and facilities and to pledge the punctual payment of said bonds and interest thereon, all or any part of the revenues and income of such undertakings or projects, including the revenues of improvements, betterments or extensions thereto, thereafter made or the sale of any of its land and facilities. 
Section 26. - Properties exempt from taxation. 
    The properties of the Authority, both real and personal, are declared to be public properties used for the benefit and welfare of the people of the State of Georgia, and not for purposes of private or corporate benefit and income, and such properties and the Authority shall be exempt from all taxes and special assessments of any city, county, or the state or any political subdivision thereof. 
Section 27. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
    It shall be the duty of the Authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed under the provisions of this Act. 
Section 28. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
    The foregoing sections of this act shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of things authorized thereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. 
ARTICLE II. - OFF-STREET PARKING[2] 
    "The City of Decatur in the County of DeKalb shall have power and authority to issue and sell revenue anticipation obligations subject to and in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Act of the General Assembly approved March 31, 1937, known as the `Revenue Certificate Laws of 1937' as heretofore amended and as the same may hereafter be amended, to provide funds for the purchase of lands and the construction and establishment thereon of off-street automobile parking lots, structures, buildings, garages and facilities. Said city shall have power and authority to equip, maintain and operate such parking lots, structures, buildings, garages and facilities, and to appoint a commission to operate a parking authority which shall have all of the powers, privileges and authority set forth in this constitutional provision." 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is 1968 Ga. Laws, page 1515 which amended Article VII, Section VII, Paragraph V of the state constitution to authorize the city and county to sell revenue anticipation obligations to finance off-street parking. The amendment was continued in force and effect after July 1, 1987 as part of the constitution by 1987 Ga. Laws, page 3790. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Code reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 98. 

ARTICLE III. - AD VALOREM TAX DEFERRAL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is 1989 Ga. Laws, page 3985 which provides for deferral of city ad valorem taxes for certain elderly persons. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Code reference- Taxation, ch. 94. 

Section 1. - Short title. 
    This Act shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Decatur Tax Deferral for the Elderly Act." 
Section 2. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  "City" means the City of Decatur, Georgia. 
(2)  "City clerk" means the city clerk of the City of Decatur. 
(3)  "Governing authority" means the governing authority of the City of Decatur. 
(4)  "Gross household income" means all income, for all individuals residing within the homestead, from whatever source derived including, but not limited to, the following sources: 
(A)  Compensation for services including fees, commissions, and similar items; 
(B)  Gross income derived from business; 
(C)  Gains derived from dealings in property; 
(D)  Interest; 
(E)  Rents; 
(F)  Royalties; 
(G)  Dividends; 
(H)  Alimony and separate maintenance payments; 
(I)  Income from life insurance and endowment contracts; 
(J)  Annuities; 
(K)  Pensions; 
(L)  Income from discharge of indebtedness; 
(M)  Distributive share of partnership gross income; 
(N)  Income from an interest in an estate or trust; and 
(O)  Federal old-age, survivor, or disability benefits. 
(5)  "Household" means an individual or group of individuals living together in a room or group of rooms as a housing unit. 
Section 3. - Annual application. 
(a)  Any individual aged 62 or older who is entitled to claim a homestead exemption pursuant to a resolution adopted by the 1981 General Assembly, H.R. 142 (1981 Ga. Laws, page 1914) and subsequently ratified as an amendment to the Constitution of the State of Georgia in the General Election in 1982, may elect to defer payment of all or part of the ad valorem taxes levied on that homestead by filing an annual application for tax deferral with the city clerk on or before March 1 of the year for which the deferral is sought. If the homestead for which a deferral is requested has an assessed value for purposes of ad valorem taxation of $100,000.00 or more, the deferral may apply only to the taxes on that portion of the assessed value which is $100,000.00 or less. 
(b)  It shall be the burden of each applicant for a deferral to demonstrate affirmatively the applicant's compliance with the requirements of this Act. 
Section 4. - Grant restrictions. 
    No tax deferral in any one year shall be granted pursuant to Section 3 of this Act: 
(1)  If the total amount of deferred taxes and interest plus the total amount of all other unsatisfied liens on the homestead exceeds 85 percent of the fair market value of the homestead as shown on the city tax digest for the immediately preceding tax year; 
(2)  If the applicant's gross household income for the immediately preceding calendar year exceeds $20,000.00; 
(3)  If the homestead for which the deferral is sought is subject to any lien, the terms of which are dictated by federal law, rule, or regulation prohibiting deferral of taxes or is subject to any tax lien under the laws of this state, other than a lien established pursuant to this Act; 
(4)  With respect to taxes levied to retire bonded indebtedness or for special assessments; or 
(5)  If any spouse of the applicant has not waived in writing, upon the application for deferral, any right that spouse might have in such homestead property under O.C.G.A. § 53-5-1 et seq. relating to year's support. 
(1990 Ga. Laws, page 4079) 
Section 5. - Application form; oath; approval or disapproval; appeal; list of liens; proof of fire and extended coverage insurance. 
(a)  The application for deferral shall be made upon a form prescribed by the local governing authority and furnished by the city clerk. The application form shall advise the applicant of the manner in which interest is computed. Each application form shall contain an explanation of the conditions to be met for approval and the conditions under which deferred taxes and interest become due, payable, and delinquent. Each application form shall clearly state that all deferrals pursuant to this Act shall constitute a lien on the applicant's homestead. 
(b)  A form of oath shall be provided and shall be administered to the individual seeking the deferral. The oath may be administered by the city clerk, any authorized deputy city clerk, or any individual authorized by law to administer oaths. 
(c)  (1) The city clerk shall consider each annual application for homestead tax deferral within 30 days of the date the application is filed or as soon as practicable thereafter. If the city clerk finds that the applicant is entitled to the tax deferral, the clerk shall approve the application and file the application in the permanent records. If the city clerk finds that the applicant is not entitled to the deferral, the clerk shall send a notice of disapproval to the applicant giving the reasons therefor within 30 days of the filing of the application either by personal delivery or by registered or certified mail to the mailing address given by the applicant, and the clerk shall make a return on the original notice of the manner in which the notice was served on the applicant and shall file the return among the permanent records of his office. The original notice of disapproval sent to the applicant shall advise the applicant of the applicant's right to appeal the decision of the city clerk to the local governing authority and shall inform the applicant of the procedure for filing an appeal. 
(2)  An appeal of the decision of the city clerk to the local governing authority shall be in writing on a form prescribed by the local governing authority and furnished by the city clerk. The appeal shall be filed with the local governing authority within 20 days after the applicant's receipt of the notice of disapproval. The local governing authority shall review the application and evidence presented to the city clerk upon which the applicant based the applicant's claim for a tax deferral and, at the election of the applicant, shall hear the applicant in person or by agent in the applicant's behalf on the applicant's right to a homestead tax deferral. The local governing authority shall reverse the decision of the city clerk and shall grant a homestead tax deferral to the applicant if in its judgment the applicant is entitled thereto, or it shall affirm the decision of the city clerk. Such action by the local governing authority shall be final unless the applicant, city clerk, or other lienholder files an appeal with the Superior Court of DeKalb County within 30 days from the date the taxpayer receives written notification of the decision of the local governing authority. 
(d)  Each application shall contain a list, and the current value, of all outstanding liens on the applicant's homestead. 
(e)  If proof of fire and extended coverage insurance has not been furnished with a prior application, each applicant shall furnish proof of such insurance in an amount which is in excess of the sum of all outstanding liens and deferred taxes and interest with a loss payable clause to the City of Decatur. 
Section 6. - Accrual of interest. 
(a)  The amount of taxes deferred pursuant to this Act shall accrue interest until paid at three-fourths of the rate specified in O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40. 
(b)  Interest on taxes deferred pursuant to this Act in any year shall begin accruing on the date the taxes were due in that year. 
Section 7. - Taxes and interest constitute prior lien. 
    The taxes and interest deferred pursuant to this Act shall constitute a prior lien and shall attach as of the date and in the same manner and shall be collected as are other liens for taxes, as provided for under Title 48 of the O.C.G.A., but the deferred taxes and interest shall only be due, payable, and delinquent as provided in this Act. 
Section 8. - Annual notification of owner of outstanding taxes and interest. 
    Each year, at the time the tax bills are mailed, the city clerk shall notify each property owner to whom a homestead tax deferral has been previously granted of the accumulated sum of deferred taxes and interest outstanding. 
Section 9. - Conditions upon which taxes and interest are due and payable. 
(a)  In the event that there is a change in use of tax-deferred property so that the owner is no longer entitled to a homestead exemption for the property pursuant to Section 3 of this Act, or if the owner fails to maintain the required fire and extended insurance coverage, the total amount of deferred taxes and interest for all previous years shall be due and payable either on the date on which the change in use occurs or on the date failure to maintain insurance occurs. 
(b)  In the event that there is a change in ownership of tax-deferred property, the total amount of deferred taxes and interest for all previous years shall be due and payable on the date the change in ownership occurs. When, however, the change in ownership is to a surviving spouse and the spouse is eligible for a homestead exemption on the property pursuant to a resolution adopted by the 1981 General Assembly, H.R. 142 (1981 Ga. Laws, page 1914) and subsequently ratified as an amendment to the Constitution of the State of Georgia in the general election in 1982, the surviving spouse may continue the deferral of previously deferred taxes and interest pursuant to this Act. 
(c)  During any year in which the total amount of deferred taxes, interest, and all other unsatisfied liens on a homestead exceeds 85 percent of the fair market value of the homestead, the city clerk shall immediately notify the owner of the homestead that the portion of taxes and interest which exceeds 85 percent of the value of the homestead shall be due and payable within 30 days of receipt of the notice. Failure to pay the amount due shall cause the total amount of deferred taxes and interest also to become due and payable at the end of the 30 days. 
(d)  Each year, upon notification, each owner of property on which taxes and interest have been deferred shall submit to the city clerk a list, and the current value, of all outstanding liens on the owner's homestead. Failure to respond to the notification within 30 days of its receipt shall cause the total amount of deferred taxes and interest to become due and payable at the end of the 30 days. 
(e)  All deferred taxes which are made due and payable by this section shall be delinquent and subject to interest in accordance with Section 6 of this Act at the end of 120 days following the date the deferred taxes become due and payable. 
Section 10. - Method of payment. 
(a)  All or part of the deferred taxes and accrued interest may be paid at any time to the city clerk by: 
(1)  The owner of the property or the spouse of the owner; or 
(2)  The next of kin of the owner, heir of the owner, child of the owner, or any person having or claiming a legal or equitable interest in the property, provided that no objection is made by the owner within 30 days after the city clerk notifies the owner of the fact that such payment has been tendered. Any payment made under this paragraph shall be deposited in a special escrow account for the 30-day period; and the city clerk shall not make distribution of the payment while the funds are held in escrow. 
(b)  Any partial payment made pursuant to this section shall be applied first to accrued interest. By resolution of the city governing authority, a minimum amount of partial payment which may be accepted in the city pursuant to this Act may be established. 
Section 11. - Record of payment. 
    When any deferred taxes or interest is collected, the city clerk shall maintain a record of the payment, which record shall contain a description of the property and the amount of taxes or interest collected for the property. The city clerk shall distribute payments received to the local tax jurisdictions to whom the taxes and interest are owed. 
Section 12. - Right of foreclosure. 
    If any holder of a deed to secure debt or any mortgagee elects to pay the taxes of an applicant who qualifies for and receives a tax deferral, such election shall not give the holder of the deed or the mortgagee the right to foreclose. 
Section 13. - Collection of personal property taxes. 
    Nothing in this Act shall be construed to prevent the collection of personal property taxes which become a lien against tax-deferred property. 
Section 14. - Penalties for filing false information. 
(a)  The following penalties shall be imposed on any person who willfully files information required under Sections 3 and 9 which is incorrect: 
(1)  The person shall pay the total amount of taxes and interest deferred, which amount shall immediately become due; 
(2)  The person shall be disqualified from filing a homestead tax deferral application for the next three years; and 
(3)  The person shall pay a penalty of 25 percent of the total amount of taxes and interest deferred. 
(b)  Any person against whom the penalties prescribed in this section have been imposed may appeal the penalties imposed to the local governing authority within 30 days after the penalties are imposed. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is 1985 Ga. Laws, page 4140 which provides an additional homestead exemption for certain elderly persons as defined in the act. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Code reference- Taxation, ch. 94. 

Section 1. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Act, the term: 
(1)  "General law exemption" means that homestead exemption from independent school district ad valorem taxes granted by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-52 to persons 62 years of age or over. 
(2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40. 
(3)  "Income" means income for purposes of computing net taxable income under O.C.G.A. § 48-7-1 et seq., relating to income taxes, including but not limited to any federal old-age, survivor, or disability insurance benefits or benefits received from any retirement or pension fund when such benefits are based on contributions made thereto by that resident or that resident's spouse or other family member residing at the homestead. 
Section 2. - Granted to residents over 62 years of age. 
    Each resident of the City of Decatur, Georgia, who is 62 years of age or over is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all City of Decatur ad valorem taxes, including but not limited to ad valorem taxes of the independent school system of the City of Decatur, in the amount of $8,000.00 if the income of that resident, together with the income of the spouse of that resident and all members of the family of that resident who also reside at such homestead, does not exceed $12,000.00 for the immediately preceding taxable year. The value of the homestead in excess of the exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(1994 Ga. Laws, page 4411) 
Section 2A. - Additional grant. 
    In addition to any other homestead exemption applicable to City of Decatur ad valorem taxes, including the homestead exemption provided for by Section 2 of this Act, each resident of said city who is 65 years of age or over is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from City of Decatur ad valorem taxes, except ad valorem taxes for the independent school system of said city, in the amount of $1,000.00. The additional exemption granted by this section shall be claimed, administered, and returned as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1 but the governing authority of the City of Decatur may grant the exemption authorized by this section without further application to any resident of the City of Decatur who qualifies therefor as shown on the previously existing tax records of the City of Decatur. The additional homestead exemption granted by this section shall apply to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 1986. 
(1986 Ga. Laws, page 4475) 
Section 3. - Application forms for determining eligibility. 
    The governing authority of the City of Decatur or its designee shall provide application forms for the exemption granted by this Act and shall require with the initial application an affidavit by the owner as to the age of the owner, and the income of the owner, owner's spouse, and each member of the owner's family residing on the homestead, and such other information as may be necessary to determine eligibility of the owner for the exemption. 
Section 4. - Obligation of those exempted to notify authority of ineligibility. 
    Any person who, as of January 1, 1986, has applied for and is eligible for the general law exemption or that homestead exemption from City of Decatur ad valorem taxes for persons 65 years of age or over (1971 Ga. Laws, page 940), shall be eligible for the exemption granted by this Act without further application. Otherwise, the exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under this Act to notify the governing authority of the City of Decatur or its designee in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
Section 5. - Applicability to county school, state or other county taxes. 
    The exemption granted by this Act shall not apply to nor affect any county school taxes, state taxes, or county taxes for county purposes. 
Section 6. - Additional to other exemptions. 
    The exemption granted by this Act shall be in addition to any other homestead exemption from City of Decatur ad valorem taxes. 
Section 7. - Repeal of state constitutional amendment exemption. 
    That amendment to the Constitution which provides a $2,000.00 homestead exemption from City of Decatur ad valorem taxes to persons 65 years of age or over (1971 Ga. Laws, page 940) is repealed when the exemption granted by this Act becomes effective. 
Section 8. - Application to certain taxable years. 
    The exemption granted by this Act shall apply to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 1994. 
(1994 Ga. Laws, page 4411) 
Section 9. - Granting and administration. 
    The exemption granted by this Act shall be administered and granted in the same manner as the general exemption; and, unless otherwise expressly provided in this Act, all provisions of general law which apply to the general exemption shall apply to the exemption granted by this Act. 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Decatur, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1967, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions, the following rules shall govern, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city commission: 
    Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they shall be bound thereby. 
    Charter. "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Decatur, Georgia. 
    City. "City" shall mean the City of Decatur, Georgia. 
    City commission, commission. "City commission", "commission" shall mean the city commission of the City of Decatur, Georgia. 
    City manager. "City manager" shall mean the city manager of the City of Decatur, Georgia. 
    Code. "Code" shall mean this Code of Ordinances, City of Decatur, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
    Corporate limits. "Corporate limits" shall mean the corporate limits of the City of Decatur. 
    County. Whenever the words "county," "the county" or "this county" are used they shall refer to DeKalb County, Georgia. 
    Court. "Court" shall mean the municipal court provided by law for the punishment of offenders against the laws or ordinances of the city, whether it shall be the court now constituted or a court hereafter established pursuant to law. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or an official of the city to do some act or perform some function, it shall be construed to authorize the head of such department or the official to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required function, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
    Gender. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
    Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
    Month, year. "Month" and "year" shall mean calendar month and calendar year unless otherwise provided. 
    Municipal court. "Municipal court" shall mean the Municipal Court of the City of Decatur. 
    Names of officers, departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Decatur" were added thereto. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. The ordinary significance shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case they shall have the significance attached to them by experts in the trade or with reference to the subject matter. 
    Number. The singular or plural number shall each include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
    Oath. "Oath" includes affirmation. 
    O.C.G.A. "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. "Person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations and bodies politic, or any combination thereof, as well as to natural persons. 
    Preceding, following. "Preceding" and "following" mean generally next before and next after unless the context requires a different significance. 
    Property. "Property" includes real and personal property. 
    Public place. The term "public place" shall include any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
    Schedule of fees and charges. "Schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list compiled and published by the city which contains rates for utility and other public enterprises, fees, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the city commission, an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the city clerk where it is available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
    Seating, minimum. Where this Code requires seating for a minimum number of persons, only chairs, stools and booths shall be provided as the required seating. The capacity of seats without dividing arms shall be determined by allotting 18 inches per occupant. 
    Shall, may. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription includes the mark of all illiterate or infirm persons. 
    State. Whenever the words "state," "the state" or "this state" are used they shall refer to the State of Georgia. 
    Street. "Street" shall include streets, sidewalks, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes and all other public highways in the city, unless otherwise provided. 
    Substantial compliance. A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code or ordinances amendatory thereof, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient; and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided. 
    Tenant or occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupied, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. The present or past tense shall include the future. 
    Writing. "Writing" includes printing and all numerals, and also pictures, illustrations and printed or written designs. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1967, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1967, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines of sections, history notes and editor's notes. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1967, § 1-4) 
State Law reference- Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1967, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city commission that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city commission without incorporation in this Code of any such invalid or unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1967, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
(16)  Any ordinance setting the rate of ad valorem taxes. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of the repeal of chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the city commission. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Decatur, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Decatur, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (division, article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which section (division, article or chapter) reads as follows:...." The new section, division, article or chapter shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city commission during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
State Law reference- Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - Liability for violations by corporations; other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by the corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as the corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where the violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
    Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance or resolution of the city, or rule or regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the city under authority duly vested in such person or agency, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by a combination of such punishments. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1967, § 1-7) 
State Law reference- Imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; deposit of drivers license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; limitations on home rule powers of municipalities with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); confinement of violators of municipal ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8; payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e); authorization of municipal courts to impose any punishment up to the maximum specified by general law, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1(c); jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a). 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The retirement plan for city employees and regulations pertaining to municipal employees on such subjects as employment policy and employee benefits are compiled and published separately by the city. Official copies of such documents are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Cross reference- Elections, ch. 34; taxation, ch. 94; zoning, pt. IV. UDO. 
State Law reference- Municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; incorporation of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; the Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; authority to adopt municipal ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq.; code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 45-6-6; duty of incumbent to deliver office property to successor, O.C.G.A. § 45-6-7 et seq.; meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; exemptions from open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3; records management plans for local governments, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90; due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IX, ¶ II; records management plan required, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99(e); requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - City commissioners included under workers' compensation law. 
    The city commissioners of the city, including the chairman, are included within the meaning of the term "employee" as such term is used in O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1 in the construction and operation of the workers' compensation law. The city commissioners, including the chairman, are included in the workmen's compensation insurance coverage provided by the city for its employees. 
(Code 1967, § 2-3.1) 
Sec. 2-2. - Beginning date of term of office for city commissioners. 
    The term of office for city commissioners shall begin on the first Monday in January after their election. 
(Code 1967, § 2-3.2) 
Sec. 2-3. - Fees and cost bills of city officers. 
(a)  Fees and cost bills for the following official acts by officers of the city shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges: 
(1)  Each case in municipal court where a defendant is convicted; 
(2)  Each fi. fa. levied; 
(3)  Each fi. fa. settled; 
(4)  Fi. fa. recording charges; 
(5)  Use of certified mail; 
(6)  Legal advertisements; 
(7)  Preparing a tax deed; and 
(8)  The cost of processing a returned check. 
(b)  All of the costs and fee bills of the city shall be paid into the treasury of the city and accurate accounts thereof shall be kept. 
(Code 1967, § 2-5) 
Sec. 2-4. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person guilty of a violation of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1967, § 2-11) 
Secs. 2-5-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COMMISSION CODE OF ETHICS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-16-13, adopted Oct. 17, 2016, set out provisions intended for use as § 2-5. To maintain a consistent style for this Code, this section has been codified as Art. II, Div. 1, § 2-31, Div. 2, §§ 2-36-2-46, Div. 3, §§ 2-50-2-53, Div. 4, §§ 2-56-2-58, as herein set out, at the discretion of the editor. 

DIVISION 1. - BASIS FOR CODE 

Sec. 2-31. - Foundation. 
    The public trust requires public servants to fulfill their duties faithfully and honestly and to subordinate any personal interest which conflicts with the public interest. A public servant is a trustee of the people and should strive to further the general welfare and not use public office in order to improve his or her own private standing. The principal policies which form the foundation of this code of ethics are: 
(a)  Public trust in the integrity of government is cultivated when individual public servants act with integrity and when the public is aware that its servants act with integrity. 
(b)  In speaking about the conduct of those in public service, or in responding to others who speak about it, express approval of positive ethical principles and behavior and refrain from unjustly despairing or demeaning those who advocate ethical principles or practice ethical behavior. 
(c)  Recognize that the most effective way to eradicate unethical practices is to consistently act ethically and to consistently react appropriately with respect to the ethical decisions of others. 
(d)  Exercise sound judgment to act ethically in situations where others may be inclined to act unethically. 
(Ord. No. O-16-13, Art. I, § I, 10-17-16) 
Secs. 2-32-2-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL 

Sec. 2-36. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this code of ethics that a city commissioner shall not knowingly engage in any activity which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or which would tend to impair his or her judgment or actions in the performance of his or her official duties. Furthermore, city commissioners should avoid any action, which might result in or create the appearance of the following: 
(a)  Using public office for private gain. 
(b)  Impeding city efficiency or economy. 
(c)  Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-16-13, Art. B, § I, 10-17-16) 
Sec. 2-37. - Definitions. 
(a)  Admonishment shall mean a statement of disapproval, used to express displeasure with actions that technically violate this code of ethics but that do not involve intentional acts or omissions or direct private gain, and that typically involve an appearance of impropriety rather than actual impropriety. 
(b)  Benefit shall mean: 
(1)  Anything regardless of its monetary value, perceived or intended by either the one who offers it or the one to whom it is offered, to be sufficient in value to influence a city commissioner in the performance or non-performance of an official action; or, 
(2)  Anything, regardless of its monetary value, which, under the circumstances, a reasonably prudent person would recognize as being likely to be intended to influence a city commissioner in the performance or non-performance of an official action. 
(c)  Censure shall mean a stern condemnation, reserved for the most egregious violations of this code of ethics, which involve intentional acts and private gain and which result in a significant erosion of the public trust in the city government. 
(d)  City commissioner shall mean any person who is an elected city official, including any person who has been elected but whose term of office has not started. 
(e)  Complainant shall mean a person who files a complaint alleging a violation of this code of ethics. 
(f)  Employee shall mean any person who is employed in a position covered by the position classification plan of the City of Decatur; any person who is employed part-time by any operating department of the city; and any person who is employed through a contractual agreement with the city. 
(g)  Government or city shall mean the City of Decatur, Georgia. 
(h)  Interest shall mean any direct or indirect financial gain accruing to a member of the city commission as a result of a contract or transaction that is, or may be, the subject of an official act or action by, or with, the city. "Interest" shall not mean any direct or indirect financial gain which is remote or insignificant. 
(i)  Reprimand shall mean a formal rebuke, used for mid-level violations of this code of ethics that involve intentional or reckless acts or omissions and/or direct or indirect private gain. 
(j)  Respondent shall mean a city commissioner who is the subject of a complaint filed pursuant to this code of ethics. 
(Ord. No. O-16-13, Art. B, § II, 10-17-16) 
Sec. 2-38. - Acceptance of gifts. 
    City commissioners shall not solicit or accept, directly or indirectly, any benefit from any person, corporation or group which has, or is seeking to obtain, contractual or other business or financial relationships with the city. 
(Ord. No. O-16-13, Art. B, § III, 10-17-16) 
Sec. 2-39. - Financial interests. 
(a)  A city commissioner may not: 
(1)  Have a direct or indirect financial interest that conflicts with his or her responsibilities and duties as a trustee of the public good. 
(2)  Either directly or indirectly engage in financial transactions as a result of, or primarily relying upon, information obtained in the course of his or her office or received due to his or her position. 
(b)  A city commissioner shall be deemed to have a financial interest in transactions involving the following: 
(1)  Any person in the city commissioner's immediate family. 
(2)  Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the city commissioner may receive any payment or other benefits. 
(3)  Any business in which the city commissioner is a director, officer, employee, agent, or shareholder. 
(Ord. No. O-16-13, Art. B, § IV, 10-17-16) 
Sec. 2-40. - Use of public property. 
    A city commissioner shall not use city property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he or she direct employees to use such property for other than official purposes. 
(Ord. No. O-16-13, Art. B, § V, 10-17-16) 
Sec. 2-41. - Use of confidential information. 
    A city commissioner shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, for the purpose of furthering a private interest, city information not made available to the general public. 
(Ord. No. O-16-13, Art. B, § VI, 10-17-16) 
Sec. 2-42. - Coercion. 
(a)  A city commissioner shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any benefit to him or her or to persons with his or her immediate family, or for those with whom the city commissioner has business or financial ties. 
(b)  A city commissioner shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, a city employee, an appointed official of the city or a contract employee to provide any benefit to him or her or to persons with his or her immediate family. 
(c)  A city commissioner shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, a municipal court judge in the outcome of matters before the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. O-16-13, Art. B, § VII, 10-17-16) 
Sec. 2-43. - Purchases. 
    A city commissioner shall not order any goods or services for the city or on behalf of the city without prior authorization from the city commission or its designee. 
(Ord. No. O-16-13, Art. B, § VIII, 10-17-16) 
Sec. 2-44. - City employees. 
    A city commissioner shall not use a city employee or employees for personal or private business during regular business hours or during the employee's scheduled shift. A city commissioner shall pay just compensation and shall not receive or expect a discount or special rate. 
(Ord. No. O-16-13, Art. B, § IX, 10-17-16) 
Sec. 2-45. - Travel expenses. 
    A city commissioner shall not draw per diem or expense money from the city to attend a seminar, convention, conference or similar meeting and then fail to attend the seminar, conference, convention or similar meeting. 
(Ord. No. O-16-13, Art. B, § X, 10-17-16) 
Sec. 2-46. - Commitments. 
    A city commissioner shall not act or create the appearance of acting on behalf of the city commission by promising to authorize or prevent any future official action of any nature, without prior authorization from the city commission or its designee. 
(Ord. No. O-16-13, Art. B, § XI, 10-17-16) 
Secs. 2-47-2-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 2-50. - Disclosure. 
    A city commissioner shall disclose the nature of any interest or benefit he or she has at the time such matter is presented to the city commission for discussion and/or action. Such disclosure shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting and become part of the public record. Following any disclosure made pursuant to this code of ethics, the member shall not participate in any ex parte communications with other members regarding the matter at hand. 
(Ord. No. O-16-13, Art. C, § I, 10-17-16) 
Sec. 2-51. - Deliberation and vote prohibited. 
    No city commissioner shall participate in the discussion, debate, deliberation or vote, or otherwise take part in the decision-making process on any agenda item, any official act or action in which he or she has a conflict of interest. 
(Ord. No. O-16-13, Art. C, § II, 10-17-16) 
Sec. 2-52. - Duty to leave meeting. 
    To avoid the appearance of impropriety, after any city commissioner is determined to have a conflict of interest or a potential conflict of interest in any matter, the city commissioner shall leave his or her regular seat as a member of the city commission and not return to it until deliberation and action on the matter is completed. 
(Ord. No. O-16-13, Art. C, § III, 10-17-16) 
Sec. 2-53. - Penalties. 
    Any violation of this code of ethics shall subject the offender to: 
(a)  Disciplinary action which may include admonishment, reprimand or censure; and 
(b)  A fine up to $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. O-16-13, Art. C, § IV, 10-17-16) 
Secs. 2-54, 2-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROCESS 

Sec. 2-56. - Ethics committee. 
(a)  The city commission shall appoint an ethics committee consisting of three persons. At least one member shall be in good standing with the State Bar of Georgia. All members shall be residents of the City of Decatur and shall serve a three year term. Members of the ethics committee must be approved by at least a four-fifths vote of the city commission. 
(b)  In the event two or more members of the ethics committee recuse themselves from consideration of a complaint, the city commission shall appoint temporary, alternate members to serve with respect to that complaint so that at least two members participate in consideration of that complaint. A city commissioner who is the subject of the complaint or who filed the complaint or actively participates in or encouraged the filing of the complaint shall not participate in the city commission's appointment of a temporary, alternate member to serve with respect to the complaint. 
(c)  Two members of the ethics committee, including, when applicable, temporary, alternate members appointed pursuant to the foregoing subsection, shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. No. O-16-13, Art. D, § I, 10-17-16) 
Sec. 2-57. - Complaint process. 
(a)  Filing of complaint. 
(1)  A complaint alleging a violation of this code of ethics by a city commissioner is initiated through the filing of a sworn, written complaint with the city manager, on a form prescribed by the ethics committee. 
(2)  At minimum, the complaint shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name and mailing address of the person filing the complaint; 
b.  The name of the city commissioner against whom the complaint is filed; 
c.  The section or sections of the code of ethics that are alleged to have been violated; 
d.  A clear and concise statement of the facts on which the complaint is based, including relevant dates, places and actions. 
(3)  The complaint shall contain an oath that, to the best of the complainant's knowledge, information and belief, the facts set forth therein are true and correct. 
(4)  A complaint is filed when received by the city manager, either by hand delivery to the city manager's office or by email addressed to the city manager's official city email address. If filed by email, the date of filing shall be the date the city manager provides the complainant with a return email acknowledging receipt of the filing. 
(b)  Maintaining records relating to complaint. The city manager shall serve as the custodian of all records, communications, pleadings, rulings, and evidence filed or submitted in connection with the complaint, serving in the role of filing clerk for the ethics committee and responsible for compiling, certifying and transmitting a record of proceedings as may be required pursuant to an appeal from a decision by the city commission. 
(c)  Service of complaint. 
(1)  The city manager shall cause a copy of the complaint to be served on the respondent within ten days of the date the complaint is filed. Service shall be by personal service on the respondent or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the respondent's residence address. 
(2)  The city manager shall provide copies of the complaint to members of the ethics committee within ten days of the date the complaint is filed. 
(d)  Preliminary review of complaint. Within 20 days of the date the complaint is filed, the chair of the ethics committee shall review the complaint, determine if it complies with the minimum requirements of section 2-57(a), and, if it does not, issue a written dismissal. The first such dismissal shall be without prejudice to the right of the complainant to refile the complaint in a form that addresses deficiencies in the original complaint. In the event a re-filed complaint is dismissed for non-conformity, such dismissal shall be with prejudice. 
(e)  Answer by respondent. Within 30 days of service of the complaint on the respondent, the respondent may, but is not required, to file an answer, in which the respondent may admit or deny the allegations set forth in the complaint and assert any applicable defenses. 
(f)  Preliminary hearing. If the complaint is not dismissed pursuant to section 2-57(d), the ethics committee shall conduct a preliminary hearing within 60 days of the of the date the complaint is filed for the limited purpose of determining whether the complaint is time barred, unjustified, frivolous or patently unfounded, or if it fails to allege facts sufficient to invoke the jurisdiction of the code of ethics. Such consideration shall be based on and limited to review of the actual complaint. The ethics committee shall make such determination at the conclusion of the preliminary hearing and issue a written decision within five business days thereafter, either dismissing the complaint with prejudice or providing notice to the Complainant and the Respondent that the complaint will proceed to a full hearing on the merits. 
(g)  Evidentiary hearing. 
(1)  The hearing on the merits of the complaint shall be conducted within 120 days of the date the complaint is filed, unless continued to a later date by the ethics committee. 
(2)  The complainant and the respondent shall receive written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing no less than 14 days prior to the hearing. 
(3)  The burden shall be on the complainant to show, by clear and convincing evidence, that the respondent violated the code of ethics. 
(4)  At the hearing, the complainant, on their own behalf or through counsel, shall have the right to submit evidence, to call witnesses, to cross-examine adverse witnesses, and to be heard on the merits. 
(5)  At the hearing, the respondent, on their own behalf or through counsel, shall have the right to submit evidence, to call witnesses, to cross-examine adverse witnesses, and to be heard on the merits. 
(6)  The chair of the ethics committee or such other member as designated by the ethics committee shall preside over the hearing, including regulating the course of the proceedings, administering oaths to witnesses, and using their discretion to rule on the admissibility of evidence, guided by the rules of evidence applicable in civil non-jury trials. 
(7)  All testimony shall be under oath. 
(8)  Members of the ethics committee may question witnesses. 
(9)  The hearing shall be open to the public. 
(10)  The hearing may continue for multiple days, if necessary. At the conclusion of the hearing, the chair may adjourn the hearing for a period of not more than five days and reconvene the hearing within such five day period for the purpose of the ethics committee's deliberation and entry of a disposition pursuant to section 2-57(h). 
(h)  Disposition by ethics committee. 
(1)  Upon the conclusion of the hearing or within five days of the conclusion of the hearing, if adjourned and reconvened pursuant to Section 2-57(g)10, the ethics committee shall deliberate and enter one of the following dispositions: 
a.  Dismiss the complaint on the grounds that it is time barred, unjustified, frivolous or patently unfounded; or 
b.  Find that there has not been a violation of the code of ethics; or 
c.  Find that there has been a violation of the code of ethics, recommend that the city commission invoke disciplinary action and/or impose a fine pursuant to division 3, section 2-53, and recommend the specific form of disciplinary action that should be taken and/or fine amount that should be imposed. 
(2)  Such disposition shall be established by the concurring votes of at least two members of the ethics committee. 
(3)  The ethics committee shall transmit a written report to the city commission within 20 days of the conclusion of the hearing. In the event there is a finding of a violation of the code of ethics, the report shall include a summary of the facts established, an explanation of how the code of ethics was violated, and rationale for the recommended form of disciplinary action and/or fine amount. 
(i)  Action by city commission. 
(1)  In the event the ethics committee finds that there has been a violation of the code of ethics, the city commission shall determine at a meeting of the city commission the following: 
a.  Whether to accept the ethics committee's finding of a violation of the code of ethics; 
b.  If the finding of a violation is accepted, whether to accept the ethics committee's recommended form of discipline and/or fine amount or to substitute a different form of discipline and/or fine amount. 
(2)  The city commission's determination in the preceding section shall be by a majority of those city commissioners present and not disqualified from voting. 
(3)  A city commissioner who is the subject of a complaint shall not participate in the city commission's deliberations or determination of the matter. The city commissioner shall leave his or her seat as a member of the city commission throughout the time that the matter is being considered, although he or she may remain present in the city commission meeting room in their capacity as a respondent. 
(4)  A city commissioner who files a complaint alleging a violation of this code of ethics or otherwise actively participates in or encourages the filing of such a complaint, shall not participate in the city commission's deliberations or determination of the matter. The city commissioner shall leave his or her seat as a member of the city commission throughout the time that the matter is being considered, although he or she may remain present in the city commission meeting room in their capacity as a complainant and/or interested citizen. 
(j)  Time limitation. A complaint alleging a violation of this code of ethics shall be time barred if filed more than one year after the violation is alleged to have occurred. 
(k)  Moratorium during election period. To protect the public perception and integrity of the complaint process and to reduce the possibility that a complaint is being filed primarily for political purposes, complaints alleging that a city commissioner who has qualified for re-election has violated the code of ethics shall not be accepted for filing during the period between the date qualifying closes and the date the election results are certified. Likewise, a complaint alleging a violation of the code of ethics by a newly elected city commissioner shall not be accepted for filing until after the election results are certified. The limitation period in the foregoing section shall be tolled during such moratorium periods. 
(l)  Compliance with timeframes. A schedule of deadlines is set forth in this section in order to ensure the timely disposition of complaints-for the benefit of complainants, respondents, and the public. General compliance is expected, but failure to strictly comply with every deadline shall not invalidate an otherwise valid complaint or otherwise deprive the ethics committee and the city commission of their authority to adjudicate violations of this code of ethics. 
(m)  Legal counsel. The ethics committee shall be advised and assisted in carrying out its responsibilities by the city attorney and/or such other attorney or attorneys authorized by the city manager. 
(n)  Administrative support. The ethics committee shall be assisted in carrying out its responsibilities by the city manager and/or the city manager's designee(s). 
(Ord. No. O-16-13, Art. D, § II, 10-17-16) 
Sec. 2-58. - Right to appeal. 
    Decisions of the city commission pursuant to this code of ethics shall be reviewable by writ of certiorari to the superior court of DeKalb County pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1, et seq. Review by the superior court shall be limited to an inquiry of whether there was any evidence before the city commission which supported the decision of the city commission. Provided, however, no action of the city commission refusing or failing to take action pursuant to this code of ethics shall be reviewable by the superior court. 
(Ord. No. O-16-13, Art. D, § III, 10-17-16) 
Secs. 2-59, 2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINANCE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Discretion of governing body as to management and disposition of property, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-2; acquisition, sale and lease by municipality of real and personal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1 et seq.; disposition of municipal property generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6; grants of state funds to municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1 et seq.; multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; establishment of fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3; appointment of budget officer, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-4; preparation of proposed budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5; adoption of budget ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-6; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq.; purchases through state, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq.; power of expenditure, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ II. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-61-2-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FISCAL CONTROL 

Sec. 2-76. - Purpose; title. 
    The purpose of this division is to provide for a system of financial administration, accounting, fiscal and budgetary control which conforms to generally accepted accounting practices. 
(Code 1967, § 2-31) 
Sec. 2-77. - Responsibility for execution of division's provisions. 
    The responsibility for the proper execution of the provisions of this division shall be with the city manager except where the responsibility is explicitly given to the city commission. 
(Code 1967, § 2-32) 
Sec. 2-78. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Appropriation means an authorization granted by the legislative body to make expenditures or to incur obligations for specific purposes. 
    Audit means the examination of records, documents, reports, systems of internal control, accounting and financial procedures, and other evidence for one or more of the following purposes: 
(1)  Ascertain whether the statements prepared from the accounts present fairly the financial position and the results of financial operations of the constituent funds and balanced account groups of the governmental unit in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles applicable to governmental units and on a basis consistent with that of the preceding year; 
(2)  Determine the propriety, legality, and mathematical accuracy of a governmental unit's financial transactions; 
(3)  Ascertain whether all financial transactions have been properly recorded; and 
(4)  Ascertain the stewardship of public officials who handle and are responsible for the financial resources of a governmental unit. 
    Balance sheet means a statement ordinarily prepared from books kept by the double entry method showing assets, liabilities, reserves and surplus of a fund of a governmental unit at a specified date properly classified to exhibit financial position of the fund or unit at that date. 
    Budget means a plan of financial operation embodying an estimate of proposed expenditures for a given time and the proposed means of financing them. The annual budget refers to a period of one year. 
    Debt service means the amount of money necessary annually to pay the interest on the outstanding debt and the principal of maturing bonded debt not payable from a sinking fund and to provide a fund for the redemption of bonds payable from a sinking fund. 
    Delinquent taxes means taxes remaining unpaid on and after the date on which a penalty for a nonpayment is attached. 
    Encumbrances means obligations in the form of purchase orders, contracts or salary commitments which are chargeable to an appropriation and for which a part of the appropriation is reserved. 
    Fund means a sum of money or other resources (gross or net) set aside for the purpose of carrying on specific activities or to attain certain objectives in accordance with special regulations, restrictions, or limitations. 
    Trust funds means amounts received or appropriated and held in trust in accordance with an agreement or legislative act which may be expended only in accordance with the terms of such trust or act. 
(Code 1967, § 2-33) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-79. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year shall begin on July 1 and shall end on June 30. 
(Code 1967, § 2-34) 
Sec. 2-80. - Adoption and preparation of annual budget generally. 
    An annual budget shall be adopted by the city commission prior to the first day of the fiscal year. The proposed budget shall be prepared by the city manager and transmitted to members of the city commission for its review a minimum of 45 days before the required date of adoption. The budget, as adopted, shall be a balanced budget with anticipated revenues, including appropriated unencumbered surplus, equal to appropriated expenditures. All funds within the budget shall also be balanced. 
(Code 1967, § 2-35) 
Sec. 2-81. - Expenditure not to be made unless appropriations adequate; bidding. 
    No expenditures in any fund shall be legal or proper unless appropriations adequate to meet that expenditure have been made in the budget. Purchases shall be made only after bona fide competitive bidding and bids shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder. Purchases in excess of $1,000.00 shall be on the basis of sealed bids. 
(Code 1967, § 2-36) 
Sec. 2-82. - Copy of proposed budget to be made available for public inspection. 
    At the time the proposed budget is transmitted to members of the governing authority by the city manager, a copy of the proposed budget shall be made available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk during regular office hours. 
(Code 1967, § 2-37) 
Sec. 2-83. - Hearing on budget. 
    No earlier than seven days after the proposed budget is transmitted to members of the city commission and no later than the time that the budget is adopted by the city commission, a public hearing shall be held to give the public the opportunity to comment upon the proposed budget. Notice of such public hearing shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality no more than 20 days and no less than five days in advance of the hearing. 
(Code 1967, § 2-38) 
Sec. 2-84. - Budget resolution. 
    The adoption of the budget shall be accomplished by the approval of a budget resolution which specifies the anticipated revenues by appropriate categories and the appropriated expenditures for each department and each nondepartmental expense and for each fund covered by the budget. Amendments to the budget shall be approved by resolution. 
(Code 1967, § 2-39) 
Sec. 2-85. - Increase in appropriation to require amendment of budget resolution; transfer of appropriations among various accounts to require approval of city manager. 
    Any increase in appropriation in a departmental budget or in a nondepartmental expense category, whether accomplished through a change in anticipated revenues or through a transfer of appropriations among departments and nondepartmental expenses, shall require the approval of the city commission in the form of an amendment to the budget resolution. The transfer of appropriations among the various accounts within a departmental budget or within a nondepartmental expense category shall only require the approval of the city manager; except that any transfer of appropriations within a departmental budget so as to increase the salary appropriation for the purpose of employing additional personnel shall require the approval of the city commission. 
(Code 1967, § 2-40) 
Sec. 2-86. - Appropriation transfer from sinking fund or debt retirement fund not to be made until legal obligations and requirements of fund are satisfied. 
    No appropriation transfer shall be made from a sinking fund or debt retirement fund until all the legal obligations and requirements of such fund have been satisfied. 
(Code 1967, § 2-41) 
Sec. 2-87. - Statement of anticipated revenues to be presented on basis of ordinary and reasonable revenues expected; property tax estimates. 
    The city manager shall present the statement of anticipated revenues on the basis of the ordinary and reasonable revenues which can be expected for the fiscal year. Property tax revenue estimates shall be based upon the anticipated tax digest, less a stated discount for delinquent taxes based on a consideration of the taxes which were delinquent at the close of the three prior fiscal years, plus a stated amount of delinquent taxes, including penalties and interest, to be collected in the fiscal year based on consideration of the actual experience in the collection of delinquent taxes in the three prior fiscal years. 
(Code 1967, § 2-42) 
Sec. 2-88. - Unencumbered surplus appropriations. 
    All appropriations which are not obligated, encumbered or expended at the end of the fiscal year shall lapse and shall become a part of the unencumbered surplus which may be appropriated for the next fiscal year. 
(Code 1967, § 2-43) 
Sec. 2-89. - Funds established. 
    The following funds may be established and shall be used as necessary to provide for the proper accounting of all financial activities: 
(1)  The general fund to account for the general governmental operations and all financial transactions not properly accounted for in another fund. 
(2)  Special revenue funds to account for the proceeds of special revenue sources, other than special assessments, or to finance specified activities as required by law or administrative regulation. 
(3)  Debt service funds to account for the payment of interest and principal on longterm debts other than special assessment and revenue bonds. 
(4)  Capital project funds to account for the receipt and disbursement of monies including bond funds used for the acquisition of capital facilities other than those financed by special assessment and enterprise funds. 
(5)  Enterprise (utility) funds to account for the financing of services to the general public where all or most of the costs involved are paid in the form of charges by users of such services. 
(6)  Trust and agency funds to account for assets held by a governmental unit as trustee or agent for individuals, private organizations, and other governmental units. 
(7)  Intergovernmental service funds to account for the financing of special activities and services performed by a designated organization unit within a governmental jurisdiction for other organization units within the same governmental jurisdiction. 
(8)  Special assessment funds to account for special assessments levied to finance public improvements or services deemed to benefit the properties against which the assessments are levied. 
(Code 1967, § 2-44) 
Sec. 2-90. - Self-balancing group of accounts to be established and maintained for funds. 
    A complete self-balancing group of accounts shall be established and maintained for each fund used. This group of accounts shall include all general ledger accounts and subsidiary records necessary to reflect compliance with legal provisions and to set forth the financial position and the results of financial operations of the fund. 
(Code 1967, § 2-45) 
Sec. 2-91. - Additional accounts. 
    Additional accounts, as follows, shall be maintained: 
(1)  A fixed asset account for the purpose of accounting for those assets which are of a tangible nature, have a life longer than one fiscal year, and have a significant value. Fixed assets shall be recorded at original cost, shall not be depreciated and shall be removed from the account when disposed of. 
(2)  A general longterm debt account for the purpose of accounting for longterm debt which is supported by general revenues and for recording and fairly representing the liability for longterm debt at any time from date of issuance until the debt is retired. 
(Code 1967, § 2-46) 
Sec. 2-92. - Modified accrual basis of accounting to be used. 
    The modified accrual basis of accounting shall be used so that expenditures, other than accrued interest on longterm debt, are recorded at the time liabilities are incurred and revenues are recorded when cash is received, except for material or available revenues which shall be accrued to reflect properly the taxes levied and the revenues earned. All receipts and disbursements shall be posted promptly and at least on a monthly basis. To the extent possible, all interfund transfers shall be cleared by the end of the fiscal year. 
(Code 1967, § 2-47) 
Sec. 2-93. - Preparation and presentation of financial statements and reports; publication. 
    Financial statements and reports showing the current conditions of budgetary and proprietary accounts shall be prepared and presented to the city commission at least every six months. Not later than six months after the close of the fiscal year, a comprehensive annual financial report covering all funds and financial operations shall be prepared and published. A summary of this report, containing at least a statement of revenues and expenditures as of the close of the preceding fiscal year and the combined balance sheet for all funds and account groups, will be published in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(Code 1967, § 2-48) 
Sec. 2-94. - Annual audit. 
    All the funds, accounts and financial transactions of the city shall be subjected to an annual audit by an independent certified public accountant who is to be selected by the city commission. The audit shall be conducted according to the standards set forth in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountant's publication, "Audits of State and Local Governmental Units." 
(Code 1967, § 2-49) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; businesses, ch. 22; health and sanitation, ch. 54; law enforcement, ch. 62; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70; taxation, ch. 94; zoning, pt. IV. UDO. 
State Law reference- Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Applicability of this article. 
    The provisions of article I shall apply to all types of alcoholic beverage licenses issued within the city. 
(Code 1967, § 4-1; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
    Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
    Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
    Brewpub means any restaurant in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36 for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form. 
    Brown bag establishment means any restaurant, music hall, theater, or other establishment providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business, and in which the owners or their agents knowingly allow patrons to bring in and consume the patrons' own alcoholic beverages. 
    Corkage license means an additional license option available to any restaurant which holds a valid license for the sale of wine for the retail sale of wine for consumption on premises that will allow patrons to bring, possess and consume the patron's own bottle of "wine" on the premises. 
    Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
    Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
    Governing authority means the City Commissioners of Decatur, Georgia. 
    Grocery store means a retail establishment that has a total retail floor space of at least 10,000 square feet, of which at least 85 percent is reserved for the sale of food and other nonalcoholic items, and that conducts all of its sales inside the building containing its retail floor space. 
    Licensee means the individual to whom a license is issued or, in the case of partnership or corporation, all partners, officers, and directors of the partnership or corporation. 
    Liter means metric measurement, currently used by the United States. 
    Manager means any person who supervises the regular operations of business licensed under this chapter. 
    Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The word "manufacturer" also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; 
(2)  In the case of malt beverage, any brewer. 
    Minor means any person under 21 years of age. 
    Moral turpitude, for the purposes of this ordinance, means a conviction for a statutory offense if one or more of the elements of that offense have been determined to involve inherently evil intent; larceny; or, intent to harm persons or things. 
    Categorized below are some of the more common crimes, which are considered to involve moral turpitude as it relates to this ordinance. 
Arson Burglary Murder Embezzlement Extortion Pandering Forgery Prostitution Larceny (grand or petty) Rape Robbery Voluntary manslaughter Sale of illegal drugs Fraud  
    Categorized below are some of the more common crimes, which are not considered to involve moral turpitude as it relates to this ordinance. 
Passing a bad check, lacking criminal intent Public drunkenness Possession of less than one ounce of marijuana Possessing stolen property Juvenile delinquency Simple battery Simple assault  
    Owner means any person or partner or stockholder owning any percentage of a business. 
    Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container as labeled and provided by the manufacturer for single unit sale. Bottles, cans or other containers which are shipped from the manufacturer connected by plastic rings, encased in cartons or similar packaging are considered a single package. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public. 
    Premises means the space or area owned, leased or controlled by the licensee and used by the licensee for the purpose of operating under the license. 
    Private club means all social, business, fraternal, veteran, and recreational clubs, lodges, associations, and organizations not generally open to the public but restricted to the registered members of the club, lodge, association, or organization, and the guests of members thereof, and which has adopted a constitution and bylaws for its operation and which elects annually or at regular intervals officers and directors responsible for the operation of the affairs of the organization. It shall not include a private club organized and functioning for the sale or serving of distilled spirits. 
    Public place means any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
    Purchaser means and includes any individual, partnership, corporation, or association purchasing alcoholic beverages from a licensee. 
    Restaurant means any eating establishment that is licensed under this chapter and located in a zoning district that permits restaurants as a conforming use or eating establishment incidental to a hotel or motel, and such establishment: 
(1)  Derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food; or 
(2)  Derives at least 40 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food and provides chairs, tables, and counters to seat and serve 50 or more persons. 
    Retail dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
    Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
    Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in the section. 
    Wine tasting means an instructional or educational promotion in a an establishment licensed for the retail sale of wine in original packages and not for consumption on the premises. 
(Code 1967, § 4-2; Ord. No. O-99-12, 7-9-99; Ord. No. O-05-01, Art. I, § 1, 2-7-05; Ord. No. O-05-16, Art. I, § 1, 12-19-05; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11; Ord. No. O-15-14, § 1, 10-5-15) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-3. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, after trial and conviction in the municipal court, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1967, § 4-25; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 6-4. - License application; fees. 
(a)  All persons desiring to manufacture or sell alcoholic beverages shall make application on the forms prescribed by the city manager. 
(b)  Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in the amount of $200.00 to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the applicant withdraws his application prior to its being submitted to the city commission, or if the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant is denied a state license, the deposit representing the license fee shall be refunded, but the $200.00 paid for investigation shall be retained. 
(c)  The license application shall include, but not be limited to, the name and address of the applicant; the proposed business location; the type of business to be conducted; if a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the partners; and if a corporation, the names of the officers, the name and address of the agent for service of process, the name of the manager, and the names of all shareholders holding more than ten percent of any class of corporate stock, or any other entity having a financial interest in each entity which is to own or operate the establishment for which a license is sought. 
(d)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof before a notary public or other officer qualified to administer oaths. 
(e)  All applicants shall furnish data, information and records as required by the city manager to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Failure to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. 
(f)  The city manager shall direct an investigation of all applications to ensure conformance with city code requirements. 
(Code 1967, § 4-3; Ord. No. O-94-17, § 6, 12-19-94; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11; Ord. No. O-12-05, 7-3-12) 
Sec. 6-5. - Moral character of license applicant. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverages license shall be granted to any persons or officers or directors of any such corporations who have been convicted under any federal, state, or local law or have pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime, misdemeanor, or felony involving moral turpitude, lottery, or illegal possession or sale of narcotics or liquors within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. 
(b)  At the time an application is submitted for an alcoholic beverage license, the applicant shall, by a duly sworn affidavit, certify that neither he, nor any of the other owners of the establishment, nor the manager of such establishment has been convicted or has plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime, misdemeanor, and/or felony involving moral turpitude, lottery, or illegal possession or sale of narcotics or liquors within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. Should any applicant, partner, officer, or employee used in the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages after a license has been granted be convicted or plead guilty or nolo contendere to a crime involving moral turpitude or the violation of any laws regulating the sale of narcotics, liquor, wine or beer, or the lottery laws of this state, the license may be revoked by the city commission. 
(Code 1967, § 4-4; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11; Ord. No. O-12-05, 7-3-12) 
Sec. 6-6. - General licensing qualifications. 
(a)  No license for the manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who is not a lawful citizen of the United States, or [nor to] an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. 
(b)  Where the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the provisions of this section shall apply to all its partners, officers, managers and majority stockholders. In the case of a corporation, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and to the majority stockholder, if an individual. Where the majority stockholder is not an individual, then the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and its agent registered under the provisions of this chapter. In the case of a partnership, the license will be issued to one of the partners. 
(c)  No license for the manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has had any license, issued under the police powers of the city, previously revoked within two years prior to the filing of the application. 
(d)  The city commission may decline to issue a license when any person having any interest in the operation of such place of business or control over such place of business does not meet the same character requirements as set forth in this section for the licensee. 
(e)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee or owner may be served. This person must be a resident of the county. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent with the city and shall be in such form as prescribed. 
(Code 1967, § 4-5; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11; Ord. No. O-12-05, 7-3-12) 
Sec. 6-7. - Transferability of alcoholic beverages licenses; fee required to change establishment owner, manager, partnership, stockholders, or establishment name. 
(a)  License applicability. All alcoholic beverage licenses shall be personal to the licensee. No alcoholic beverage license shall be transferable, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  Death of licensee. In case of the death of a licensee, the establishment shall be allowed to continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date of death or until expiration of the license or until approval of a new licensee, whichever shall first occur. No sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed until such time as a personal representative of the estate, appointed by a probate court of competent jurisdiction, shall make application for a new license with the city. Upon issuance of a new license, the authorization to sell under the previous license shall be revoked by operation of law. No additional license fees shall be required during the period for which the original license was issued. 
(c)  Severance of association with licensed establishment. If a licensee severs his association with a licensed establishment, the establishment may continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date determined to be the date of severance. No such sale shall be authorized until such time as a new application for a license is made, the application indicating that no change of ownership has occurred, except as provided in this section. Upon issuance of a new license, the authorizations to sell under the previous license shall be revoked by operation of law. No additional license fees shall be required during the period for which the original license was issued. 
(d)  Withdrawal from partnership. Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership. This section shall not prohibit transfer of stock between persons who held stock in the corporate ownership at the time of issuance of the license, nor shall it prohibit transfers of stock which do not result in any person increasing his stock holdings to a total of ten percent or more of any class of stock. 
(e)  Conditions for new application for license. A new application for a license shall be made whenever there is a new owner, change in partnership, or change in stockholders holding an alcoholic beverage license issued by the city. 
(f)  Transfer of location of establishment. Any licensee who desires to transfer the location of an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages within the city shall so notify the city manager prior to any transfer of location. The city manager shall determine whether the new location is in compliance with all provisions of this chapter. No change in the location of a licensed establishment shall be permitted unless the new location complies with all provisions of this chapter. The city commission shall have the authority to approve or deny the transfer of location in the same manner that it may approve or deny the issuance of a new license. An investigative fee of $200.00 shall be paid by the licensee at the time that an application is made for the transfer of an establishment location. Should a transfer of location be approved, with no change of ownership of the business, the license fee paid for the old location shall be applied to the new location. 
(g)  Change of establishment name. Any licensee who desires to change the name of an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages within the city shall so notify the city manager prior to any change of name, and the city manager shall direct the issuance of a corrected license in replacement of the original license. A fee of $50.00 shall be paid by the licensee at the time that an application is made for the change of an establishment name. 
(h)  Change of manager. Any licensee who changes the manager of an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages within the city shall so notify the city manager within three days of the effective date of such change and shall file, with the city manager or his/her designee, such information about the new establishment manager as the city manager may require. A fee of $200.00 shall be paid at the time that an application is made for change of an establishment manager. 
(i)  Change of ownership. Except as provided in this section, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed establishment shall be cause to cancel and revoke any license issued under this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 4-6; Ord. No. O-94-17, § 6, 12-19-94; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11; Ord. No. O-12-07, 11-5-12) 
Sec. 6-8. - Nonprofit civic organizations eligible for issuance of temporary license or annual license. 
(a)  Upon application by a nonprofit or charitable organization and approval by the city commission, a temporary license for the retail sale of beer and wine may be issued to such nonprofit or charitable organization. Such temporary license shall be subject to such conditions as may be established by the city commission, and no temporary license shall be granted for a period longer than three days. The fee for a temporary license shall be $50.00. 
(b)  Upon application by a nonprofit or charitable organization, based in the City of Decatur corporate limits, and approval by the city commission, an annual license for the retail sale of beer and wine may be issued to such nonprofit or charitable organization at a reduced fee. Such annual license shall be subject to such conditions as may be established by the city commission and the fee for such annual license shall be as determined by the city commission. 
(Code 1967, § 4-7; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 6-9. - Issuance of alcoholic beverages licenses subject to state and local code requirements; payment of taxes and fees. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued to any city elected official or an employee of any city department, or his/her spouse or minor children; nor shall any such person have any whole, partial or beneficial interest in any alcoholic beverage license in the city. 
(b)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued for a location within the city that fails to meet all applicable state and local fire, life safety, building, health, and zoning codes. 
(c)  No new or renewal alcoholic beverage licenses shall be issued to any applicant who is delinquent in the payment of city taxes or fees, including, but not limited to, property taxes, alcoholic beverage excise taxes, business license fees, or any other taxes or fees which are owed to the city by the applicant. 
(Code 1967, § 4-8; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11; Ord. No. O-12-07, 11-5-12) 
Sec. 6-10. - License may issue; manufacturing/sales prohibited in incomplete establishment. 
    Where a building intended for the manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages is at the time of the application for such license not in existence or not yet completed, a license may be issued for such location, provided the plans for the proposed building show clear compliance with all provisions of this chapter and applicable provisions of this Code. No manufacturing or sales shall be allowed in such establishment, however, until it has been completed in accordance with such plans and is inspected by the city manager, or his/her designee, to ensure compliance with city codes. 
(Code 1967, § 4-9; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11; Ord. No. O-12-07, 11-5-12) 
Sec. 6-11. - Establishment to open for business within six months of issuance of license; cessation of operation; automatic forfeiture of license for failure to open and remain open. 
(a)  All holders of licenses under this chapter must open for business within six months after issuance of the license at the establishment referred to in the license. Failure to open the licensed establishment within such time shall automatically forfeit and cancel the unused license, and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder. 
(b)  Any holder of a license under this chapter who shall begin the operation of the business as authorized in the license, but who shall cease to operate the business as authorized in the license for a period of three consecutive months shall, upon completion of the three-month period, automatically forfeit his license. Such license shall, by virtue of such failure to operate, be cancelled by the city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 4-10; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 6-12. - Expiration and renewal of licenses. 
    All licenses granted under this chapter shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their licenses shall file an application and submit the requisite fees to the city manager or his/her designee on the forms provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed before November 15 of each year, otherwise no renewal license shall be granted, but an application for renewal shall be treated as an initial application, and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. 
    All licenses granted under this chapter shall be for the calendar year, and the full license fee must be paid for a license issued prior to July 1 of each license year. One-half of a full license fee shall be paid for a license issued after July 1 of the license year. Any new license issued in December shall be valid for the next license year provided that the full annual license fee is paid. 
(Code 1967, § 4-11; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 6-13. - Denial, suspension and revocation of alcoholic beverages licenses. 
(a)  Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license of any licensee to manufacture or sell at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages, the city alcoholic beverage license shall thereupon be automatically revoked. The city manager, upon notice of this revocation, shall take the necessary steps to ensure that alcoholic beverage manufacturing or sales cease. 
(b)  A license may be suspended or revoked by the city commission when the licensee furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license or omits information required in the application for a license or for failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  The city commission may suspend or revoke the license of any licensee where the establishment has been found in violation of the specified days or hours of operation or sales as stipulated in this chapter. 
(d)  The city commission may suspend or revoke the license of any licensee that does not maintain a public telephone and public restrooms available for use by customers during operating hours. 
(e)  The city commission may revoke the license of any licensee whose license has been suspended two or more times in any consecutive 12-month period. 
(f)  The city commission may revoke the license for any premises where alcoholic beverages have been manufactured or sold or distributed during a period of suspension. 
(g)  The city commission may suspend or revoke the license of any establishment which does not meet the licensing qualifications set forth in this chapter at any time such knowledge becomes known. 
(h)  An act of omission of a licensee, owner of more than ten percent interest in the licensed establishment, or employee of the licensee or licensed establishment willingly or knowingly performed, which constitutes a violation of federal or state law or of any provision of this chapter will subject the licensee to suspension or revocation of its license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, when the city commission determines to its own satisfaction that the act or omission did occur, regardless of whether any criminal prosecution or conviction ensues; provided, however, that in the case of an employee, the city commission must determine that the acts of the employee were known to or under reasonable circumstances should have been known to the licensee, were condoned by the licensee, or that the licensee has not established practices or procedures to prevent the violation from occurring. 
(i)  Any license may be revoked or suspended by the city commission for good cause after hearing upon five days' written notice to the holder of such license of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing and a general statement of the charges to be considered. Good cause for the suspension or revocation of any such license shall consist of the violation of any laws or ordinances regulating such businesses; violation of this chapter or other regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the licensing of such businesses; for the violation of any city ordinance, rule, or regulation other than traffic ordinances; or for irregularities, omissions, or untruths in the application for a license. 
(j)  In addition to all other authority to deny, revoke or suspend a license, any application for a license may be denied and any existing license may be revoked or suspended by the city commission in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. In making such a determination, the city commission shall assess the extent to which the granting of the license or the continued holding of the license would contribute to the following problems: 
(1)  Littering in the area of the establishment. 
(2)  Loitering in the area of the establishment. 
(3)  The public consumption of alcoholic beverages in the area of the establishment. 
(4)  The exposure of minors to the sale of alcoholic beverages because of the number of minors who frequent the establishment. 
(Code 1967, § 4-12; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11; Ord. No. O-12-07, 11-5-12) 
Sec. 6-14. - Employee regulations. 
(a)  Certain employee regulations shall apply to all establishments holding an alcoholic beverage license for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages issued by the city. 
(b)  No person shall be employed to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages by an establishment holding a license under this chapter unless such person first certifies in writing, on a form provided by the police department, that he/she is eligible to obtain an alcoholic beverage server permit. Licensees shall make a good faith effort to ensure that such employees file applications for alcoholic beverage server permits as soon as practicable. In no case shall a licensee allow any employee to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages when such employee has failed to apply for an alcoholic beverage server permit within four days of the date of their original employment. 
(c)  All employees who work for a business licensed to sell alcoholic beverages within the city who are actually engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be required to apply for and obtain an alcoholic beverage server permit from the police department for each location at which the employee is working. All alcoholic beverage server permits issued to employees who sell alcoholic beverages within the city shall have on the alcoholic beverage server permit the person's name and address, the name of the establishment, and the address of the establishment. 
(d)  No alcoholic beverage server permit shall be issued to any applicant until such time as a signed application has been filed with the police department and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed. The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth, and prior arrest record of the applicant, though the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Because of the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential to the extent allowed by the Georgia Open Records Act. The police chief or his/her designee shall have a search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted. In no event shall any alcoholic beverage server permit be granted to any persons who have been convicted under any federal, state, or local law or have pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime, misdemeanor, or felony involving moral turpitude, lottery, or illegal possession or sale of narcotics or liquors within a period of five years immediately prior to the filing of such application, nor shall any person sell or dispense alcoholic beverages. If there is no record of a violation of this chapter, the police chief or his/her designee shall issue an alcoholic beverage server permit to the employee, stating that the person meets the requirements of this chapter. When any employee's alcoholic beverage server permit is denied, the police chief or his/her designee shall issue to the employer and applicant a letter stating that the person does not meet the requirements of this chapter and that, upon request, the police chief or his/her designee will refer the matter and any evidence the person cares to submit in their behalf to the city manager for consideration. If the person requests consideration by the city manager, the entire record will be sent. The city manager or his/her designee shall consider all matters presented and make a decision as to whether the person qualifies for an alcoholic beverage server permit under this chapter. In the event the city manager or his/her designee denies the permit, written notice shall be provided of the denial to the applicant. 
(e)  Alcoholic beverage server permits shall expire at midnight on the one-year anniversary of issuance. 
(f)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding any license to sell alcoholic beverages to file with the police chief the name of the establishment, the license number and a list of all employees, with their home addresses and home telephone numbers twice annually on or before June 1, and again on or before December 1. 
(g)  All alcoholic beverage server permits issued through administrative error or through an error in the conduct of a background investigation may be revoked by the police chief. 
(h)  This section shall not be construed to include employees whose duties are limited solely to those of busboys, cooks, dishwashers or similar jobs that do not involve selling or serving or controlling the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages. 
(i)  Except as provided in this section, no licensee shall allow any employee required to hold an alcoholic beverage server permit to work on the licensed premises unless the licensee has on file, on the premises, the current, valid alcoholic beverage server permit of each such employee. 
(j)  If any alcoholic beverage server permit holder leaves the employ of a licensed establishment, the licensee shall immediately surrender the alcoholic beverage server permit to the police department. 
(k)  All alcoholic beverage server permits issued under this chapter remain the property of the city and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any officer of the police department. 
(l)  Any employee engaged in selling or serving or controlling the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages shall be 19 years of age or older. 
(m)  Each application for a permit under this article shall be accompanied by a check or cash for the full amount of the alcoholic beverage server permit fee as outlined in city commission approved schedule of fees. 
(Code 1967, § 4-13; Ord. No. O-07-01, 2-1-07; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11; Ord. No. O-12-07, 11-5-12) 
Sec. 6-15. - Inspection of licensed establishments by the police department. 
    Sworn officers of the police department shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this chapter during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of this Code and state law. 
(Code 1967, § 4-14; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 6-16. - License and certain Code provisions to be posted. 
(a)  Licenses to be kept in plain view. All alcoholic beverages licenses issued by the city shall include a statement as to the type of license issued, the name of the licensee, the name of the licensed establishment, and the address of the licensed establishment. All licenses issued shall, at all times, be kept plainly exposed to view within the premises. 
(b)  Posting of approved sign. All licensees shall post in a prominent location on licensed premises, in a manner whereby it may be easily viewed by patrons, an approved sign setting forth or summarizing the laws of the city and the state in regard to the sale of alcoholic beverages to underaged or intoxicated persons. 
(c)  Size of sign; contents. Each such sign shall be of a size and configuration approved by the city manager, and shall include either the language of the applicable Code sections, or summaries approved by the city manager. 
(d)  Price of signs. The city manager is authorized to design and have printed approved signs, which shall be made available to licensees at a price to be established by the city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 4-15; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
State Law reference- Posting of laws regarding sale of alcoholic beverages to underage persons, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24.2; signs used by retail distilled spirits dealers; signs advertising Georgia lottery, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-3. 
Sec. 6-17. - Application of chapter provisions to minors generally. 
(a)  No person under 21 years of age shall be employed in or about the premises of any establishment licensed to sell distilled spirits at retail in original packages. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person under 21 years of age to attempt to purchase or for any other person to purchase alcoholic beverages for a person under 21 years of age. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person under 21 years of age to exhibit faked, forged, or borrowed credentials in an effort to obtain alcoholic beverages to which he is not legally entitled. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age, other than a licensed employee working in a licensed establishment, to have an open container of any alcoholic beverage in his possession. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee, his agent, or employee to allow any person under 21 years of age, other than a licensed employee of a licensed establishment, to enter a licensed premises; provided, however, that this section does not apply to properly licensed restaurants, food stores, or private clubs. 
(f)  It shall be a violation not to require and properly check identification to ensure that a person under 21 years of age is not sold, served, or has in his possession alcoholic beverages while in a licensed establishment, except that a licensed employee working in a licensed establishment may have in his possession alcoholic beverages for the purpose of selling or serving such alcoholic beverages. The term "identification," as used in this section, shall mean any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, a photograph and giving such person's date of birth, and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license or state department of public safety identification card. 
(Code 1967, § 4-16; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
State Law reference- Municipal court jurisdiction in cases involving underaged persons and alcohol, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10. 
Sec. 6-18. - Acts prohibited by retailers generally. 
    No holder of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages at retail nor any agent or employee of the licensee shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)  Sell any alcoholic beverage to a person under 21 years of age. 
(2)  Sell any alcoholic beverage to any person while such person is in an intoxicated condition. 
(3)  Sell any alcoholic beverage upon the licensed premises on any day or at any time when such sale is prohibited by law. 
(4)  Allow any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on the premises of an establishment not licensed for on-premises consumption excepting wine tastings, as provided for in article VII of this chapter, wine tastings. 
(5)  At restaurants where wine is sold in original packages for off-premises consumption pursuant to section 6-57(a), allow any person to break any package or packages containing alcoholic beverages on the premises where sold or allow or permit the drinking the contents of such package or package on the premises where sold. 
(Code 1967, § 4-17; Ord. No. O-05-16, Art. I, § 3, 12-19-05; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 6-19. - Purchases from and sales to other than license holders. 
    No retailer shall purchase any alcoholic beverages from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this chapter. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverages to any person other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 4-18; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 6-20. - Unlawful conduct on licensed premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the holder of any license issued under the provisions of this chapter to permit any disturbance of the peace, any obscenity, or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practices in the licensed premises, or to operate the business carried on the licensed premises in such manner as to constitute a nuisance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee, his agent or employee to fail to report to the police department any disturbance which occurs immediately outside their premises or in their parking facilities of which they have knowledge. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any licensed establishment to employ any person who has been convicted of, entered a plea to, or has otherwise been found guilty of a felony, a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or alcoholic beverage violations. 
(d)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the licensee, his agent, or employee to report to the police department any usage or possession or illegal drugs or narcotics and to report any unlawful conduct on a licensed premises. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee, his agent or employee to fail to assist any law enforcement officer in the performance of his duty while the officer is on a licensed premises. 
(Code 1967, § 4-19; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 6-21. - Sale of alcoholic beverages on election days. 
    Licensees may sell alcoholic beverages on election days, provided that such sale is not within 250 feet of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established on primary or election days. The limitations imposed by this section shall be in effect beginning with the opening of the polls and ending with the closing of the polls. 
(Code 1967, § 4-21; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
State Law reference- Sale of alcoholic beverages on election days, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 6-22. - Consumption and sales on public property, patio sales, and sidewalk table plan permits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic beverages or any other intoxicating beverage at any public place within the city, or for any person to have in his possession any unsealed 
or opened container with such intoxicating beverage in it at any public place within the city, except as provided under the terms and conditions of special permits issued by the city commission or as outlined in this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or possess any alcoholic beverage upon real property of the city that is used as a public park, playground, or school. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic beverages in any automobile on the streets of the city, whether such automobile shall be moving or parked. 
(d)  Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve, or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages outside the licensed premises structure. 
(e)  No consumption and/or sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed in open areas, decks, patios or similar unenclosed spaces on the premises of an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages unless permitted and approved by the city. The city shall review and inspect annually such sites to ensure adherence to approved patio and sidewalk plans for the safe and orderly operation, including, but not limited to, regulations pertaining to maximum capacity, ingress and egress and the protection of public health. 
(f)  A sidewalk table plan permit, for the approval of the location of tables on city-owned right-of-way, will be granted annually as part of the alcohol beverage license new or renewal process and will be granted based on adherence to regulations for sidewalk table plans as stated in subsection (g) of this section. 
(g)  Sidewalk table plan permits for the location of tables on city-owned right-of-way must adhere to following regulations: 
(1)  The request for a sidewalk table plan permit will be included with an application for an alcohol beverage license. 
(2)  The city manager or his/her designee shall review each permit based on the provisions of Appendix A of the zoning ordinance section 10.19.2. 
(3)  Smoking is prohibited at tables included in a sidewalk table plan permit area and within five feet of any such area boundary. 
(4)  The city manager or his/her designee will perform random inspections on sidewalk table plan permit areas to assure compliance with the ordinance. 
(5)  Sidewalk table plan permits may be revoked by city commission for failure to adhere to established regulations. 
(Code 1967, § 4-22; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-11-10 further provided that subsections (f) and (g) shall become effective for new alcoholic beverage license applications on January 1, 2012 and renewal alcoholic beverage license applications on October 1, 2012. 
Sec. 6-23. - Brown bag establishments. 
(a)  Brown bag establishments shall be prohibited within the city. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) above, restaurants that possess licenses as allowed by section 6-60 may permit patrons to bring, possess, and consume bottles of wine that are owned by the patrons into the premises pursuant to the conditions set forth in section 6-60. 
(Code 1967, § 4-23; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 6-24. - Measurement of distances. 
    Unless otherwise provided by law, all measurements to determine distances required by this chapter, for the issuance of alcoholic beverage licenses, shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1)  From the front door of the structure from which the alcoholic beverage is sold or offered for sale. 
(2)  In a straight line to the nearest public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway. 
(3)  Along such public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest route. 
(4)  To the front door of the building, to the property line, or to the nearest portion of the grounds, whichever is applicable under the appropriate section of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-05-16, Art. I, § 2, 12-19-05; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Secs. 6-25-6-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BEER AND WINE 

Sec. 6-51. - Authority to sell; license required. 
    Beer, wine or malt beverages may be sold in the incorporated limits of the city only under a license granted by the city, upon the terms and conditions provided in this article. 
(Code 1967, § 4-31; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
State Law reference- Local permit or license required for wholesale or retail sales of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(a). 
Sec. 6-52. - License fees. 
    Before such license shall be granted, the applicant therefor shall comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the city commission regulating the sale of beer and wine, and each applicant shall pay a license fee in accordance with the following scale: 
(1)  Wholesale dealers in wine; five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year. 
(2)  Retail dealers in wine, sold in original packages only; one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per year. 
(3)  Retail dealers in wine where it is permissible to consume the same on the premises; five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year. 
(4)  Wholesalers of beer and malt beverages; five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year. 
(5)  Retail dealers in beer and malt beverages, where the same is sold in the original packages; one thousdand dollars ($1,000.00) per year. 
(6)  Retail dealers in beer where the same is sold to be consumed on the premises; five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year. 
(7)  A combination license to sell beer and wine at retail in original packages, not to be consumed on the premises at the same location where the beer may be unchilled, chilled, iced, or refrigerated; one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per year. 
(8)  A combination license to sell wine, beer and malt beverages at retail, where it is to be consumed on the premises; seven hundred fifty ($750.00) per year. 
(9)  A combination license for wholesalers of beer and malt beverages and wine; seven hundred fifty ($750.00) per year. 
(10)  A combination license to sell wine, beer, and malt beverages at retail, where it is to be consumed on the premises and to sell wine at retail in original packages, not to be consumed on the premises at the same location where the beer may be unchilled, chilled, iced, or refrigerated; one thousand seven hundred fifty dollars ($1,750.00). 
(11)  Corkage license; one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year. 
(12)  Manufacturers of beer or malt beverages; one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per year. 
(13)  Manufacturers of wine in an amount not to exceed 60,000 gallons per year; $1000.00 per year. 
(Ord. No. O-94-17, § 6, 12-19-94; Ord. No. O-05-16, Art. II, § 1, 12-19-05; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11; Ord. No. O-12-05, 7-3-12; Ord. No. O-13-03, 2-19-13) 
Sec. 6-53. - Excise taxes on malt beverages and wine. 
(a)  Maximum allowable by state law. The excise tax provided for in this section shall be in addition to any license fee, tax or charge which may now, or in the future, be imposed upon the business of selling alcoholic beverages at retail or wholesale, within the city. The city shall collect the maximum excise tax allowable by law upon the wholesale of malt beverages and wine, as prescribed in O.C.G.A. §§ 3-5-80 and 3-6-60, or as hereafter prescribed by subsequent state law. 
(b)  Barrels and bulk containers; bottles and cans. Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 151/2 gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 151/2 gallons; and where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(c)  Wine by the package. There is hereby levied an excise tax on the sale of wine by the package in the amount of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(d)  Due date of taxes. The excise taxes imposed by this section shall be paid by the wholesale dealers to the city clerk by the tenth of each month, based upon the units of beer and wine sold during the previous month. Any such excise taxes not paid in full by the tenth day of each month shall bear interest at the rate, of one percent per month or fraction thereof and a penalty of ten percent of such unpaid fee shall be added and attached to the total amount of such fee. 
(e)  Records. The wholesale dealers shall keep true and correct records of all sales and shipments, and shall render a sworn statement of the same accompanying the monthly report to the city clerk. 
(f)  Performance bond. Wholesalers shall post a performance bond with the city clerk equal to 11/2 times the estimated highest monthly payment made in a calendar year of the excise taxes based on sales collected by wholesalers from the retailers to secure the payment for the excise taxes imposed in this section. The bond provided for in this section shall be secured by cash which shall bear no interest, or a surety bond executed by a surety company licensed to do business in this state and approved by the city manager. 
(g)  Audit. The city clerk may audit each wholesale dealer licensed to do business in the city to determine compliance with all applicable provisions of this section. 
(Code 1967, § 4-32; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
State Law reference- Nudity and related acts on premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-41; employee solicitation of patrons for drinks on premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-42; display of prices of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-26; sale of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-90 et seq.; imposition of excise tax on malt beverages required, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80; authorization to levy tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 
Sec. 6-54. - Sale without license; separate application and separate license required for each location. 
    Beer and wine shall not be distributed, sold, or possessed for the purposes of sale without a license granted by the city commission. A separate application must be made and a separate license to sell beer and wine must be obtained, for each location where the same is sold at retail. 
(Code 1967, § 4-33; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 6-55. - Hours of operation for retailers. 
(a)  Original packaging. Retailers shall not engage in the sale of beer and wine in original packages except between 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday; and on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 11:30 p.m. 
(b)  Consumption on-premises. Retailers shall be allowed to engage in the sale of beer and wine for consumption on the premises Monday through Friday from 9:00 a.m. until 3:55 a.m. the following day; Saturday from 9:00 a.m. until 2:55 a.m. the following day; and on Sundays from 11:00 a.m. until 2:55 a.m. the following day. 
(Code 1967, § 4-34; Ord. No. O-95-12, 10-2-95; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11; Ord. No. O-18-14, § 1, 7-16-18) 
Sec. 6-56. - Proximity of establishment to school ground, MARTA rapid transit station and other establishments. 
(a)  No license shall be issued where an entrance to a place of business for the wholesale sale of beer, malt beverages or wine is located within 100 yards of the property line of any school ground or college campus or the entrance to a MARTA rapid transit station. 
(b)  No license shall be issued where an entrance to a place of business for the retail sale of beer, malt beverages or wine in original packages is located within 100 yards of the property line of any school ground or college campus. The foregoing prohibition shall not apply to grocery stores. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply at any location for which a license exists at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this subsection derives, nor to the renewal of a license for such location. 
(c)  No license shall be issued where an entrance to a place of business for the retail sale of beer, malt beverages or wine in original packages is located within 100 yards of the entrance to a MARTA rapid transit station or to an existing establishment licensed for the retail sale of beer, malt beverages or wine in original packages, except that a license for the retail sale of wine in original packages only may be issued to establishments which are licensed to sell wine, beer, and malt beverages at retail for consumption on the premises and which also comply with the requirements of section 6-56(b) above. 
(d)  No license shall be issued where the entrance to a place of business for the retail sale of beer, malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises is located within 100 yards of any "housing authority property," defined as any property containing 300 housing units or fewer owned and operated by a housing authority created by O.C.G.A. § 8-3-1. Except for housing authority properties, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply at any location for which a license exists at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives, nor to the renewal of a license for such location. As authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply at any location within 100 yards of a housing authority property which was licensed prior to July 1, 2000. 
(e)  No license shall be issued where the entrance to a place of business for the retail sale of beer, malt beverages or wine is located within 100 yards of the entrance to an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government. As authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply at any location within 100 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government which was licensed prior to July 1, 1981. 
(f)  The city commissioners may, in their discretion, issue or deny any license for the sale of beer, malt beverages or wine where there is evidence that the type and number of schools in the vicinity causes minors to frequent the immediate area, even though there is compliance with minimum distance from schools. 
(Code 1967, § 4-35; Ord. No. O-05-16, Art. II, § 2, 12-19-05; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11; Ord. No. O-15-14, §§ 2, 3, 10-5-15) 
State Law reference- Sale of alcoholic beverages near churches, schools or college campus, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 6-57. - Type of retail establishments for sales; retail sales of on-premises consumption generally; sales for on-premises consumption. 
(a)  No beer or malt beverages shall be sold at retail in original packages for off-premises consumption except in retail establishments in which at least 50 percent of the floor space and storage area is dedicated to the retail sale of food and food related products such as cooking utensils and equipment and which are located in C-1, C-2 or C-3 zoning districts, in an existing food store that exists as a lawful nonconforming use under the zoning regulations. 
    No wine shall be sold at retail in original packages for off-premises consumption except in retail establishments in which at least 50 percent of the floor space and storage area is dedicated to the retail sale of food and food related products such as cooking utensils and equipment and which are located in C-1, C-2 or C-3 zoning districts, in an existing food store that exists as a lawful nonconforming use under the zoning regulations, or in a restaurant. Where wine is sold at retail in a restaurant in original packages for consumption off-premises, a license for such retail sale in original packages shall be obtained separate from and in addition to any license for the retail sale of beer, wine, malt beverage, or distilled spirits for consumption on premises and the licensee must comply with the hours of operation requirements of section 6-55(a) and the distance requirements of section 6-56. 
(b)  No beer or wine shall be sold for consumption on the premises except in restaurants that are located in C-1, C-2 or C-3 zoning districts. The licensee of each such establishment shall furnish, at time of any renewal application, an affidavit that reports the percentage of the licensee's total annual gross sales derived from the sale of groceries, food products, or prepared meals in the licensee's most recently ended fiscal year. 
(c)  For the purpose of ensuring compliance with this section, the city manager may require that a licensee furnish a statement from a certified public accountant that reports the percentage of the licensee's total annual gross sales derived from the sale of groceries, food products, or prepared meals in the licensee's most recently ended fiscal year. 
(Code 1967, § 4-36; Ord. No. O-05-01, Art. II, § 1, 2-7-05; Ord. No. O-05-16, Art. II, § 2, 12-19-05; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 6-58. - Wholesaler's delivery to retail outlets; marking of vehicles. 
    No beer or wine shall be delivered to any retail sales outlet in the city except by a duly licensed wholesaler in licensed vehicles. The name of the wholesale distributor shall be clearly marked on the vehicle. 
(Code 1967, § 4-37; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 6-59. - Removal of a partially consumed bottle of wine. 
(a)  Any restaurant which is licensed to sell wine for consumption on premises may permit a patron to remove one unsealed bottle of wine per patron for consumption off premises under the following conditions: 
(1)  The patron has purchased a meal from the restaurant and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine which has been purchased on the premises with such meal on the restaurant's premises. 
(2)  The partially consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the premises must be securely resealed by the licensee or its employees before removal from the premises. 
(3)  The partially consumed bottle of wine shall be placed in a bag or other container that is secured in such a manner that it is visibly apparent if the container has been subsequently tampered with or opened. 
(4)  A dated receipt for the meal and the purchase of the bottle of wine, or corkage fee, shall be provided by the licensee and attached to the container. 
(b)  If transported in a motor vehicle, the container with the resealed bottle of wine shall be placed in a locked glove compartment, a locked trunk, or the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. 
(Ord. No. O-08-11, 8-4-08; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 6-60. - Corkage services. 
(a)  A restaurant that possesses a valid license for the retail sale of wine for consumption on premises and a valid corkage license may permit patrons to bring, possess and consume bottles of wine that are owned by the patron and brought onto the premises under the following conditions: 
(1)  No more than 750 milliliters of wine, per patron over the age of 21 per meal, shall be permitted to be uncorked. 
(2)  Only patrons seated at tables or booths shall be permitted to consume wine that has been provided by the patron. 
(3)  Wine may only be consumed by individuals who order and are served a meal by the licensee. 
(4)  Every bottle of wine brought onto the premises by a patron must be opened by restaurant personnel. 
(5)  A patron may remove an uncorked bottle of wine from the premises only if the requirements set forth in section 6-59 are met. 
(b)  Restaurants may at their discretion charge corkage fees. 
(Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Secs. 6-61-6-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTILLED SPIRITS 

Sec. 6-81. - Authority to manufacture or sell; license required. 
    Distilled spirits may be manufactured or sold in the incorporated area of the city only under a license granted by the city commissioners upon the terms and conditions provided in this article. 
(Code 1967, § 4-51; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11; Ord. No. O-12-07, 11-5-12) 
State Law reference- Local permit or license required for wholesale or retail sales of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(a). 
Sec. 6-82. - License fee; excise tax in addition to retail license fee; records; wholesalers' performance bond. 
(a)  The applicant for a license shall comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the city commission regulating the sale of distilled spirits, and each applicant shall pay a license fee in accordance with the following scale: 
(1)  Wholesale dealers in distilled spirits; $5,000.00 per year. 
(2)  Retail dealers in distilled spirits; $2,500.00 per year. 
(3)  Manufacturers of distilled spirits; $1,000 per year. 
(b)  In addition to the license fees listed in subsection (a) of this section, there is hereby imposed an excise tax upon all distilled spirits purchased by persons holding licenses for retail sales of distilled spirits at the rate of $0.22 per liter. 
(c)  The excise tax shall be collected by all wholesale dealers selling distilled spirits to persons holding retail licenses, and shall be paid by the wholesale dealers to the city clerk by the tenth of each month, based upon the units of distilled spirits sold during the previous month. Any such excise tax not paid in full by the tenth day of each month shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof, and a penalty of ten percent of such unpaid tax shall be added and attached to the total amount of the tax. The wholesale dealers shall keep true and correct records of all sales and shipments. The monthly remittance shall be accompanied by a sworn statement showing the type, volume and price of distilled spirits sold to each retail licensee. 
(d)  Wholesalers shall post a performance bond with the city clerk of the city equal to 11/2 times the estimated highest monthly payment made in a calendar year of the excise tax based on sales collected by wholesalers from the retailers to secure the payment for the tax imposed in this section. The bond provided for in this section shall be secured by cash, which shall bear no interest, or a surety bond executed by a surety company licensed to do business in this state and approved by the city manager. 
(e)  The city clerk may audit each wholesale dealer licensed to do business in the city for the purposes of determining compliance with applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 4-52; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11; Ord. No. O-12-07, 11-5-12) 
State Law reference- Levy of tax on sale of distilled spirits by the package authorized, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80. 
Sec. 6-83. - Sale without license; separate application and separate license required for each location. 
    Distilled spirits shall not be distributed, sold, or possessed for the purposes of sale without a license granted by the city commission. A separate application must be made, and a separate license to sell distilled spirits must be obtained, for each location where the same is sold at retail. 
(Code 1967, § 4-53; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 6-84. - Residency requirements and qualifications of applicants. 
    An applicant for a license shall have been a resident of, or qualified to do business in, the state for three years prior to the year for which the application is made. Where the applicant is a corporation whose primary business is the operation of a liquor store, the majority stockholder must meet the residency requirements, and the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and the majority stockholder. Where the applicant is a corporation whose primary business is other than the operation of a liquor store, the license shall be issued to the corporation and an officer or agent of such corporation who meets the residency requirements. If the applicant is a partnership, the same requirements pertaining to corporations shall apply. Where the applicant is a corporation whose primary business is the operation of a hotel or motel, the officer or agent of such corporation who acts as an applicant on behalf of the corporation shall have been a resident of the state for the one-year period next preceding the year for which application is made. 
(Code 1967, § 4-54; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 6-85. - Application for license to be accompanied by statement of information relative to interest in retail liquor stores. 
(a)  In addition to all other information required by other provisions of this chapter, all applications for licenses, both original and renewal, must be accompanied by a full and complete statement under oath of information relative to any and all interests, as defined by state law, in retail liquor stores. This shall include names and addresses of all persons interested in the ownership of the sale of liquor at retail, together with any interest each person or any immediate relative has in any other retail liquor store located at any other place; the ownership of the land and building where such retail business is operated; the amount of rental paid for the land and building and the manner in which the same is determined and to whom and at what intervals it is paid; the names and addresses, by affidavit from the owner, lessor, or sublessor of such land and building, of all persons having any whole, partial, beneficial, or other interest in and to the land and building on and in which the retail liquor store is located; and any other information called for by the city manager to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Any change in relationship declared in subsection (a) of this section must be filed when made with the city manager, and failure to so file within a period of five days after such change is made shall be grounds for the city manager to recommend revocation or suspension of the license by the city commission. 
(Code 1967, § 4-55; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 6-86. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Retailers shall not engage in the sale of distilled spirits except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday; and, on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 11:30 p.m. 
(b)  Wholesalers shall not engage in the sale of distilled spirits except between sunup and sundown, Monday through Saturday. 
(Code 1967, § 4-56; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 6-87. - Proximity of establishment to residence, library, church, school ground, or MARTA rapid transit station. 
(a)  Generally. No license for the wholesale or retail sale of distilled spirits shall be issued where an entrance to the place of business is located as follows: 
(1)  Within 100 yards of the property line of a private residence, unless such residence is in a C-2 zoning district; 
(2)  Within 100 yards of the property line of any public library; 
(3)  Within 100 yards of the property line of any church, chapel of a mortuary, or other place used primarily for religious services; 
(4)  Within 200 yards of the property line of any school ground or college campus; 
(5)  Within 100 yards of the entrance to any MARTA rapid transit station; or 
(6)  Within 100 yards of the entrance to an existing establishment that is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages at wholesale or at retail for consumption off the premises; 
(7)  Within 100 yards of the entrance to an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government. As authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply at any location within 100 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government which was licensed prior to July 1, 1981. 
(b)  Issuance or denial of license. The city commissioners may, in their discretion, issue or deny any license for the sale of distilled spirits where there is evidence that the type and number of schools in the vicinity causes minors to frequent the immediate area, even though there is compliance with minimum distance from schools. 
(Code 1967, § 4-57; Ord. No. O-05-16, Art. III, §§ 1, 2, 12-19-05; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
State Law reference- Sale of alcoholic beverages near churches, schools or college campus, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 6-88. - Places where retail sales permitted. 
(a)  Generally . No distilled spirits shall be sold at retail in original packages for off-premises consumption except in: 
(1)  Retail establishments devoted exclusively to the retail sale of distilled spirits in original packages for off-premises consumption, which are located in C-2 zoning districts; 
(2)  Retail establishments in which at least 50 percent of the floor space and storage area is dedicated to the retail sale of food and food related products such as cooking utensils and equipment and which are located in C-2 zoning districts. Such retail establishments may also be licensed for the retail sale of other alcoholic beverages in original packages for off-premises consumption, pursuant to Section 6-57(a). 
(3)  Hotels, motels and high-rise office buildings where: 
a.  Every public entrance to such a use shall be from a lobby, hallway or other interior portion of the primary use structure; and 
b.  No show window, advertising or display shall be visible from the exterior of the primary use structure. 
(b)  Posting of price list of distilled spirits offered for sale. Each retail licensee shall have conspicuously displayed within the interior of the licensed premises not less than four copies of a printed price list of the distilled spirits offered for sale, provided that a licensee, in lieu of having four copies of a printed price list, may have the prices placed on the bottles or on the front of the shelf where distilled spirits are exhibited for sale. No other signs may be used within or without the premises showing prices or indicating that distilled spirits are for sale. 
(Code 1967, § 4-58; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11; Ord. No. O-17-10, § 1, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 6-89. - Machines operated for amusement purposes on retail premises. 
    No retail dealer in liquors shall permit on his premises any slot machines or mechanical music boxes or pinball machines of any kind or character or any coin-operated machines or any machine operated for amusement purposes. However, cigarette vending machines may be permitted. 
(Code 1967, § 4-59; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 6-90. - Persons having direct financial interest in wholesale liquor license holding other licenses; identification of wholesale distributor's vehicles. 
(a)  No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the sale of distilled spirits at wholesale shall hold any other license under the terms of this article. 
(b)  No distilled spirits shall be delivered to any retail sales outlet in the city except by a duly licensed wholesaler in licensed vehicles. The name of the wholesale distributor shall be clearly marked on the vehicle. 
(Code 1967, § 4-60; Ord. No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Secs. 6-91-6-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SALE OF DISTILLED SPIRITS BY THE DRINK FOR CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES 

Sec. 6-111. - Authority to sell; license required. 
    Distilled spirits may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold within the city only under a license granted by the city commissioners upon terms and conditions provided in this article. 
(Code 1967, § 4-71) 
Sec. 6-112. - Locations where permitted. 
(a)  Distilled spirits may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold in: 
(1)  Restaurants that regularly serve food prepared on the premises, with a full service kitchen in operation consistently, that are located in C-1, C-2 or C-3 zoning districts. 
(2)  Private clubs when associated with and incidental to any apartment or office development, and where such clubs are located in C-1, C-2 or C-3 zoning districts. 
(b)  For the purpose of ensuring compliance with this section, the city manager may require that a licensee furnish a statement from a certified public accountant that reports the percentage of the licensee's total annual gross sales derived from the sale of groceries, food products, or prepared meals in the licensee's most recently ended fiscal year. 
(c)  The licensee of each such establishment shall furnish at time of any renewal application an affidavit that reports the percentage of the licensee's total annual gross sales derived from the sale of food products or prepared meals in the licensee's most recently ended fiscal year. 
(Code 1967, § 4-72) 
Sec. 6-113. - License fees and excise tax. 
(a)  The fee for a consumption of distilled spirits by the drink on the premises where sold, license shall be $2,000.00 per year. In exception to the general provisions of section 6-4, the fee for such license may be paid in two installments, rather than in one lump sum payment at the time of original or renewal application. In the case of a new license application, one-half of the license fee shall be paid at the time of application, and the other half shall be paid at the time of license issuance. In the case of a renewal license application, one-half of the license fee shall be paid at the time of application, and the other half shall be paid no later than March 1 immediately following the date of application. 
(b)  In addition to the license fee in subsection (a) of this section, there is hereby imposed an excise tax upon all distilled spirits purchased by persons holding a consumption on the premises license at the rate of $0.22 per liter. 
(Code 1967, § 4-73) 
Sec. 6-114. - Hours of sale. 
    Retailers shall be allowed to engage in the sale of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises Monday through Friday from 9:00 a.m. until 3:55 a.m. the following day; Saturday from 9:00 a.m. until 2:55 a.m. the following day; and on Sundays from 11:00 a.m. until 2:55 a.m. the following day. 
(Code 1967, § 4-74; Ord. No. O-95-12, 10-2-95; Ord. No. O-18-14, § 2, 7-16-18) 
Sec. 6-115. - Private club. 
    No private club shall operate solely for the purpose of selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages to its members. Private clubs may be granted a license by the city upon the payment of a business license tax, as established by the city commissioners, and may sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises upon compliance with the provisions of this article regulating such sale. Private clubs shall be subject to all the requirements including the food service requirements imposed upon public establishments under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 4-75) 
Sec. 6-116. - Separate application and separate license required for each location. 
    A separate application must be made for a license and a separate license to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises must be obtained for each location where the same is sold. 
(Code 1967, § 4-76) 
Sec. 6-117. - Consumption sales only. 
    Persons holding a license to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises shall not be permitted to sell distilled spirits by the package or bottle. 
(Code 1967, § 4-77) 
Sec. 6-118. - Proximity of establishment to school ground. 
(a)  Generally. No license shall be issued under this article where an entrance to a place of business designed for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises is located within 100 yards of the property line of any school ground, measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. 
(b)  Issuance or denial of license. The city commissioners may, in their discretion, issue or deny any license for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises where there is evidence that the type and number of schools in the vicinity causes minors to frequent the immediate area, even though there is compliance with minimum distance from schools. 
(c)  No license shall be issued where the entrance to a place of business for the retail sale of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises by the drink is located within 100 yards of any "housing authority property," defined as any property containing 300 housing units or fewer owned and operated by a housing authority created by O.C.G.A. § 8-3-1 or within 100 yards of the entrance to an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government. As authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply at any location within 100 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government which was licensed prior to July 1, 1981, nor to any location within 100 yards of a housing authority property which was licensed prior to July 1, 2000. 
(Code 1967, § 4-78; Ord. No. O-05-16, Art. IV, 12-19-05) 
Secs. 6-119-6-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TAX ON DISTILLED SPIRITS BY THE DRINK[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to impose excise tax on sale of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130. 

Sec. 6-136. - Levy. 
    There is hereby levied and imposed, in addition to all other excise taxes now imposed by law, a tax on the retail purchases of distilled spirits or alcoholic beverages for beverage purposes by the drink excluding the sale of fermented beverages made in whole or in part from malt, or any similar fermented beverage, to be collected at the rates and in the manner set forth in this section: 
(1)  Every purchaser of distilled spirits or alcoholic beverages for beverage purposes by the drink, excluding fermented beverages made in whole or in part from malt, or any similar fermented beverage, at retail in the city, shall be liable for a tax thereon at the rate of three percent of the sales price or charge for such beverages. The tax shall be paid by the purchaser to the licensee making such sales, as hereafter provided, and the licensee shall remit the same to the city, such taxes to be remitted by the licensee to the city clerk on or before the 20th of the succeeding month, to be delinquent if remitted thereafter, with a summary of the licensee's gross sales derived from the sale of distilled spirits or alcoholic beverages for beverage purposes by the drink, excluding fermented beverages made in whole or in part from malt, or any similar fermented beverage, and the amount of taxes collected by him from his purchasers, on such form as may be required by the city clerk, and when received by the city clerk it shall be a credit against the tax imposed under this article on the licensee. Every licensee, as defined in this section, making a sale or sales of such beverages shall be liable for a tax thereon at the rate of three percent of such gross sale or gross sales derived from the sale of distilled spirits or alcoholic beverages for beverage purposes by the drink, excluding fermented beverages made in whole or in part from malt, or the amount of taxes collected by him from his purchaser, as provided in this section, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Gross sales shall include all credit sales to the extent permitted by the laws of the state and shall be reported and the taxes collected thereon remitted to the city clerk to the same extent as required of cash sales, and the fact that the licensee may receive payment from such credit sale or sales in a later reporting period shall not relieve or excuse the licensee's responsibility for collecting and remitting the taxes as provided under this article. 
(3)  The tax so levied is and shall be in addition to all other taxes, whether levied in the form of excise, license or privilege taxes, and shall be in addition to all other fees and taxes levied. 
(Code 1967, § 4-91) 
Sec. 6-137. - Tax levied on purchaser. 
    The taxes imposed in this article are upon the purchaser and shall be collected by the licensee from the purchaser. Therefore, the licensee shall collect the tax imposed under this article from the purchaser and shall pay the tax over to the city. 
(Code 1967, § 4-92) 
Sec. 6-138. - Tax added to sales price; licensee liable. 
    Licensees shall, as far as practicable, add the amount of the tax imposed under this article to the sales price or charge, which shall be a debt from the purchaser to the licensee, until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. Any licensee who shall neglect, fail, or refuse to collect the tax provided in this article upon any, every and all retail sales made by him, or his agents or employees, of alcoholic beverages, which are subject to the tax imposed in this article, shall be liable for and pay the tax himself. 
(Code 1967, § 4-93) 
Sec. 6-139. - Licensee not to advertise that he will absorb tax. 
    A licensee shall not advertise or hold out to the public, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that he will absorb all or any part of the tax, or that he will relieve the purchaser of the payment of all or any part of the tax. 
(Code 1967, § 4-94) 
Sec. 6-140. - Final returns within 15 days of selling or quitting business. 
    If any licensee liable for any tax levied under this article shall sell out his business or stock of goods, or shall quit the business, he shall make a final return and payment within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(Code 1967, § 4-95) 
Sec. 6-141. - Deduction allowed licensee, provided tax not delinquent. 
    In reporting and paying the amount of tax due under this article, each license shall be allowed a deduction equal to that rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the "Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act," O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50, as now or hereafter amended, provided that the tax is not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Code 1967, § 4-96) 
Sec. 6-142. - Tax delinquent on 21st day; delinquency cause for revocation or denial of renewal. 
(a)  The tax imposed under this article shall, for each month, become delinquent on the 21st day of each succeeding month. Any such delinquent tax shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, and a penalty of ten percent of such delinquent tax shall be added and attached to the total amount of the fee. The city clerk is empowered, and it shall be his duty when any tax becomes delinquent under this article, to pursue any remedy or right of collection and payment of taxes lawfully levied by the city, as may be allowed under the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city. 
(b)  Any default or delinquency of tax levied under this article shall constitute cause for suspension or revocation of license. 
(c)  When the governing authority determines that a license has been chronically delinquent or chronically in default under this article, the governing authority, when acting upon the application of such licensee for renewal of his license, may, in the exercise of its discretion, deny such application upon the grounds of such chronic delinquency. 
(Code 1967, § 4-97) 
Sec. 6-143. - Licensee required to report and pay tax; maintain appropriate records. 
    It shall be the duty of every licensee required to make a report and pay any tax levied under this article, to keep and preserve suitable records of the sales taxable under this article, and such other books of account as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax due under this article, and any other information as may be required by the city clerk. It shall be the duty of every such licensee, moreover, to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all invoices and other records of such alcoholic beverages, which are taxable under this article, and the sales of such alcoholic beverages and all such books, invoices, and other records shall be open to examination by the city clerk or his duly authorized agents at all reasonable hours. 
(Code 1967, § 4-98) 
Secs. 6-144-6-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CATERER 

Sec. 6-150. - Authority to sell; license required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on or conduct the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages off-premises and in connection with a catered event or function without first having obtained an alcoholic beverage catering license. 
(Ord. No. O-96-05, 4-15-96; Ord No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 6-151. - Eligibility for license. 
(a)  Applicants for an alcoholic beverage caterer's license to sell wine and/or beer and malt beverage and/or distilled spirits for consumption off-premises in conjunction with an authorized catered function at facilities authorized for special event activities and located in an area that is zoned for commercial or institutional use must also possess a valid license issued by the City of Decatur and the State of Georgia for the retail sale for consumption on premises of the same alcoholic beverage(s). 
(b)  A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may only sell that which is authorized by his/her alcoholic beverage license. For example, if the alcoholic beverage caterer possesses a valid license to sell malt beverages, he/she may only sell malt beverages at the authorized catered event or function. 
(c)  Those employed by a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to dispense, serve, sell or handle alcoholic beverages must adhere to employee regulations as stated in section 6-14, employee regulations. 
(Ord. No. O-96-05, 4-15-96; Ord No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 6-152. - License fees. 
(a)  Each applicant shall pay a license fee of $500.00 per year. 
(b)  The license will be valid for the period of no longer than one year. The alcoholic beverage caterer shall apply for a new license annually in the same manner as the original period. 
(Ord. No. O-96-05, 4-15-96; Ord No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 6-153. - Copy of license; sale without licenses; separate application and separate license required for each place of business. 
(a)  A copy of the license shall be kept in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered event or function, and shall be available for inspection at the catered event or function during the duration of such event or function. 
(b)  No alcoholic beverage caterer may distribute or sell alcoholic beverages during any hours prohibited in the City of Decatur. 
(Ord. No. O-96-05, 4-15-96; Ord No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Secs. 6-154-6-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WINE TASTINGS 

Sec. 6-170. - Wine tastings. 
    Upon filing an application and payment of a license fee of $250.00 per year, the city manager may issue a permit to hold wine tastings. The permit shall allow the applicant to provide samples of wine to the public for consumption on the premises under the following conditions: 
(1)  The applicant shall be an establishment licensed to sell wine, in original packages for off-premises consumption. 
(2)  The applicant shall maintain on the premises and offer for sale at all times a variety of wines from not less than 50 manufacturers of wine. 
(3)  The applicant's establishment shall have minimum interior floor area of 1,500 square feet devoted to the storage, display and sale of wine. 
(4)  The applicant for a wine tasting must hold a valid current wine license in the state. 
(5)  No wine tasting may be conducted on the premises of any place of business licensed to sell distilled spirits in original packages for off-premises consumption. 
(6)  No wine tasting may be conducted on the premises of a malt beverage and wine store operating in connection with a licensed retail liquor store. 
(7)  Wine tastings may only be conducted in connection with an bona fide instructional or educational promotion. 
(8)  All wines secured for tasting purposes must be obtained through a retail or wholesale wine outlet. 
(9)  Wine tastings must comply with all laws and regulations otherwise pertaining to the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the state. 
(10)  All applicants and permit holders must comply with all state statutes and sections of this Code and other city ordinances concerning alcoholic beverages, including, but not limited to, those dealing with hours of operation, zoning and distance requirements. 
(Ord. No. O-05-16, Art. VII, 12-19-05; Ord No. O-11-10, 11-21-11) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 22; health and sanitation, ch. 54; law enforcement, ch. 62; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70; zoning, pt. IV. UDO. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AMUSEMENT DEVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- State licensing of coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq.; exchange of free replay for anything of value unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(c). 

Sec. 10-31. - Pinball machines, pool tables, miniature game tables, video games and similar amusements. 
    Pinball machines or machines similar to pinball machines, pool tables, miniature game tables, video games and similar amusements may be operated for profit in the incorporated limits of the city under the following conditions: 
(1)  The place of operation of such machines, pool tables, miniature game tables, video games and similar amusements is: 
a.  An eating establishment regularly serving prepared food where chairs, tables and counters are provided to seat and serve 20 or more persons; or 
b.  A coin laundromat with ten or more washing machines, and where such establishments are located in zoning districts which permit such establishments as conforming uses. 
(2)  The operation of such machines, pool tables, miniature game tables, video games and similar amusements is clearly accessory to the serving of food in the eating establishment or to the laundering of clothes in the coin laundromat. There shall be no more than one such machine for every 20 seats in the eating establishment or for each ten washing machines in the coin laundromat. 
(3)  A permit is obtained from the city building official prior to the operation of such machines, pool tables or video games and similar amusements. The annual fee for such a permit per machine, table or game shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Code 1967, § 16-27) 
Secs. 10-32-10-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-51. - Findings of fact. 
    Based on the experiences of other urban counties and municipalities including, but not limited to, Atlanta, Georgia; Fulton County, Georgia; and DeKalb County, Georgia; which experiences we believe are relevant to the problems faced by the city, we take note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. Moreover, it is the finding of the city commission that public nudity, either partial or total, under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in so-called nude bars or establishments offering so-called nude entertainment or adult entertainment, begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, drug trafficking and drug use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhoods, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior described in this section, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. Furthermore, the public health, safety and welfare require that adult entertainment establishments and their locations, operations and employees be regulated and licensed in order to reduce the potential for harm and in order to preserve the quality of urban life in residential and business areas of the community. Therefore, the limitation of adult uses and adult entertainment to certain prescribed areas of the city is in the public welfare, and it is a matter of governmental interest and concern to minimize the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which provide or establish adult entertainment or adult uses. To that end, this article is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. O-94-13, § 16-51, 9-19-94) 
Sec. 10-52. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses; the adverse affect on property values and on the public health, safety, and welfare of the city; on its citizens and property; and on the character of its neighborhoods and development will be curtailed. This article is not intended as a de facto prohibition of legally protected forms of expression. This article is intended to represent a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of neighborhoods and development through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus any legally protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. This article is not intended to allow or license any business establishment or activity which would otherwise be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. O-94-13, § 16-52, 9-19-94) 
Sec. 10-53. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, printed materials, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising at least five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult businesses means establishments other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities. 
    Adult entertainment establishment means a business or establishment where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities including, but not limited to: adult bookstores, adult businesses, adult motion picture theaters, adult minimotion picture theaters, adult motion picture arcades, adult video stores, erotic entertainment/dance establishments, escort bureaus, and introduction services. 
    Adult minimotion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising at least five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Erotic entertainment/dance establishments means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers or entertainers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Escort bureaus and introduction services means any business, agency or persons who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward, profit or other consideration furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
    Seminude means the exposure of one or more, but not all of the following: human genitals or pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
    Specified anatomical areas means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered genitals or pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sapphism, or zooerasty. 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence. 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation. 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts. 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain. 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being. 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. No. O-94-13, § 16-53, 9-19-94) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-54. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to punishment, upon conviction, as provided in section 1-12. In addition to fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued under this article. 
(b)  The violation of any provision of this article by any person may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in any courts of competent jurisdiction. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. O-94-13, § 16-71, 9-19-94) 
Sec. 10-55. - Unlawful operation of establishment declared nuisance. 
    Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition, or in lieu of all other remedies, commence an action or proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. O-94-13, § 16-72, 9-19-94) 
Sec. 10-56. - Establishment to comply with zoning, building, fire, health codes, and other applicable laws. 
    No adult entertainment establishment shall be conducted on any premises which does not comply with all zoning regulations, as well as the building code, fire code, health codes and other ordinances and laws of the city, the county and the state. 
(Ord. No. O-94-13, § 16-73, 9-19-94) 
Sec. 10-57. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No person or licensee shall admit or permit the admission of any individual under the age of 18 or allow such individual to remain within a licensed premises. 
(1)  A licensee means any person, association, partnership, corporation or other business entity which has obtained a valid city license for the operation of an adult entertainment establishment. 
(2)  A licensed premises means any adult entertainment establishment which has obtained a valid city license. 
(b)  No person or licensee shall sell, exchange, barter, trade, give or offer to sell, exchange, barter, trade or give, to any individual under the age of 18 years of age any entertainment, service, material device or thing offered, for sale or otherwise, at an adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)  No licensee shall permit or suffer an employee or other person to appear nude or seminude where there is an individual payment offer or solicitation of money occurring between patron and employee. 
(d)  No licensee shall permit any employee or patron to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described in this article. 
(e)  No licensee shall suffer or permit an employee or any person on the premises to insert an object into her vagina or his or her anal orifice, except for personal hygiene or necessity. 
(f)  No licensee shall suffer or permit an employee or any person on the premises to engage in actual or simulated genital masturbation, or, in the case of females, fondling of the breasts. 
(g)  No licensee shall suffer or permit a male employee or any person on the premises to exhibit an unclothed erect penis. 
(h)  No licensee shall suffer or permit an employee or any person on the premises to engage in, or simulate bestiality. 
(i)  No person, other than a dancer or entertainer while on any licensed premises, shall expose or be permitted to expose to public view with less than a complete and opaque covering of his or her genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or anal cleft or cleavage, and if a female, her breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(j)  No employee or person while on a licensed premises shall be permitted to dance or perform nude or seminude in such a manner as to simulate specified sexual activity with any patron, spectator, employee or other person not employed therein. 
(k)  No person, while on a licensed premises, shall, while nude, or seminude, be permitted to sit upon or straddle the legs, lap or body of any patron, spectator, employee or other person therein, or to engage in or simulate sexual activity while touching or being touched by the patron, spectator or other person. 
(l)  No licensee shall suffer or permit the use of any areas on the premises of such establishment for sexual contact or private dancing performance or entertainment. 
(m)  No dancer or entertainer while on a licensed premises shall dance on a platform intended for that purpose which is not raised at least 18 inches from the floor. Furthermore, no dancing shall occur closer than four feet from any patron. 
(n)  No licensee shall suffer or permit any signage or advertisement which encourages, solicits, induces or promotes conduct or activities prohibited by this article. 
(o)  No erotic entertainment/dance establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverages or controlled substances upon the premises of a licensee. 
(p)  No drugs or illegal or controlled substances of any kind shall be allowed, permitted, used, possessed or sold upon the premises, and no gambling shall be allowed or permitted therein. 
(Ord. No. O-94-13, § 16-54, 9-19-94) 
Sec. 10-58. - Zoning and distance requirements for establishments, businesses or uses. 
    Adult entertainment establishments, businesses, or uses shall be located according to the following requirements as defined and measured as stated in this section: 
(1)  An adult entertainment establishment may be located only within the C-3 heavy commercial zoning district, as described and defined by the city zoning ordinance. 
(2)  An adult entertainment establishment shall not be located on a property which is within 200 yards of the property line of any church or other place of worship, public park, public library, public housing development, hospital, public or private school, college or seminary, recreation center, or private residence unless such private residence is located in the C-3 zoning district. The measurement of distances for purposes of this subsection shall be from property line to property line along the shortest possible course, regardless of any customary or common route or path of travel, i.e. as the crow flies. 
(Ord. No. O-94-13, § 16-55, 9-19-94) 
Sec. 10-59. - Establishment employees. 
(a)  Age. Employees of adult entertainment establishments shall be not less than 18 years of age. 
(b)  Disqualification due to criminal record; exception. No person shall be employed in any capacity whatsoever including, but not limited to, performers, entertainers, waiters, bouncers, bartenders, disc jockeys and musicians, who have been convicted in this or any other city or state or in any federal court within five years immediately prior to the application for employment of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, illegally dealing in narcotics, sex offenses, or any charge relating to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquors, or any other felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or for whom any outstanding warrant exists on which service has not been perfected. The expression "be employed" shall include all work done or services performed while in the scope of employment on the premises and elsewhere than on the licensed premise, for compensation or otherwise. Notwithstanding, this section shall not apply to an independent contractor who performs accounting, legal, administrative, repair or maintenance services for a licensee. 
(c)  Work permit; required; independent contractors; exception. A permit to work in or be employed by an adult entertainment establishment, whether for compensation or otherwise, shall be required for all employees thereof. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors, such as entertainers employed or hired by any adult entertainment establishment, shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. Each independent contractor shall be required to have and maintain his separate business license. Notwithstanding, this subsection shall not apply to an independent contractor who performs accounting, legal, administrative, repair or maintenance services for licensee. No person requiring a permit may be employed by or work in an establishment until such person has filed an application, paid the fee, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, and obtained a work permit from the public safety department. 
(d)  Contents of work permit application; investigation of applicant; issuance. An application for a permit shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, address, business name and address, date of birth and prior arrest record of the applicant. The public safety department shall make a complete search relative to any police record of the applicant. If there is no record of a violation of subsection (b) of this section, or of any other section of this article, the public safety department shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(e)  Denial; application for hearing with public safety director; decision; appeal to city commission. Any applicant denied a permit may, within ten days of the denial, apply to the public safety director for a hearing. The decision of the public safety director, after hearing, may be appealed to the city commission. 
(f)  Expiration of permit for employment. Any permit for employment issued under this article shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance unless earlier revoked or suspended. The public safety department may prescribe reasonable fees for certifying the eligibility for employment. 
(g)  Availability of permit for inspection. Employees holding permits issued pursuant to this article shall at all times during their working hours have such permits available for inspection at the premises. 
(Ord. No. O-94-13, § 16-57, 9-19-94) 
Secs. 10-60-10-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-76. - Required; issuance not to condone any illegal act; display. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, corporation, or other business entity to engage in, operate, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises, an adult entertainment establishment without first having complied with the provisions of this article, or without a currently valid city license for the operation of an adult entertainment establishment. No license issued under this article shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States or under any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the city. The license shall be conspicuously displayed at all times within the premises. 
(Ord. No. O-94-13, § 16-56, 9-19-94) 
Sec. 10-77. - Licensing generally. 
(a)  Grant of privilege for term of license. All licenses shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license, subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this article and related laws, applicable provisions of this Code and other ordinances and resolutions of the city relating to such business. 
(b)  Wording. All licenses under this article shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be suspended and revoked under the provisions of the ordinances of the City of Decatur." 
(c)  Separate license for each business. A separate license shall be required for each place of business. 
(d)  Age of licensee. No license shall be issued to any person who is less than 21 years of age. 
(e)  Application; contents. Application for a license shall be written and on forms supplied by the city clerk. Such application shall state the name and address of the applicant; the place where the proposed business is to be located; the nature and character of the business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names of the partners; if a corporation, the name of the officers and shareholders; if other business entity, then the names of all persons holding any ownership or managerial interest therein; and such other reasonable information as may be required by the public safety department. 
(f)  Duty of applicant to supply data, information and records. All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them by the city and pay an administrative investigation fee to be determined by the public safety department. Failure to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of such request shall mean an automatic denial of the license. 
(g)  Definition of term "applicant." For the purpose of this division, the term "applicant" shall include a person and, in the case of a partnership or corporation, all partners, officers, directors, principals, and shareholders of the partnership or corporation. 
(h)  Completion of application required. Each application must be complete in its entirety before being accepted by the city for filing and processing. 
(i)  Plans furnished by applicant; compliance with city codes. All applicants for licenses shall furnish plans of the proposed premises. The applicant shall comply with all zoning, building, health and similar city codes. 
(j)  Verification of application under oath. Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
(2)  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
(3)  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; and 
(4)  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Ord. No. O-94-13, § 16-58, 9-19-94) 
Sec. 10-78. - Notice of intent by applicant to engage in business. 
(a)  All applicants for licenses under this article shall give notice that an application has been filed and of the purpose of making such application by publication of an advertisement once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the date of consideration of the application by the city clerk in the newspaper in the official county legal organ. 
(b)  The first advertisement shall not appear more than 30 days prior to the date of such consideration. The advertisement shall be of type not smaller than ten point capital and lower case and shall be at least one-inch column. The advertisement need not appear on the same day as legal advertisements are regularly published. 
(c)  The notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business; the name of the applicant; if a partnership, the names of the partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers; the date, time and place of hearing; a statement that any objections to the issuance must be made at or prior to the time of hearing; and, if prior to the time of the hearing, must be in writing and received by the supervisor on or before the date and time of the hearing. 
(d)  The city shall place upon the location of the proposed business a sign advertising the date, time and location of the public hearing. If made prior to the hearing, objections must be in writing. The sign shall be at least 18 inches by 24 inches in size and shall face toward all public streets, sidewalks, or other public property which adjoins the location so as to be clearly visible by persons using such public area. The sign shall be posted on the property from the date of the first publication of the notice of the intent to engage in business through the date of the granting or denial of a license. 
(Ord. No. O-94-13, § 16-59, 9-19-94) 
Sec. 10-79. - Fees and penalty for late payment. 
(a)  The annual license fee shall be set by the city commissioner from time to time by resolution and set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. Licenses shall be issued for a calendar or any partial year and shall expire on December 31 of each year. No license shall be issued or renewed until and unless all taxes, fees and penalties due the city are first paid. 
(b)  In addition to and not in the alternative to any other penalty which may be provided in this section, any licensee, person or entity who fails to pay any fee, tax or other payment due to the city of any kind, when due, shall pay, in addition to such fee, tax or other charge, a separate penalty equal to ten percent of the required fee, tax or other charge, for each period of 30 days, or portion thereof, following the due date, until paid in full, including penalties. 
(Ord. No. O-94-13, § 16-60, 9-19-94) 
Sec. 10-80. - Application investigation; conditions for granting. 
    The public safety department shall have a reasonable time, not to exceed 60 days after the city clerk has received all final documents from all departments, within which to investigate a license application. All final documents from all departments must be forwarded to the public safety department within 30 days of the department receiving the license application. The investigation shall be conducted to ensure that an applicant meets the terms and requirements of this article. Upon completion of the investigation, a license will be granted if: 
(1)  The required fee, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, has been paid. 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. 
(5)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city or county located in or out of this state prior to the date of the application. 
(6)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with all applicable laws including, but not limited to, health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards. 
(7)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(8)  The applicant, his employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities openly occur. 
(9)  On the date the business for which a permit is required commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
(10)  The proposed premises is not to be located too close to any church, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted under this article. 
(11)  The grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, the county, the state or the United States. 
(12)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, or the preservation of its neighborhoods has been answered. 
(13)  No further action shall be taken by the city or by any applicant with respect to any application until completion by the city of its investigation. 
(Ord. No. O-94-13, § 16-61, 9-19-94) 
Sec. 10-81. - Issuance to persons with prior convictions. 
    No original license shall be issued to any person where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, principal stockholder, directly or indirectly beneficial or absolute, shall have been convicted within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony or misdemeanor or any state or of the United States or any municipal ordinance except traffic violations, or for whom an outstanding warrant exists on which no service has been perfected. Where the violation is for misdemeanor, forfeiture of bond, violation of a city or municipal ordinance, or where there is a plea of nolo contendere, the city commissions, after hearing, may, after investigation, waive same as a disqualification. Such a hearing shall be conducted in the manner provided in section 10-88(c). 
(Ord. No. O-94-13, § 16-62, 9-19-94) 
Sec. 10-82. - To be obtained within two weeks of approval of application. 
(a)  All licenses must be obtained and fees, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, paid not later than two weeks from the date of the approval of the application; and if not so obtained, the permit granted shall be void. 
(b)  When a license has been approved and the applicant has deposited the required fee, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, with the city clerk, the license shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. O-94-13, § 16-63, 9-19-94) 
Sec. 10-83. - Causes for mandatory denial. 
    No license shall be issued to an applicant if, within 12 months immediately preceding the filing of an application, one or more of the following shall have occurred: 
(1)  The same applicant for a license or renewal has been rejected for any location, if such rejection was based upon the applicant's failure to meet the terms of this article applicable to the applicant as opposed to rejection for reasons related to the location itself. 
(2)  The location has been rejected for any applicant. 
(3)  When any application for a license to transact any business within the control of the police powers is denied for cause or any license is revoked for cause by the city commissioners. 
(4)  The 12 months' waiting period will not apply where the applicant shall apply for a new location which has not been rejected within the preceding 12 months, except if the applicant has had an application for another location rejected within the preceding 12 months because of lack of qualifications of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. O-94-13, § 16-64, 9-19-94) 
Sec. 10-84. - Sale, gift, transferral, or assignment; change of location. 
(a)  No license issued under this article shall be sold, given, transferred or assigned by any licensee, or by operation of law, to any other persons or entities. Any such sale, gift, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of the license, and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided, however, that if the licensee is a partnership or corporation, and one or more of the partners or shareholders, as the case may be, should die, one or more of the surviving partners or shareholders who were partners or shareholders at the time of issuance of the license may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest effecting a surrender or termination of such license. In such case the licensee shall immediately notify the city clerk. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a closely held corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license under this article is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(b)  No licensee shall change the location of the establishment without obtaining a new license. The licensee upon change of the name of the establishment must notify the city clerk at least 30 days prior to the change. An application for a license due to a change of location is subject to all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-94-13, § 16-65, 9-19-94) 
Sec. 10-85. - Issuance to persons with prior convictions (felony). 
    No original license shall be issued to any person where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, principal stockholder, directly or indirectly beneficial or absolute, shall have been convicted within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony. 
(Ord. No. O-94-13, § 16-66, 9-19-94) 
Sec. 10-86. - Provisionally issued to uncompleted premises. 
    When a building where the adult entertainment establishment is to operate is, at the time of the application for such license, not in existence or not yet completed or renovated, a license may be issued for such location, provided the plans for the proposed building or renovation show clearly compliance with all other provisions of this article. No business shall be conducted therein until the premises have been completed in accordance with the plans and is in conformity with all of the other provisions of this article, the other ordinances of the city and laws and regulations of the state or federal government. 
(Ord. No. O-94-13, § 16-67, 9-19-94) 
Sec. 10-87. - Annual renewal required. 
(a)  All licenses issued under this article shall be issued for a calendar year or any partial year and shall expire on December 31 of each year. All licensees under this article shall be required to renew their licenses annually on forms provided by the city. 
(b)  An application for renewal shall meet and qualify under all requirements of this article for the granting of a new license. 
(Ord. No. O-94-13, § 16-68, 9-19-94) 
Sec. 10-88. - Suspension, revocation and probation; hearings. 
(a)  No license issued under this article shall be suspended, revoked or placed on probation except for due cause, as defined in subsection (b) of this section, and after a hearing before the city commissioners following written notice by the city to the holder of such license. Such written notice shall include the time, place and purpose of such hearing and shall be addressed to the licensee at the last address which the licensee provided to the city clerk or to the address of the premises and a statement of the charges upon which such hearing shall be held, except as provided in this section. Three days' notice shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods of notice shall be authorized as the circumstances may justify. 
(b)  The term "due cause" for the suspension, revocation, or probation of such license shall consist of the violating of any local, state, or federal laws, regulations, statutes or ordinances regulating such business or for any reason which would authorize the refusal to issue or renew such license. 
(c)  In all hearings pursuant to this section, the following procedures shall prevail, and the proceeding shall be as informal as compatible with justice: 
(1)  The city manager shall read or cause to be read the charges and specifications against the licensee. The city manager shall then read or cause to be read any response filed by the licensee. 
(2)  The city commissioners shall hear the evidence upon the charges and specifications, as filed against the licensee, and shall not consider any additional evidence beyond the scope of the charges, and may exclude evidence which is purely cumulative. 
(3)  The order of proof shall be as follows: The city representative shall present his evidence in support of the charges, and the licensee shall then present his evidence. Evidence of each party may be supported by submission of pertinent documents. Each party shall be allowed to present pertinent rebuttal evidence. 
(4)  The licensee and the city may be represented by counsel, and may present, examine and cross examine witnesses. Additionally, the city commissioners may interrogate all parties and witnesses to obtain necessary information. 
(Ord. No. O-94-13, § 16-69, 9-19-94) 
Sec. 10-89. - Falsifying information in applications. 
    Any material omission or untrue or misleading information contained in or left out of an original or renewal application for any license or permit issued pursuant to this article shall be unlawful, shall be cause for denial thereof, and shall be punishable as a violation of a city ordinance and applicable state statutes. If any such license or permit has previously been granted under the above circumstances, such circumstances shall constitute cause for the revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. O-94-13, § 16-70, 9-19-94) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, ch. 54; law enforcement, ch. 62; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person guilty of a violation of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1967, § 5-17) 
Sec. 14-2. - Running at large. 
    No animals, including horses, mules, cattle, hogs, sheep, goats, chickens or other fowl shall be permitted to run at large upon any street or public place or elsewhere within the city. Any person owning or controlling any such animals or fowl who shall allow any of such animals or fowl to run at large in the city in violation of this section shall, on conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1967, §§ 5-1, 5-20) 
State Law reference- Livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to run at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6. 
Sec. 14-3. - Impounding of animals running at large-Duty of police. 
    Any horses, mules, cattle, hogs, sheep, goats or other animals running at large in the city shall be taken up and impounded by the police department of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 5-2) 
Sec. 14-4. - Same-Payment of fee and costs. 
    The owner of any impounded animal shall pay to the marshal the sum as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges as an impounding fee and the cost of taking up and keeping such animal before the marshal shall render to such person the possession of such animal. 
(Code 1967, § 5-3) 
Sec. 14-5. - Same-Sale. 
    Should any owner of an impounded animal fail or refuse to pay the impounding fee and the expenses of taking up and keeping the animal within three days after the impounding of such animal, the marshal shall advertise such animal for sale by posting a notice in front of the city hall and two other public places of the city for five days, after which time such animal shall be sold at public outcry by the marshal to the highest bidder for cash between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
(Code 1967, § 5-4) 
Sec. 14-6. - Same-Disposition of fee and costs. 
    The marshal shall pay out of the sale of an impounded animal the impounding fee prescribed by section 14-4 and the expense for keeping such animal. The balance, if any, shall be turned over to the owner of the animal if called for on or before December 31 of the year in which the animal is sold. If not called for by such date, such balance shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(Code 1967, § 5-5) 
Sec. 14-7. - Keeping of hogs and pigs. 
    It shall be unlawful to keep hogs or pigs within the city. 
(Code 1967, § 5-6) 
Sec. 14-7.1. - Livestock. 
    The following restrictions are established for keeping livestock such as cattle, horses and similar animals. 
(1)  Livestock shall be permitted on properties of at least two acres in size. 
(2)  All buildings used for livestock shall be located at least 200 feet from any property line. 
(3)  All livestock shall be maintained at least 100 feet from any property line. 
(4)  There shall be a minimum of 5,000 square feet of fenced lot area not covered by the principal building or structure for each livestock animal. 
(5)  Live slaughter shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. O-99-19, § 12, 12-20-99; Ord. No. O-12-Z-22, § 1, 12-3-12) 
Sec. 14-8. - Keeping of fowl and small domesticated animals-General regulations. 
    Small domesticated animals, such as rabbits and guinea pigs and fowl, such as chickens, ducks, geese, guineas, turkeys and the like may be kept within the city subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  All such animals shall be provided with adequate and sanitary housing. Such houses, hutches, pens, stables, sheds, stalls and enclosures wherein domesticated animals, poultry or other fowl are kept shall have a solid floor as may be approved by the county health officer. All such houses, hutches, pens, stables, sheds, stalls and enclosures, wherever located, shall have a minimum floor space of four square feet per animal or bird over one month old. 
(2)  All houses, hutches, pens, stables, sheds, stalls or enclosures where such livestock, poultry or other fowl are kept shall not be nearer to any houses wherein human beings reside, other than the residence of the person who is the owner of such animals, than a distance equal to the width of the lot upon which the animals are kept, or a minimum distance of 75 feet should the lot be 75 feet or more in width. 
(3)  Every person owning or keeping chickens or any other domestic fowl in the city is hereby required to keep such fowl and chickens under fence and not allow such chickens or fowl to run on any property other than his own. 
(4)  Live slaughter shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1967, § 5-8; Ord. No. O-12-Z-22, § 2, 12-3-12) 
Sec. 14-9. - Same-Sanitary requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control of the use of any house, hutch, pen, stable, stall or enclosure or other place where domesticated animals, poultry or fowl are kept to allow the same to become filthy or unsanitary. Every person who owns or keeps such domesticated animals, poultry or fowl shall maintain in connection therewith a bin, pit or container in which the manure from such animals, poultry or fowl shall be placed pending removal. Such bin, pit or container shall be provided with covers or other devices, sufficient to prevent the ingress and egress of flies and other insect pests. All persons controlling such places where domesticated animals, poultry or fowl are kept shall remove all manure from such bins, pits or containers before the same shall become malodorous or unsanitary. However, any such person may use such manure upon his premises for the purpose of enriching his own ground. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person who possesses, harbors or is in charge of any animal not to immediately remove excrement deposited by the animal in the public right-of-way, in a city park or on private property not owned by the person responsible for the animal. Animal waste must be removed and disposed of in a sanitary manner. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of any person having custody or control of any animal in the city to have in such person's possession a device or equipment for the picking up and removal of animal excrement when the animal is not confined to that person's property. The provisions of this section shall not apply to an animal aiding the handicapped (e.g., guide dog) or to an animal when in police or rescue activities. 
(Code 1967, § 5-9; Ord. No. O-05-05, Art. I, § 1, 4-4-05) 
Sec. 14-10. - Same-Drainage of pens and other areas. 
    All places wherein livestock, poultry or fowl are kept shall have adequate drainage sufficient to prevent standing water in yards or pens. 
(Code 1967, § 5-10) 
Sec. 14-11. - Same-Use of lime or other chemicals required. 
    All yards or pens wherein livestock, poultry or fowl are kept shall be regularly covered with lime or other suitable chemical agents, as may be approved by the county health officer, to prevent bad odors or nuisances to neighbors. 
(Code 1967, § 5-11) 
Sec. 14-12. - Same-Exemptions. 
    The preceding four sections shall not apply to regular poultry or meat markets licensed by the city where poultry is kept for instant sale and where such poultry is kept in metal or wooden cages so it can be sold or slaughtered, provided that this section shall be applicable only where such poultry is located within a building which has been zoned for such business by the city. 
(Code 1967, § 5-12) 
Sec. 14-13. - Diseased animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have or keep within the city any domesticated animal, poultry or fowl infected with a disease which may contaminate other animals, poultry or fowl. 
(Code 1967, § 5-13) 
Sec. 14-14. - City designated as bird sanctuary. 
    The entire area embraced within the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(Code 1967, § 5-15) 
Sec. 14-15. - Hunting, shooting, trapping or molesting birds or wild fowl; exception when certain birds constitute a nuisance. 
    It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests; provided, however, that if starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property in the opinion of the proper health authorities of the city, then such health authorities shall meet with representatives of the Audubon Society, bird club, garden club and humane society, or as many of such societies and clubs as are found to exist in the city, after having given at least three days' actual notice of the time and place of such meeting to the representatives of such societies and clubs. If as a result of such meeting no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance, then such birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by such health authorities under the supervision of the chief of police. 
(Code 1967, § 5-16) 
Secs. 14-16-14-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dogfighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7. 

Sec. 14-30. - General responsibilities of owners. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of every owner of any animal, or anyone having possession or custody of any animal, to exercise reasonable care and to take all necessary steps and precautions to protect other people, property and animals from injuries or damages which might result from such behavior, regardless of whether such behavior is motivated by mischievousness, playfulness or ferocity. 
(2)  If the owner or keeper of any animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible to ensure that there is compliance with provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  If the owner or keeper of any animal is not the owner of the property where the animal is domiciled, the person having right of possession of the property shall also be responsible to ensure that there is compliance with provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-99-19, § 9, 12-20-99) 
Sec. 14-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned animal means any animal which shall have been placed upon public property or within a public building unattended or uncared for, or upon or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian, or tenant of the private property and unattended or uncared for. Any animal shall also be considered as abandoned which shall have been upon or within the property of the owner or custodian of such animal for a period of time in excess of 36 hours unattended or without proper food and water. 
    Abused animal means any animal which is any of the following: 
(1)  Mistreated, beaten, tormented or teased. 
(2)  Deprived of water, food or shelter. 
(3)  Kept under unsanitary conditions. 
(4)  Abandoned. 
(5)  Trained for fighting other animals. 
(6)  Transported in the trunk of any vehicle. 
(7)  Left unattended in a vehicle in extreme heat without proper ventilation. 
    Animal at large means an animal not under restraint. 
    Animal control center means the facility designated by the city manager for the detention of animals. 
    Animal control officer means that person designated as such by the city manager to perform the duties prescribed by this article. 
    Animal under restraint means any animal secured by a leash or lead or enclosed by way of fence or other enclosure or any animal confined within a vehicle, parked or in motion. 
    Companion animal means a domesticated animal kept for pleasure rather than utility. Pets include, but are not limited to, birds, cats, dogs, hamsters, horses, mice, reptiles, domesticated wild animals, exotic animals, and other animals associated with man's environment. 
    Dangerous animal means any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other domestic animals by virtue of a known propensity to endanger life by an unprovoked assault or by biting so as to cause serious bodily harm or an animal trained, owned, or harbored for the purpose, primarily or in part, of animal fighting. 
An animal shall not be deemed dangerous if: 
(1)  It bites, attacks or menaces: 
a.  Anyone assaulting the owner; 
b.  A trespasser on the property of the owner; or 
c.  Any person or other animal who has tormented or abused it. 
(2)  It is otherwise acting in defense of an attack from a person or other animal upon the owner or other person. 
(3)  It is protecting or defending its young or other animal. 
    Dog park means an area within a city-owned park designated by signs, fencing or other appropriate boundaries as a free-run area for dogs when the dog is under the control of a responsible and competent person and obedient to that person's commands and such person is present with the animal. 
    Domesticated animals means such as are accustomed to live in or about the habitation of men including, but not limited to, cats, cows, dogs, fowl, horses, swine, domesticated wild animals, and/or exotic animals. This definition only applies to those animals mentioned and is only applicable to this article, and in no way affects the meaning or application of a definition of the described animal, as may be found in any other city ordinances. 
    Guard dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon oral command and any dog which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of the property upon and within which he is located. 
    Owner means any person owning, keeping, harboring, or acting as custodian of a domesticated animal. 
(Code 1967, § 5-18; Ord. No. O-99-19, §§ 1, 2, 12-20-99; Ord. No. O-05-05, Art. II, §§ 1, 2, 4-4-05) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-32. - Certain animals deemed public nuisance. 
    Any animal which: 
(1)  Is found at large in violation of sections 14-2, 14-33, and 14-34, as set out in this section; 
(2)  Is a dangerous animal, as defined by this chapter; 
(3)  Produces, because of the quantity, manner, or method in which such animals are domesticated or maintained, unsanitary conditions in the city; 
(4)  Attacks passersby or passing vehicles; 
(5)  Makes or causes frequent or long-continued noise which disturbs the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity; and/or 
(6)  Is inimical to the public health, welfare, or safety according to the rules and regulations promulgated by the county board of health, which rules and regulations are incorporated in this section and made a part of this section as if fully set out in this article; 
(7)  Is unlicensed (unregistered) in violation of the Dekalb County Code of Ordinances section 5-12; 
(8)  Is trained, owned, or harbored for the purpose, primarily or in part, of dogfighting; 
(9)  Is dangerous, as defined, and is not restrained or confined, as provided in section 14-34. 
is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Any person who knowingly keeps, owns, harbors, or acts as custodian of an animal constituting such nuisance shall be guilty of an unlawful act and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1967, § 5-19; Ord. No. O-99-19, § 3, 12-20-99) 
Sec. 14-32.1. - Training for fighting prohibited. 
    No person shall keep, buy, sell, trade, exchange, give, transport or deliver any animal: 
(1)  For the purposes of training the animal, primarily or in part, for animal fighting. 
(2)  Which has been trained, primarily or in part, for animal fighting. 
(3)  Which has been or is intended to be engaged in any manner in animal fighting. 
A violation of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. O-99-19, § 10, 12-20-99) 
Sec. 14-33. - Duty of owner to keep animal under restraint while on property. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every owner of any animal, or anyone having possession or custody of any animal, to ensure that the animal is kept under restraint and that reasonable care and precautions are taken to prevent the animal from leaving, while unattended, the real property limits of its owner, possessor or custodian, and to ensure that: 
(1)  The animal is securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, pen or other enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump or otherwise escape on its own volition. Such enclosure must be securely locked at any time the animal is left unattended. 
(2)  No animal shall be chained, tethered or otherwise tied to any inanimate object such as a tree, post or building, outside of its own enclosure as provided for in paragraph (a)(1). 
(3)  The animal is on a leash and under the control of a competent person; or is off leash and obedient to that person's command and that person is present with the animal any time it is not restrained as provided for in paragraph (a)(1) of this subsection. 
(b)  Additional requirements for precautions to be taken by owners of dangerous animals are: 
(1)  Whenever outside of its enclosure as provided for in paragraph (a)(1) of this section, but on the owner's property, a dangerous dog must be attended by the owner and restrained by a secure collar and leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. 
(2)  In addition to the requirement in paragraph (a)(1) of this section for owners of dangerous animals who maintain their animals out-of-doors, a portion of their property must be fenced with a perimeter or other area fence. Within the perimeter fence, the dangerous animal must be humanely confined inside a pen or kennel of adequate size. The pen or kennel may not share common fencing with the area of the perimeter fence. The kennel or pen must have secure sides and a secure top attached to all sides; the sides must either be buried two feet into the ground, sunken into a concrete pad or securely attached to a wire bottom. The gate to a kennel must be kept locked except for entrance thereto or exit therefrom. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1967, § 5-21; Ord. No. O-99-19, § 4, 12-20-99) 
Sec. 14-34. - Duty of owner to keep animal under restraint while off of property. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of any animal or anyone having an animal in his/her possession to keep the animal under restraint at all times while the animal is off the real property limits of the owner, possessor, or custodian. For the purposes of this section, an animal is deemed under restraint when it is confined within a vehicle, parked or in motion, is secured by a leash or other device held by a competent person, is within the boundaries of a designated dog park under voice command of a competent person and such person is present with the animal, or the animal is properly confined within an enclosure with the permission of the owner of the property where the enclosure is located. A violation of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1967, § 5-22; Ord. No. O-99-19, § 5, 12-20-99; Ord. No. O-05-05, Art. II, § 3, 4-4-05) 
Sec. 14-35. - Collar and tag required for dog and cat. 
    It shall be the duty of each dog and cat owner, possessor, or custodian thereof to provide a collar for his dog and cat to which the rabies inoculation tag shall be attached. The collar, together with the tag, shall be worn by the dog and cat at all times. Failure to comply with this section shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1967, § 5-24; Ord. No. O-99-19, § 6, 12-20-99) 
Sec. 14-36. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Summons to appear in municipal court. Upon information made known to the chief of police, or his authorized representative, that any owner, possessor, or custodian of any dog or animal is in violation of this article, he or his authorized representative shall cause a summons to be issued requiring the owner, possessor, or custodian of such dog or animal to appear before the municipal court judge of the city on a day and time certain, then and there to stand trial for the violation of this article. If a violation of this article has not been personally witnessed by the chief of police or his authorized representative, a subpoena shall be issued to the person making the complaint, to appear on the day and time set for trial, then and there to testify on behalf of the city. 
(b)  Impoundment. If the owner, possessor, or custodian of any dog or animal is not known and such dog or animal is upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, school grounds, or other public places or premises, or the property of another without the property owner's permission, as prohibited by this article, upon complaint made to, or information made known to, the police department, it shall be the duty of the chief of police or his authorized representative to take possession of such dog or animal and impound it in a facility designated by the city manager for the detention of animals. To the extent possible, the city manager shall designate that such impoundments shall be at the animal control center of the county, and such impoundments shall be regulated by such ordinances of the county board of commissioners as are enacted to regulate impoundments made by the county. 
(c)  Authority of county animal control officers to impound. In the enforcement of the provisions of this article, all animal control officers employed as such by the county are hereby authorized when they witness, while on duty, violation of the provisions of this article within the corporate limits of the city, to cause summons to be issued requiring the owner, possessor or custodian of such dog or animal to appear before the municipal judge of the city on a day and time certain, then and there to stand trial for the violation of this article. If the owner, possessor, or custodian of any dog or animal is not known and such dog or animal is upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, school grounds, or other public places or premises, or the property of another without the property owner's permission, as prohibited by this article, to take possession of such dog or animal and impound it in a facility designated as stated in subsection (b) of this article, and such animal control officers of the county are specifically deputized as animal control officers of the city for the purposes described in this section. 
(Code 1967, § 5-25) 
Sec. 14-37. - Notice to owners of impounded animals. 
    Notices to owners of any animal impounded at the county animal control center shall be given as prescribed by the ordinances of the county for the giving of notice for any animal impounded by the county. 
(Code 1967, § 5-26) 
Sec. 14-38. - Vaccinations for rabies and inoculation tags required for dogs and cats. 
    All dogs and cats in the incorporated limits of the city shall be inoculated for the prevention of rabies by a licensed veterinarian. Evidence of this inoculation in the form of a rabies inoculation tag shall be worn by the dog and cat at all times. 
(Code 1967, § 5-27; Ord. No. O-99-19, § 7, 12-20-99) 
Sec. 14-39. - Guard dogs. 
    It shall be the duty of each owner, tenant, or custodian of property upon or within which a guard dog is located to conspicuously and prominently post the following notice on the outside of the property: 
WARNING 
GUARD DOG 
in either red or black letters upon a white background, large enough to be easily read at a distance of 25 feet. In the case of a building, such notice shall be conspicuously posted on or about each and every entrance and exit. In the case of a general enclosure in which a guard dog is located, such notices shall be conspicuously posted upon such enclosure at a distance not greater than 50 feet apart as well as upon each and every entrance and exit through the enclosure. In the case of apartments, condominiums, or businesses located within a larger building where the guard dog is located within the apartment, condominium, or building solely, such notice shall be conspicuously posted on or about each and every entrance and exit. Failure to comply with this section shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1967, § 5-28) 
Sec. 14-39.1. - Dangerous animals. 
(a)  If a law enforcement or codes enforcement agent of the city has probable cause to believe that a dangerous animal is being harbored in violation of this chapter, such agent may do one of the following: 
(1)  Order the violation immediately corrected and cite the owner or keeper to appear in court for the violation. 
(2)  If the violation cannot be immediately corrected and the animal is posing an immediate, serious threat to human beings or other domesticated animals, the animal may be seized and impounded, in which case the owner or keeper will be cited to appear in court for the violation. At the owner's request and expense, such impoundment may be at a veterinarian or licensed kennel of the owner's choosing. If the court rules that the animal is not dangerous, it will be released to the owner. If the court rules that it is dangerous, the animal will be released to the owner after payment of any fees and penalties and upon presentation of proof that the animal will now be kept restrained or confined as specified in section 14-33. 
(b)  If the owner or keeper of an alleged dangerous animal impounded for violation of this chapter presents proof that the animal will now be kept in compliance with this chapter, the animal will be released upon payment of any fees and penalties due. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any specific provision to the contrary, if an owner or keeper of dangerous animal fails to provide proof that the animal will be restrained or confined within compliance with the provisions of section 14-33; or, fails to reclaim it after impoundment; or, fails to keep the dangerous animal restrained or confined within compliance with the provisions of section 14-33; then section 5-6(c) and/or (d) of the DeKalb County Code of Ordinances will apply. 
(Ord. No. O-99-19, § 11, 12-20-99) 
Sec. 14-40. - Abandonment or abuse of animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly abandon or abuse any domesticated animal within the city. Each person who does abandon or abuse knowingly, or willingly permits such abandonment or abuse, or aids in the abandonment or abuse of any domesticated animal, shall be in violation of the law and shall be punishable as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1967, § 5-29; Ord. No. O-99-19, § 8, 12-20-99) 
Sec. 14-41. - Fee schedule. 
    In the reclaiming of animals from the county animal control center, such fees shall prevail as are established by the county board of commissioners. 
(Code 1967, § 5-30) 
Sec. 14-42. - Wild animals-Permit required. 
    No person shall have, keep, or maintain any wild, exotic, dangerous, or nondomestic animal or reptile without first applying to and receiving from the police department a permit to do so. The charge for this permit shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Code 1967, § 5-31) 
Sec. 14-43. - Same-Authority of police department. 
    The police department is hereby invested with the authority to issue permits to any person for the keeping or maintaining of any wild, exotic, dangerous, or nondomestic animal or reptile when, in the opinion of the police chief, any such animal or reptile may be kept or maintained without menacing the safety of any person or property; provided, however, that the police department may require any such animal or reptile to be properly caged or secured or may make additional rules or regulations regarding the keeping or maintaining of any such animal or reptile, and may revoke any such permit for any violation of any of the provisions of this article or of any of the rules and regulations of the police department, or when, in the opinion of the police chief, the safety of any person or property is menaced by the keeping of any such animal or reptile. 
(Code 1967, § 5-32) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; health and sanitation, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; taxation, ch. 94; vehicles for hire, ch. 102; zoning, pt. IV. UDO. 
State Law reference- Local taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Rummage, garage, carport and similar sales; permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hold a rummage, garage, carport, outdoor auction of personal property, or similar sales within the city without first obtaining from the city manager, or his designated representative, a permit for the holding of such sale at some designated place which shall be approved by the city manager. Such sales, when held under such permit, shall be governed by such rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 16-29) 
Sec. 22-2. - Peddling or soliciting; permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to go from residence to residence and offer for sale, solicit orders for, or sell any merchandise, or to solicit to perform services, or to engage in charitable solicitation within the city without first obtaining a permit to do so from the City of Decatur. 
(b)  The chief of police, or his/her designee, shall cause each person requesting such a permit to be photographed and fingerprinted and shall take such other steps as are necessary to ensure proper identification of the person. The chief of police shall issue a permit to any person who is not disqualified pursuant to subsection (c). 
(c)  The chief of police shall deny a permit to any person who has been convicted, been on probation, parole, or been imprisoned for the violation of any of the following offenses of the State of Georgia, of any other state, or of the United States within a period of five years immediately prior to the date of request for a permit: homicide; rape; aggravated battery; burglary; aggravated assault; kidnapping; robbery; child molestation; criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses; attempts to commit any of these offenses; any crime of violence or theft; sale or distribution of controlled substances; or violation of any other state law or local government ordinance involving improper residential solicitation activities. 
(d)  A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall be charged for each permit, except that the permit fee shall be waived for persons officially representing charitable organizations, as that term is defined by O.C.G.A. § 43-17-2. 
(e)  If a permit is issued, it shall be on the person engaged in going from residence to residence and offering for sale, soliciting orders for, or selling merchandise, or soliciting to perform services, or in making charitable solicitations. 
(f)  Permits issued pursuant to subsection (b) shall be valid from 9:00 a.m. until 8:00 p.m. and will expire 90 days after date of issuance. 
(Code 1967, § 16-24; Ord. No. O-97-12, 4-7-97; Ord. No. O-08-10, 8-4-08) 
State Law reference- Peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq. 
Secs. 22-3, 22-4. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-95-16, adopted Dec. 20, 1995, repealed § 22-31, which comprised the substantive provisions of this art. II, occupation taxes and regulatory fees, provisions saved from repeal, and enacted similar new provisions as herein set out. 
State Law reference- Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

Sec. 22-5. - Occupation tax required; business dealings in city. 
    For the year 1996 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the city clerk or his/her designees or to any police officer or codes enforcement officer of the city upon request. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 22-6. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)  Generally. Wherever the term Decatur is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean the City of Decatur, Georgia; wherever the term city is used herein, it shall be construed to mean the City of Decatur, Georgia. 
(b)  Specific terms. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows: 
    Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
    City clerk means the appointed city clerk of the City of Decatur, Georgia, or his/her designee. 
    Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
    Location or office means a fixed place located within the city from which a person conducts business, but shall not include a work site located in the city for less than four months in any calendar year for the purpose of serving a single customer or project. 
    Occupation tax certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of the occupation tax and administrative fee. 
    Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
    Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization. 
    Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who, by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
    Practitioners of professions are: 
(1)  Lawyers. 
(2)  Physicians licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43, chapter 34. 
(3)  Osteopaths licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43, chapter 34. 
(4)  Chiropractors. 
(5)  Podiatrists. 
(6)  Dentists. 
(7)  Optometrists. 
(8)  Psychologists. 
(9)  Veterinarians. 
(10)  Landscape architects. 
(11)  Land surveyors. 
(12)  Practitioners of physiotherapy. 
(13)  Public accountants. 
(14)  Embalmers. 
(15)  Funeral directors. 
(16)  Civil, mechanical, hydraulic, or electrical engineers. 
(17)  Architects. 
(18)  Marriage and family therapists, social workers, and professional counselors. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
    Regulatory fee means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2, paragraph 8 or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees for the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 22-7. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $25.00 shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial startup, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(c)  The regulatory fee schedule shall be as described elsewhere in the Decatur City Code. 
(d)  The administrative fee of $25.00 shall be waived for certificate renewals paid within 30 days of invoicing. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95; Ord. No. O-15-12, § I, 10-5-15) 
Sec. 22-8. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the corporate limits of the city and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, based on the dominant line of business, based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  Profitability ratio for the type of business, profession, or occupation as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications, or other information published by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service, or successor agencies of the United States. The city manager or his or her designee shall review the assignment of businesses to profitability classes on an annual basis and administratively reassign businesses as necessary to the accurate profitability class in accordance with the most recent such nationwide averages. A copy of the annual administrative assignment of businesses to profitability classes shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(2)  The particular type of business, profession, or occupation as classified by the North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS). A copy of the NAICS manual shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Occupation tax schedule: 
Profitability ratios: The tax rate for each business, trade, profession, or occupation is determined by ranking profitability ratios according to federal statistics as follows: 
Profitability Ratio/Tax Class Tax Liability Class 1 $170.00 Class 2 230.00 Class 3 290.00 Class 4 340.00 Class 5 400.00 Class 6 460.00  
Class 1 includes businesses with the sixteenth highest profitability ratio and all lower profitability ratios. 
Class 2 includes businesses with the thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth highest profitability ratios. 
Class 3 includes businesses with the tenth, eleventh, and twelfth highest profitability ratios. 
Class 4 includes businesses with the seventh, eighth, and ninth highest profitability ratios. 
Class 5 includes businesses with the fourth, fifth, and sixth highest profitability ratios. 
Class 6 includes businesses with the first, second, and third highest profitability ratios. 
(c)  (1)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(2)  No occupation tax shall be required from those real estate brokers, real estate agents, or real estate companies whose offices are located outside the jurisdiction and who sell property inside the jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95; Ord. No. O-15-12, §§ II, III, 10-5-15) 
Sec. 22-9. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in state. 
    Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city and which generates income or is used to generate income. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 22-10. - Each line of business to be identified. 
    The registration of each business operated in the local government's jurisdiction shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the city clerk's office and that line of business being noted by the city clerk's office upon the occupation tax certificate which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 22-11. - Number of businesses considered to be operating in city. 
    Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation taxes, administrative fees, and regulatory fees. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 22-12. - Professionals as classified in state law. 
    Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on profitability ratio; 
(2)  A fee of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this paragraph shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework; 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done on or before January 31, 1996. Such election shall be changed for subsequent calendar years only by a written request filed by the professional on or before January 31 of the year in which the election is to be changed. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 22-13. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
    Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 22-14. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
    The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 22-15. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax or fee delinquent. 
(a)  Except for lawyers, each such occupation tax or administrative fee, as applicable, shall be for the calendar year 1996 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Any occupation tax or administrative fee on businesses continuing from the preceding year shall be due and payable annually to the city by January 31 of each year and shall, if not paid by April 30 of each year, be subject to a ten percent penalty of the amount of tax or fees due and interest at the rate of one percent per month or any portion thereof. Any occupation tax or administrative fee for lawyers shall be payable pursuant to the provisions of section 22-26. 
(b)  On any new profession, trade or calling begun in the city in 1996 or succeeding years thereafter, except for the practice of law, the occupation tax shall be delinquent if not paid immediately upon beginning business and a penalty of ten percent and interest at the rate of one percent per month or any portion thereof shall be imposed if not paid within 90 days after commencing business. 
(c)  The occupation tax certificate herein provided for shall be issued by the city. 
(d)  In addition to the above remedies, the city may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95; Ord. No. O-97-13, 4-7-97; Ord. No. O-03-10, §§ II-IV, 8-19-03; Ord. No. O-15-12, §§ IV-VIII, 10-5-15) 
Sec. 22-16. - Proration of tax. 
    If a person commences business in the city on or after July 1 in any calendar year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The administrative fee shall not be reduced. This provision is not intended to benefit delinquent persons who did operate a business prior to July 1 of the calendar year. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 22-17. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
    No business on which an occupation tax, regulatory fee, or administrative fee is levied by this article shall be exempt from such fee or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 100 percent or more of the entire proceeds from such business are devoted to such purpose; except that places of worship and schools shall be exempt. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 22-18. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable. 
    Each person who is required to be licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43, excluding aviation and aeronautical engineers, shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city occupation tax certificate and/or regulatory fee certificate may be issued. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95; Ord. No. O-97-13, 4-7-97; Ord. No. O-15-12, § VIII, 10-5-15) 
Sec. 22-19. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
    Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city occupation tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 22-20. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
    All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary city occupation tax certificate and/or regulatory fee certificate for such business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a city occupation tax certificate and/or regulatory fee certificate. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the city occupation tax certificate and/or regulatory fee certificate herein provided for upon or before commencing the same. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95; Ord. No. O-97-13, 4-7-97) 
Sec. 22-21. - When occupation tax due and payable. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year in which the occupation tax certificate was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall obtain the occupation tax certificate required upon or before commencing such business. 
(b)  The occupation tax certificate herein provided for shall be issued by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95; Ord. No. O-97-13, 4-7-97) 
Secs. 22-22, 22-23. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-97-13, adopted Apr. 7, 1997, repealed §§ 22-22 and 22-23, which pertained to penalty of ordinance violation and city clerk, subpoena and arrest powers, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. O-95-16, adopted Dec. 20, 1995. 
Sec. 22-24. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
(a)  The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. title 46, chapter 3. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Nonprofit agricultural product cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Any business where the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the state or the United States. 
(b)  The exemptions and limitations contained in this article shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way franchise fees, business taxes, or other fees or taxes otherwise permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 22-25. - More than one place or line of business. 
    Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, said business shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for each location and line and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for the dominant line of business. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 22-26. - Exemption of lawyers from registration and certificate requirements; when occupation tax due and payable for lawyers. 
(a)  Lawyers are expressly exempted from the registration and occupation tax certificate requirements, including posting of the certificate, of this article. Such an exemption shall not affect the occupation tax payment requirement for lawyers under this article. 
(b)  Any occupation tax or administrative fee for lawyers shall be due and payable annually to the city by December 31 of each year and shall, if not paid by March 31 of the following year, be subject to a ten percent penalty of the amount of tax or fees due and interest at the rate of one percent per month. Such occupation tax or administrative fee for lawyers shall be for the calendar year concluding on December 31. 
(Ord. No. O-03-10, § I, 8-19-03; Ord. No. O-15-12, §§ IX, X, 10-5-15) 
Sec. 22-27. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
    In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the city clerk's office of the city, upon any tax or installment of such tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of such tax against the persons, partnership, or corporation liable for the tax, which execution shall bear interest at the rate of 18 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property (in the city) of the person, partnership, or corporation liable for the tax, all as provided by the laws, ordinances, and charter of the city and the laws of the state. The lien of such occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the city clerk or marshal of the city upon the property of the defendant located in the jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by the laws, ordinances, and charter of the city and the laws of the state, and the defendant in the execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95; Ord. No. O-97-13, 4-7-97) 
Sec. 22-28. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
    This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the city commission to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. The amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 22-29. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
    This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed civil penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in such ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95; Ord. No. O-97-13, 4-7-97) 
Sec. 22-30. - Enforcement of provisions. 
(a)  It is hereby made the duty of city officers designated by the city manager to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed. City police officers are hereby authorized to issue citations for violations of this article. Each citation shall state the specific provision allegedly violated. It is made the further duty of such designated officers to inspect all occupation tax certificates issued by the city as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the occupation tax certificate held is proper for the business sought to be transacted hereunder. 
(b)  Except for lawyers, a person or business violating any provisions of this article shall, upon order of the municipal court, be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $500.00. Such civil penalty may be enforced by the contempt power of the municipal court. 
(c)  Lawyers who fail to pay the occupation tax by the payment deadline may be reported by the city to the State Bar of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95; Ord. No. O-97-13, 4-7-97; Ord. No. O-15-12, §§ XI, XII, 10-5-15) 
Sec. 22-31. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by governing body. 
    This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the city commission. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 22-32. - Public hearing requirements. 
(a)  After January 1, 1996, the city commission shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(b)  In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year for the city, the city commission shall hold one or more public hearings as a part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 22-33. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
    The city commission may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a written plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in a written economic development plan approved by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 22-34. - Peddlers. 
    Any person in the city offering for sale merchandise in a door-to-door fashion, shall be deemed a peddler and every such peddler shall be required to pay an occupation tax, based on the dominant line of business as classified by the appropriate NAICS code. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95; Ord. No. O-15-12, §§ XIII, XIV, 10-5-15) 
Sec. 22-35. - Stands. 
    No occupation tax certificate, regulatory fee certificate, or clearance to operate shall be issued to any shoe shine, newsstand, popcorn, food/beverage vendor, or any other retail stand, where such stand or stands propose to locate on any street, sidewalk, alley, or public area of the city, unless written permission is granted by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 22-36. - Businesses not listed. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to conduct any other business than those specified in the following schedule shall make application to the city manager or his or her designee, who shall determine the most appropriate NAICS code and amount of such tax based on profitability ratios, and shall instruct the Revenue Division as to the classification and amount of the tax. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95; Ord. No. O-15-12, § XV, 10-5-15) 
Sec. 22-37. - Reduction in tax for persons with a business activity located in their principal residence. 
    Other provisions of this chapter notwithstanding, a person required to obtain an occupation tax certificate for a business activity located in his/her primary residence with no more than one non-resident employed in the business activity for no more than ten hours per week shall pay the occupation tax normally required as specified in section 22-7 and section 22-8 for profitability ratio/tax class 1. No reduction in the administrative fee or regulatory fee(s) is intended for these persons. If these persons begin business operations prior to July 1 of the calendar year, they must pay the normal occupation tax. If these persons begin business operations after July 1 of the calendar year, and have not operated any portion of their business prior to July 1, then they shall pay one-half of the normal occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95; Ord. No. O-01-05, 3-5-01) 
Sec. 22-38. - Denial. 
(a)  The city manager or his/her designee shall be authorized to deny an application for an occupation tax certificate, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The applicant fails to provide evidence required by section 2-18. 
(2)  The applicant furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information or omits required information in the application for an occupation tax certificate. 
(3)  The applicant is not a citizen of the United States or lawfully present in the United States, as evidenced by an affidavit complying with O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1. 
(b)  The city manager or his or her designee shall give written notification to the applicant of such denial, including a specification of the reasons for denial. 
(c)  An applicant may appeal a denial through the appeals procedure identified in section 22-39. 
(d)  An applicant shall not furnish fraudulent or untruthful information in the application. 
(Ord. No. O-15-12, § XVI, 10-5-15) 
Sec. 22-39. - Procedure for appeals. 
    Any person taxed under this article shall have the right to appeal the tax classification to the city commission, provided however that the appeal be in writing stating the grounds for the appeal and provided that the petition of appeal be first presented to the city manager. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 22-40. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
    Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. No. O-95-16, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 22-41. - Alteration of certificates. 
    The holder of an occupation tax certificate shall not alter or modify the information contained on any occupation tax certificate issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-15-12, § XVII, 10-5-15) 
Secs. 22-42-22-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BAIL BONDS AND BAIL BONDING COMPANIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Persons deemed professional bondsmen, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-50; certain persons prohibited from engaging in bail bond business, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-8. 

Sec. 22-46. - Business license required. 
    The business of arranging, posting and acting as surety on bonds for accused in any city ordinance violation coming within the jurisdiction of the city and any person or other entity desiring to conduct such business within the city limits is required, prior to the conducting of such business, to obtain a business license from the city. Such license shall be granted in accordance with the terms and conditions as set forth in this article, and may be revoked by the city upon violation of any of the terms and conditions of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 51/2-1) 
Sec. 22-47. - License fee; posting of license. 
    The annual license fee for the conduct of a bonding business, as referred to in section 22-46, shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the office of the bonding company, visible to any individual lawfully on the premises. 
(Code 1967, § 51/2-2) 
Sec. 22-48. - Posting of certificate of deposit prerequisite to issuance of license. 
    Any bonding company, prior to the conduct of any business in the city, shall post, or cause to be posted, with the city clerk a certificate of deposit in an amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. The amount required to be posted may, in the sole discretion of the city commission, be increased or decreased, but notice of any increase shall only be effective after notice to any licensed bonding company and by appropriate amendment to this article. The certificate of deposit shall be endorsed by the bonding company to the city, and shall be held by the city subject to the terms and conditions as are set forth in this article. The posting of such certificate of deposit shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of any business license to any bonding company and shall be in such form as may be required by the city. 
(Code 1967, § 51/2-3) 
Sec. 22-49. - Form of bond; bonding schedule. 
    All bonds posted by any bonding company as surety for accused shall be on forms acceptable to the city and shall be in accordance with the current bonding schedule of the city as may be set by the municipal court from time to time or in accordance with bonds as may be set by the municipal court in any particular case, and further shall be in accordance with any future bond schedules which may be promulgated at any time hereafter. 
(Code 1967, § 51/2-4) 
Sec. 22-50. - Bonds to be made returnable to appearance date in municipal court. 
    All bonds shall be made returnable to the appearance date in the municipal court for the city. 
(Code 1967, § 51/2-5) 
Sec. 22-51. - Forfeiture of bond. 
    Should any individual accused of violating any of the ordinances or laws referred to in the bonding schedule, as referred to in section 22-49, and for whom a bonding company has acted as surety or posted bond, fail to appear at his appearance date, including continuances, then the bond of that individual failing to appear shall be declared forfeited, and the bonding company, which acted as surety thereon, shall have a period of 28 days from the appearance date to deliver the individual up before the municipal court. If after the expiration of 28 days the individual has not been brought before the municipal court, any subsequent continuances included, then the bonding company which has acted as surety on that individual's bond shall pay to the city the value of the cash bond as reflected in the bond schedules referred to in section 22-49. At no time shall any monies paid by the bonding company to the city, pursuant to the provisions of this article, be returnable to the bonding company by the city. 
(Code 1967, § 51/2-6) 
Sec. 22-52. - Continuance of bond. 
    If any individual shall be bound over by the municipal court to a higher court, then, it shall be within the sole discretion of the municipal court whether to continue the bond for that individual and to make the bond returnable to any required appearance in any higher court to which the individual is bound if the latter procedure is permissible. 
(Code 1967, § 51/2-7) 
Sec. 22-53. - Nonpayment of forfeited bonds. 
    The certificate of deposit referred to in section 22-48, which each bonding company is required to post, shall be a fund from which the city may, at its sole election, collect any forfeited bonds which are not promptly paid by the bonding company in accordance with the provisions of this article. This section shall in no way limit the liability of the bonding company such amount as may be required in the schedule of fees and charges, and each bonding company shall be liable directly to the city for any and all amounts due the city by virtue of forfeited bonds, whether or not the sums exceed the amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. In the event of nonpayment of any forfeited bond, the city may, at its election, sell or cash the certificate of deposit, and deduct from the proceeds thereof any and all amounts due the city by the bonding company for forfeited bonds, together with all costs incurred by the city in the sale or negotiation of the certificate of deposit, and the balance remaining, if any, shall be delivered to the bonding company. The business license for the bonding company shall, upon default, be immediately revoked. 
(Code 1967, § 51/2-8) 
Sec. 22-54. - Settlement of case prior to appearance date. 
    If any case is settled prior to the designated appearance date either by a plea by the accused or by the payment of a fine, if allowed, for the particular offense, or both, the bonding company which acted as surety on that individual's bond shall be relieved of all further liability. It shall be the sole responsibility of the bonding company to determine whether or not a case has been disposed of prior to the appearance date. 
(Code 1967, § 51/2-10) 
Sec. 22-55. - Revocation of license. 
    Any violation of any section of this article or regulation of the city, or any violation of any other statute, law or resolution by any bonding company shall be grounds for the revocation of the business license of the offending company. In the event of any such revocation, the bonding company shall immediately cease to act as surety on any bonds after the date of revocation, but shall remain liable and bound to the city for any bonds for which it is surety prior to such revocation. The city commission shall have the power to revoke any business license for any bonding company, after notice to the offending bonding company and a hearing at any scheduled commission meeting. 
(Code 1967, § 51/2-11) 
Sec. 22-56. - License to be obtained prior to commencing business; date fee due and payable. 
    The license shall be procured before any bonding company commences business. The annual license fee shall be payable on or before February 1 of each year thereafter, except that any bonding company obtaining a license prior to January 1, 1980, may function by paying for their license for the year 1980. 
(Code 1967, § 51/2-13) 
Secs. 22-57-22-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSURANCE COMPANIES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 

Sec. 22-76. - License fees; levied. 
    There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 22-77, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. No. O-94-16, § 121/2-41, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 22-77. - Additional license fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
    For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee under this article, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, such insurer shall pay an additional license fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, per location, for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. O-94-16, § 121/2-42, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 22-78. - Insurers' agency license fees; independent insurance agencies and brokers not otherwise licensed. 
    There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 22-76 in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for each such location within the city. 
(Ord. No. O-94-16, § 121/2-43, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 22-79. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
    There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 22-76. 
(Ord. No. O-94-16, § 121/2-44, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 22-80. - Gross premiums tax for all other insurers. 
    There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an amount equal to 21/2 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by other sections of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-94-16, § 121/2-45, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 22-81. - Due date for license fees. 
    License fees imposed in other sections of this article shall be due and payable on January 1, 1995, and on the first day of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. O-94-16, § 121/2-46, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 22-82. - Administrative provisions. 
    The city clerk is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of this article to the state insurance commissioner within 45 days of its enactment. 
(Ord. No. O-94-16, § 121/2-47, 12-19-94) 
Secs. 22-83-22-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TELEPHONE COMPANIES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Limitation on expanding the power of municipal regulation over any business activity regulated by the Public Service Commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(5). 

Sec. 22-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Recurring local service revenues means: 
(1)  Monthly charges for local exchange service, including: 
a.  Charges for additional listings and joint users; 
b.  The guarantee portion of the charge for semipublic pay station services; 
c.  Charges for local message rate service, including mobile service local messages; and 
d.  Subscriber station revenues from tele-typewriter exchange service. 
(2)  Charges for Morse transmission, signaling, data transmission, remote metering and supervisory control, where both terminal points are within the city limits. 
(3)  All charges for local private line services, except audio and video program transmission services, where both terminals of the private line are within the city limits. 
Nothing in this definition shall preclude the charging of a separate franchise fee for the transmission of audio or video programs to customers by CATV companies. 
(Code 1967, § 121/2-61) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-102. - Occupational license tax levied; amount; date due and payable. 
    Each telephone company operating in the city shall pay an occupational license tax in the amount of three percent of the recurring local service revenues received by such company from subscribers located within the city. Such occupational license tax shall be paid in quarterly installments, each of which shall be due on or before the last day of the second month following the end of each calendar quarter and shall be based on recurring local service revenues billed during such calendar quarter. The first payment under this article shall be based on revenues billed between the effective date of this article (January 1, 1974) and the end of the calendar quarter in which such effective date falls. Any amount of license tax previously paid and absorbed by a telephone company which is applicable to any period subsequent to the effective date of this article shall be credited against the amounts imposed in this article or by subsequent ordinance. 
(Code 1967, § 121/2-61) 
Secs. 22-103-22-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 22-131. - License fee levied. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon the gross receipts generated by or credited to an office within the corporate limits of the city upon each national bank and banking association, federal savings and loan association, building and loan association, bank organized and chartered under the laws of the state, and corporations doing banking business within the city. Such license fee shall be based upon the amount of annual gross receipts and is hereby fixed at the following rate schedule: 
(1)  Five-tenths percent of gross receipts on the first $3,000,000.00 of gross receipts; 
(2)  One-tenth percent of gross receipts on the next $20,000,000.00 ($3,000,000.00 to $23,000,000.00) of gross receipts; 
(3)  None upon the gross receipts in excess of $23,000,000.00. 
(b)  The term "gross receipts" shall mean the gross receipts of the business from all earnings, fees, commissions, interest, rentals and all other income whatsoever arising from or growing out of the conduct of the business without any deduction whatsoever except sales and excise taxes. 
(Code 1967, § 121/2-71) 
Sec. 22-132. - Administrative provisions. 
(a)  Each such corporation to which this article applies, doing business within the city shall, on or before May 1 each year, file with the clerk of the city its estimate of gross receipts to be generated for that year. The license fees levied by this article based on such estimate are due and payable on June 1, 1975, and on June 1 of each succeeding year. Any such license fee based on such estimate not paid by July 1 for each respective year shall be delinquent, and further, on or before the following February 1 of each year, each such corporation or association doing business shall file its report under oath with the clerk of the city showing its actual aggregate gross receipts for the preceding calendar year. If such report reflects an estimated underpayment of the actual license fee payable under the provisions of this article, the amount of such underpayment shall be due and payable on February 1 each year and shall be delinquent if not paid by March 1 each year. If such report reflects an estimated overpayment of the actual license tax levied by this article, such overpayment shall be refunded by the city. All reports required to be filed under this article shall be confidential, and the information contained therein shall be solely for use of the officers of the city responsible for administering this article. 
(b)  The clerk of the city shall be authorized to prepare and supply forms for the preparation and submission of reports of estimated gross receipts and reports of actual annual gross receipts. 
(Code 1967, § 121/2-72) 
Sec. 22-133. - Determination of license fee for new business. 
    If a business, as described and classified in this article, is commenced after May 1 of any license year that this article is in effect, it shall be the duty of any such new business to file with the clerk of the city, on or before commencing business, its estimate of gross receipts to be generated for that year and to pay on or before the date such business is commenced the license fee based upon such estimate, computed according to the rate specified in this article. Any such license fee based on such estimate not paid within 30 days from the date such business is commenced shall be delinquent, and further, on or before the following February 1, such corporation shall file its report under oath with the clerk of the city showing its actual aggregate gross receipts for such preceding partial calendar year. The provisions of section 22-132 with respect to underpayment or overpayment of estimated license fees shall also be applicable to such new business. 
(Code 1967, § 121/2-73) 
Sec. 22-134. - Enforcement of article. 
    The fees and taxes levied by this article may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city. A violation of this article shall be grounds for refusing or revoking a license, and the person responsible may be punished as for violations of other city ordinances. 
(Code 1967, § 121/2-74) 
Sec. 22-135. - Deadline penalties. 
    Failure to file reports and pay the license fees herein levied before the same become delinquent shall subject such corporation or association to an additional ten percent of the amount required to be paid as a penalty for such negligence and delinquency. Further, all amounts not paid by due date shall bear interest at the legal rate as prescribed by the laws of the state. 
(Code 1967, § 121/2-75) 
Sec. 22-136. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
    All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. National banks and banking associations, federal savings and loan associations, banks organized and chartered under the laws of the state, and any corporation doing banking business shall be excluded from the levy and assessment of business license fees and taxes under provisions of that certain ordinance of the city, adopted December 20, 1971, to levy and assess special taxes for the city. The provisions of such ordinance in so far as the same relate to corporations and associations doing banking business as classified in this section are hereby repealed. 
(Code 1967, § 121/2-76) 
Secs. 22-137-22-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FIREARMS DEALERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-161. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dealer means any person regularly engaged in the business of selling firearms. 
    Department means the city department of public safety. 
    Firearms means any pistol, revolver or derringer, by whatever name known, which is designed to expel projectiles by the action of an explosive. 
    Identification means any driver's license, birth certificate, U.S. passport, U.S. military identification card, baptismal or christening certificate, or employee's identification card, provided the same shows the age and home address of the employee. 
(Ord. No. O-90-06, § 16-71, 5-7-90) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-162. - Recordkeeping. 
    Each dealer within the city shall maintain complete and adequate records reflecting the disposition, at wholesale or retail, of all firearms physically or constructively disposed of in the course of this business. Entries of such records shall be posted at the time of each transaction. The records required by this section shall be in permanent form and shall be retained on the business premises of the dealer for a period of not less than ten years from the date the transaction occurs or until discontinuance of business by the dealer. Where there is a discontinuance of business by the dealer, all records of sales of firearms shall be delivered to the department within 90 days of the discontinuance. Where there is a transfer of the business of a dealer to new owner, the records will reflect those facts and will be delivered to the successor dealer. The records will show and include: 
(1)  A full and adequate description of each firearm including: 
a.  The manufacturer thereof; 
b.  The manufacturer's serial number stamped thereon; 
c.  The caliber of the firearm; and 
d.  The model and type of firearm. 
(2)  The disposition made of each firearm including the name, address and age of the person to whom sold and the date of disposition. 
(3)  The evidence of identification furnished to the dealer by the purchaser. 
(4)  A statement signed by purchaser setting forth: 
a.  The purchaser's age; 
b.  That the purchaser is not a fugitive from justice; 
c.  That the purchaser is not under indictment or has not been convicted of a crime punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding one year by or in any court; and 
d.  That the purchase is made for the sole use of purchaser or members of the purchaser's immediate family. 
(Ord. No. O-90-06, § 16-72, 5-7-90) 
Sec. 22-163. - Fingerprint record. 
(a)  In addition to the other records and information as called for in section 22-162, each dealer shall obtain from each person purchasing any firearm the fingerprint of the righthand index finger, unless that finger is missing in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand of the person purchasing the firearm shall be obtained, with a notation as to the exact finger printed. If the purchaser has no right hand, the dealer shall require the fingerprint of the lefthand index finger, unless that finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the left hand of the person purchasing the firearm shall be obtained, with a notation as to the exact finger printed. Fingerprints and the information, as required in this section, shall be obtained from all persons each time that a person purchases any firearm, regardless of whether or not that person may have previously purchased a firearm from the dealer and been fingerprinted. 
(b)  Failure to fingerprint the person purchasing a firearm shall constitute an offense under this article. 
(Ord. No. O-90-06, § 16-73, 5-7-90) 
Sec. 22-164. - Records subject to inspection by department of public safety. 
    All records required to be kept under the provisions of section 22-162 and all firearms held for resale by any dealer shall be subject to inspection by officers and agents of the department during regular business hours or, if regular business hours are not maintained, upon demand during the daytime. 
(Ord. No. O-90-06, § 16-74, 5-7-90) 
Sec. 22-165. - Compliance with article by dealer and purchaser. 
    Any failure to comply with the terms and provisions of this article by any dealer, or the furnishing of any false identification or statement by any purchaser under this article shall constitute an offense by the dealer or purchaser under this article. 
(Ord. No. O-90-06, § 16-75, 5-7-90) 
Sec. 22-166. - Sale and distribution of replica firearms. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, no person shall market for sale, distribute, or sell a replica or facsimile of a firearm which is a toy or imitation firearm which substantially duplicates an actual pistol or revolver. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "replica or facsimile of a firearm" shall include any device or object made of plastic, wood, or metal, or any other material, which can reasonably be perceived as an actual firearm. Such term does not include nonfiring replica of an antique firearm, nor shall it include starter pistols used in athletic events. 
(Ord. No. O-90-06, § 16-76, 5-7-90) 
Secs. 22-167-22-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL 

Sec. 22-186. - Application of division. 
    This division shall not be construed to apply to toy pistols, toy revolvers or toy weapons of any kind, or to antique weapons which are used only for display. This division shall further not apply to casual sales between bona fide gun collectors, nor shall this division apply to any marshal, deputy marshal, sheriff, prison or jail warden, deputy prison or jail warden, correctional officer, police officer or other authorized law officer. No person regularly engaged in the manufacture, repair or sale of firearms shall be required to make application to obtain firearms as provided by this division. 
(Ord. No. O-90-06, § 16-71(l), 5-7-90) 
Sec. 22-187. - Compliance with division and furnishing of purchaser's identity required prior to sale, transfer, delivery or disposal. 
    It shall be unlawful for any dealer in firearms or for any employee, servant or agent of such dealer, to sell, transfer, deliver or dispose of, in any way, any firearms unless the person obtaining the firearm shall furnish identification to the dealer setting forth the person's name, present address and age. No dealer in firearms, nor any employee, servant or agent of such dealer, shall sell, transfer, deliver or dispose of, in any way, a pistol, revolver or short-barrelled firearm, the barrel of which is less than 15 inches in length, to any person within the city unless there shall first have been compliance with each provision of this division. For the purpose of this division, a dealer in firearms shall include any person engaged in the business of operating a pawnshop or other place where money is advanced on goods or other effects, or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn. 
(Ord. No. O-90-06, § 16-71, 5-7-90) 
Sec. 22-188. - Penalty for violation of division. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. O-90-06, § 16-71(m), 5-7-90) 
Sec. 22-189. - Required. 
    No dealer in firearms, or any employee, servant or agent of such dealer, shall sell, transfer, deliver or dispose of in any way a pistol, revolver or short-barrelled firearm less than 15 inches in length as provided herein, unless the prospective purchaser shall have first obtained a certificate of approval from the director of public safety of the city and submitted such to the dealer. 
(Ord. No. O-90-06, § 16-71(a), 5-7-90) 
Sec. 22-190. - Application; contents. 
    The applicant shall file with the department of public safety an application furnished by the department stating the applicant's name, including any and all names by which the applicant may have previously been known; sex, race, age, height, color of hair, color of eyes; present address; any and all addresses for the applicant within the past five years; whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime of violence within the past five years; whether the applicant has been convicted of any felony related to firearms, sex, alcohol or drug offenses within the past five years; whether the applicant has been found guilty of the violation of any law governing the use of firearms within the past five years; whether the applicant is presently a fugitive from justice from any police jurisdiction within the United States; whether the applicant is presently suffering from any mental illness; whether the applicant has been treated for any mental illness within the past ten years, and if so, the location of the hospital or mental institution providing such treatment; and whether the applicant presently has a valid permit issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-11-129, and, if so, the date of issuance and the county of issuance of such permit. The application shall also provide the name and address of the dealer from whom the purchaser will purchase the firearm and the date such application is completed by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. O-90-06, § 16-71(b), 5-7-90) 
Sec. 22-191. - Applicant fingerprints; background history (criminal record); hospital or mental institution records. 
(a)  The applicant shall provide a full set of fingerprints as may be required by the department of public safety; furthermore the applicant shall authorize said department to conduct a background history of any criminal record which the applicant may have related to his or her qualifications to purchase a firearm pursuant to this section. The applicant shall further authorize the department to obtain such hospital or mental institution records as may be required to determine the applicant's qualifications for purposes of this section. 
(b)  After receipt of the application, the director of public safety or his designee shall conduct an investigation of the applicant, including a search of the applicant's fingerprint records, and hospital or mental institution records, if any. 
(Ord. No. O-90-06, § 16-71(c), (d), 5-7-90) 
Sec. 22-192. - Application processing fee. 
    The applicant shall pay to the department of public safety a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for the processing of the application, and such fee shall be paid at the time the application is delivered to the department. 
(Ord. No. O-90-06, § 16-71(e), 5-7-90) 
Sec. 22-193. - Approval; disapproval generally. 
    Within 15 days for a state resident or not less than one year and 60 days for a nonresident, from the delivery of the application provided in this division to the department of public safety, the director of public safety or his designee shall notify the dealer, indicated on the subject application in writing, of the approval or disapproval of the applicant; provided, however, that no dealer shall sell, transfer, deliver or dispose of, in any way, any firearms, as provided in this division, until and unless such dealer is notified of the approval by the director of public safety or his designee. Such approval shall remain in effect for a period of 90 days after the effective date thereof, and, if approved, such approval shall only permit the applicant to obtain a firearm from the dealer whose name shall appear upon the application. If disapproved, the dealer shall not sell, transfer, deliver or dispose of, in any way, any firearm to such applicant, and the applicant shall not make any further application until the expiration of six months after the effective date of such disapproval. 
(Ord. No. O-90-06, § 16-71(f), 5-7-90) 
Sec. 22-194. - Conditions for disapproval. 
    The director of public safety or his designee shall disapprove the disposition if the director or his designee shall determine that any of the following conditions apply to the applicant: 
(1)  Such applicant has been convicted of a crime of violence within the past five years. For the purposes of this subsection, a crime of violence shall mean murder, manslaughter, rape, mayhem, assault, aggravated assault, assault with intent to murder, assault with intent to rape, assault with intent to rob, simple assault, simple battery, aggravated battery, robbery, burglary, kidnapping, or the crime of attempting to commit any of such crimes. 
(2)  Such applicant has been convicted of any felony related to firearms, sex, alcohol or drug offenses within the past five years. 
(3)  Such applicant has been found guilty of the violation of any law governing the use of firearms within the past five years. 
(4)  Such applicant is presently a fugitive from justice from any police jurisdiction within the United States. 
(5)  Such applicant is presently suffering from any mental illness. 
(6)  Such applicant fails or refuses to complete the application or fails or refuses to complete any part of the application process. 
(7)  Such applicant is under 21 years of age at the time the application is submitted to the department. 
(Ord. No. O-90-06, § 16-71(g), 5-7-90) 
Sec. 22-195. - Approval; obtaining firearms from dealer not on application. 
(a)  The issuance of a pistol permit to the applicant under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 16-11-129, shall be prima facie evidence of good cause for the approval of the application by the director of public safety or his designee. 
(b)  If the application is approved and the applicant elects to obtain a firearm from a dealer other than the dealer whose name appears upon the application, the applicant shall notify the department of the name and the address of such dealer, and the department shall promptly notify such dealer, in writing, of the applicant's eligibility to obtain a firearm. 
(Ord. No. O-90-06, § 16-71(h), (i), 5-7-90) 
Sec. 22-196. - Revocation of eligibility. 
    If at any time during the period for which the applicant retains his eligibility to obtain a firearm, the director of public safety or his designee shall learn or have brought to his attention in any manner any reasonable ground to believe the applicant is not entitled to retain his eligibility to obtain a firearm, the director or his designee may revoke the applicant's eligibility and shall promptly notify the dealer whose name appears upon the application of such revocation. The director or his designee shall further confiscate from the applicant any firearm obtained in contravention of the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. O-90-06, § 16-71(j), 5-7-90) 
Sec. 22-197. - Notification of disapproval or revocation; right of appeal. 
    If an applicant's eligibility is revoked, or if the applicant's application is disapproved, both as provided in this division, the director of public safety or his designee shall promptly notify the applicant of such disapproval or revocation and shall further notify the applicant that the applicant shall have the right to appeal the disapproval or revocation to the city commission. After a hearing, the action of the director of public safety or his designee shall be either affirmed or overruled. 
(Ord. No. O-90-06, § 16-71(k), 5-7-90) 
Sec. 22-198. - False information. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly provide false information on an application to obtain firearms, as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. O-90-06, § 16-71(l), 5-7-90) 
Secs. 22-199-22-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PAWNSHOPS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq. 

Sec. 22-226. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Employee means any person working for an owner or pawnbroker, or any owner or pawnbroker who, in the performance of duties or the management of the business affairs of a pawnshop, comes into substantial contact with members of the public, or is employed on a part-time or full-time basis, either with or without remuneration, by a pawnshop. 
    Pawn or pledge means a bailment of personal property as security for any debt or engagement, redeemable upon certain terms and with the implied power of sale on default. 
    Pawnbroker means any person, whether an owner or not, who works in a pawnshop on a regular basis and in a managerial capacity whereby the person has charge of the business or operations of the pawnshop. Pawnbroker includes any person whose business or occupation it is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn or exchange, any goods, wares or merchandise or any kind of personal property whatever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
    Pawnshop means any business wherein a substantial part thereof is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise or any kind of personal property as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
(Ord. No. O-92-20, § 121/2-102, 12-21-92) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-227. - Penalty for violation of article; suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(b)  Any person failing to comply with any provision of this article, or such other laws, ordinances and regulations as may be passed by the city commissioners for the conduct of the business of a pawnbroker, or who is convicted in any court for a violation of any provision of this article or any other ordinance or regulation covering the conduct of the business for which a permit and license have been issued shall be subject to the denial, suspension or revocation of the business license. 
(Ord. No. O-92-20, § 121/2-103, 12-21-92) 
Sec. 22-228. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
    The public safety department shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-92-20, § 121/2-104, 12-21-92) 
Sec. 22-229. - Annual permit and license. 
(a)  All persons, before beginning the business of operating a pawnshop or becoming an employee of a pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn, shall first file an application with the public safety department and obtain an annual permit to conduct or be employed in the business. No permit shall be issued until a fee in the amount established by the city commissioners and set forth in the schedule of fees and charges is paid to the city clerk. 
(b)  All pawnshops shall have a valid business license. The requirements of this section are in addition to the requirements of article II of this chapter. 
(c)  The application for the permit required shall state the street and number at which it is proposed to operate the business. The application shall contain the full name, address, phone number, date of birth and social security number of all persons, including pawnbrokers, owning any interest in the proposed business, plus any additional information, including fingerprints, deemed necessary by the public safety department. 
(d)  No business license shall be issued to a person until the permit required by this section has been approved by the public safety department. 
(Ord. No. O-92-20, § 121/2-105, 12-21-92) 
Sec. 22-230. - Employees. 
    No person shall be employed by a pawnshop in any capacity until such person has been fingerprinted by the public safety department and has been issued an annual permit authorizing such person to be employed by a pawnshop. It shall be the duty of the pawnbroker to ensure that there is compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-92-20, § 121/2-106, 12-21-92) 
Sec. 22-231. - Character of persons connected with business. 
    No owner, stockholder, employee, pawnbroker or any other person connected with the business for which a license or permit is sought shall have been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude or shall have been convicted of any crime involving theft or a crime against property. 
(Ord. No. O-92-20, § 121/2-107, 12-21-92) 
Sec. 22-232. - Records. 
    All pawnbrokers shall keep books wherein shall be entered an accurate description of all property pledged, traded or sold to them. This description shall include, to the extent possible, the name of the maker of the article, any identifying mark or number and a statement of the kind of material of which it is made. In these books there shall be entered also the full name and address of the person by whom it was deposited or sold, and the time when it was done. These entries shall be made as soon after the transaction as is possible, but in no event more than one hour thereafter. The pawnbroker shall photograph the person pawning the merchandise along with a pawnbroker's ticket showing a transaction number. The pawnbroker shall obtain the right index fingerprint, provided it has not been amputated; if so, the next adjoining finger shall be acceptable. 
(Ord. No. O-92-20, § 121/2-108, 12-21-92) 
Sec. 22-233. - Daily reports; fingerprinting and photographing of persons pawning articles. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall make a daily report in writing to the public safety department in such form as may be prescribed by the public safety department of all property pledged, traded or bought by such pawnbroker during the 24 hours ending at 9:00 p.m. on the date of the report. These reports shall be typewritten. In addition to any other information required by the public safety department, the reports shall show: 
(1)  The name and address of the pawnbroker. 
(2)  The time of transaction. 
(3)  The serial numbers of pawn tickets. 
(4)  The amount paid or advanced. 
(5)  A full description of articles, including kind, style, material, color, design; kind and number of stones in jewelry; and all identifying names, marks and numbers. 
(6)  A description of the person selling or pawning, including name, address, race, weight and height. 
(b)  Insufficient reports shall be rejected, and any pawnbroker making them shall be deemed guilty of an offense. 
(c)  In addition to the other records and information, each pawnbroker shall obtain from each person pawning any articles with such pawnbroker the fingerprint of the righthand index finger, unless this finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand of the person pawning the articles shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. All prints shall be made on forms approved by the public safety department, and the pawnbroker shall obtain all other information called for on the approved form. Fingerprints and the information, as required in this section, shall be obtained from all persons each time these persons pawn any article with a pawnbroker, regardless of whether the person may have previously pawned an article with the pawnbroker and been fingerprinted. 
(d)  In addition to other records and information, each pawnbroker shall photograph each customer with the photograph showing the pawnbroker's ticket and transaction number. This photograph shall be reduced to a negative form and maintained by the pawnbroker as a permanent record. 
(Ord. No. O-92-20, § 121/2-109, 12-21-92) 
Sec. 22-234. - Hours of operation. 
    Pawnbrokers may not keep open their places of business except between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(Ord. No. O-92-20, § 121/2-110, 12-21-92) 
Sec. 22-235. - Waiting period prior to disposal of articles. 
    Any pawnbroker or person operating under a pawnbroker's license who takes goods on pawn or buys goods, taking full title thereto, the word "goods" being used in the broadest sense and including all kinds of personal property, shall hold these goods so taken in pawn or purchase for at least 30 days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. O-92-20, § 121/2-111, 12-21-92) 
Sec. 22-236. - Dealing with minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, the pawnbroker's agents or employees to receive goods in pawn from minors. 
(Ord. No. O-92-20, § 121/2-112, 12-21-92) 
Chapter 26 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-13-02, adopted February 4, 2013, repealed the former ch. 26, §§ 26-1-26-12, and enacted a new ch. 26 as set out herein. The former ch. 26 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1967, §§ 7-1, 7-2, 7-4, 7-6-7-14. 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, ch. 74. 
State Law reference- Criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-20 et seq.; abandoned cemeteries and burial grounds, O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1 et seq.; Georgia Cemetery Act of 1983, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-130 et seq. 

Sec. 26-1. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person guilty of a violation of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. O-13-02, 2-4-13) 
Sec. 26-2. - Control and supervision of cemetery. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby vested with the power and authority to control and supervise any improvements, changes in contour of lots or any other change of any kind or character to any of the lots located in the Decatur Cemetery. For purposes of this chapter, "city manager" means the person designated by the city commission as the city manager or his or her designee. 
(b)  No such changes or improvements shall be made to any of such lots without first securing the written approval of the city manager and then only under direct supervision and direction of the city manager. 
(c)  Except as permitted by section 26-5, all improvements or alterations to individual lots in the cemetery shall be undertaken in compliance with the direction of and subject to the consent, satisfaction and approval of the city manager; and should such improvements or alterations be made without the city manager written consent, the city shall have the right to remove, alter or change such improvements or alterations and to assess the costs of such work against the lot or the owner of the lot. 
(d)  All work on lots within the cemetery, including all grading, landscape work, improvements, and care of any kind, all planting, trimming, cutting and removing of trees and shrubs of any kind, all opening and closing of graves, and all interments, disinterments and removals, shall be made in compliance with the authority of the city manager, including all rules that may from time to time be adopted for the cemetery. 
(e)  Employees of the City of Decatur shall have the authority to remove all floral designs, flowers, weeds, trees, shrubs, and plants of any kind from the cemetery, both in public areas and on privately owned lots, when, in the judgment of the city manager such objects become dangerous, detrimental, diseased or in a state of disrepair. 
(f)  All marker restoration and repair of individual lots in the 1828 historic section of the cemetery shall be under the direction of and subject to the written approval of the city manager or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. O-13-02, 2-4-13) 
Sec. 26-3. - Prices of lots, charges and fees. 
    Prices of lots, charges and fees for services offered in Decatur Cemetery shall be established by the city commission and set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Ord. No. O-13-02, 2-4-13) 
Sec. 26-4. - Purchase of lots by residents; resale to nonresidents. 
    The prices of lots in Decatur Cemetery purchased by residents shall apply to bona fide and legal residents of the city. Any such resident, before purchasing any lots in the cemetery, shall provide the city manager with sufficient proof of legal residency within the city, and such purchaser shall agree that they will not sell or dispose of any such lot or part thereof to a nonresident of the city without first obtaining written consent from the city manager. If such consent is obtained and such resale is made, then such new purchaser or transferee shall pay to the city an amount equal to the difference between the current resident graves or lot price and the current nonresident grave or lot price for each lot or grave that is resold. In the event of a violation of this section, the lot shall revert to the city, and the owner thereof shall be reimbursed in the amount originally paid therefor. 
(Ord. No. O-13-02, 2-4-13) 
Sec. 26-5. - Placement of gravestone or markers. 
(a)  When a gravestone or marker is placed above a grave by any firm or person licensed to perform such work in the Decatur Cemetery, the same shall be set in a concrete foundation of a size and type approved by the city manager, such work to be performed by the city and paid for by the person or firm requesting such foundation work, based on the current fee schedule of the cemetery. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any lot owner, or any agent or employee of such lot owner, to place any marker in a manner otherwise than as provided by this section, including all rules that may from time to time be adopted for the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. O-13-02, 2-4-13) 
Sec. 26-6. - Mausoleums, tombs, or other edifices; removal. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in Decatur Cemetery, to erect, construct or build on any lot in the cemetery any mausoleum, tomb or other edifice of like kind or character or any edifice other than what is commonly termed a monument or marker and in keeping with monuments and markers now erected in the cemetery without first obtaining the written permission of the city manager. Upon the violation of this section, the city reserves the right to remove any such edifice from any such lot and to assess the costs of such removal against the lot, the owner of the lot, or the person erecting the edifice. 
(Ord. No. O-13-02, 2-4-13) 
Sec. 26-7. - Trees. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to plant any tree in Decatur Cemetery without first obtaining the written permission of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. O-13-02, 2-4-13) 
Sec. 26-8. - Shrubbery over three feet in height. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to plant upon any lot in Decatur Cemetery any shrubbery that exceeds three feet in height at the time of such planting, without first obtaining written permission of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. O-13-02, 2-4-13) 
Sec. 26-9. - Removal of trees and shrubbery. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to remove any trees or shrubbery prohibited by sections 26-7 and 26-8 from any lot in Decatur Cemetery and to assess the costs of such removal against the owner of the lot or against the person planting such trees or shrubbery. 
(b)  If any tree or shrub, situated in any lot, shall, by means of its roots or branches, become detrimental in any way to the adjoining lot, drive or walk, the city shall have the authority to enter upon the lot and remove the tree or shrub, or any part thereof. However, no tree growing in any lot shall be pruned or removed without the written consent of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. O-13-02, 2-4-13) 
Sec. 26-10. - Animals. 
(a)  All animals in the Decatur Cemetery must be kept under restraint as defined in sections 14-31 and 14-34. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person who possesses, harbors or is in charge of any domestic restrained animal not to immediately remove excrement deposited by the animal while in the Decatur Cemetery. Animal waste must be removed and deposited in suitable sanitary containers. 
(Ord. No. O-13-02, 2-4-13) 
Sec. 26-11. - Erection of walls, coping and curbing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to build or erect any wall, coping or curbing in, around or on any lot in Decatur Cemetery lying outside of the 1828 historic section of the cemetery, without first obtaining written permission of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. O-13-02, 2-4-13) 
Sec. 26-12. - Obstruction of walks or drives. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to block or obstruct any of the walks or drives in Decatur Cemetery without the permission of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. O-13-02, 2-4-13) 
Sec. 26-13. - Hours for cemetery. 
    The Decatur Cemetery shall open at 7:00 a.m. and shall close at one-half hour after sunset; provided, however, that the closing time may be extended if at the regularly scheduled closing time there is an ongoing activity supervised by the city or having a permit issued by the city, in which event the closing time shall be ten minutes after the end of such supervised activity or permitted event. 
(Ord. No. O-13-02, 2-4-13) 
Chapter 30 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Emergency services, ch. 38; law enforcement, ch. 62; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt temporary or experimental traffic regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19); Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 30-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency management means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions, other than those functions for which military forces or state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. These functions may include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, protection against the effects of radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, shelter, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian population, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out such functions. 
(Ord. No. O-94-10, § 171/2-40, 7-5-94) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-32. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article, or any rule, order, or regulation made pursuant to this article, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. O-94-10, § 171/2-45, 7-5-94) 
Sec. 30-33. - County emergency management director; duties. 
    It is the desire and intent of the governing officials of the city that the city be a part of the county emergency management unit. The chief executive officer of the county shall nominate for appointment, by the governor, a director of emergency management for the entire county. When appointed, the emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  Represent the governing officials of the city on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  Assist city officials in organizing city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  Develop, in conjunction with city and county departments, the county emergency and disaster operations plan emergency functions set forth in section 30-31. The plan will be in consonance with the state natural disaster operations plan and nuclear emergency operations plan and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the cities therein for approval and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval. 
(4)  Maintain the emergency management office and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports, to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)  Submit reports as necessary as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices. 
(6)  Obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operating center. 
(7)  Coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating center staff during periods of an emergency, and under supervision of county governing officials. 
(Ord. No. O-94-10, § 171/2-41, 7-5-94) 
Sec. 30-34. - County emergency management office; assignment of emergency functions. 
    The county emergency management office shall be established around existing city and county departments, and the emergency functions described in section 30-31 are assigned as follows: 
(1) Mayor CEO, county commissioners Direction and control (2) Police department and sheriff department Communications and warning 
Police services 
Evacuation (3) Emergency management office Public information 
State military support 
Training 
Preliminary damage assessment and reporting 
Public property assistance 
Attack preparedness 
Specific hazards (4) Fire department Search, rescue and recovery 
Fire services 
Hazardous materials 
Radiological protection (5) Public works Engineering 
Petroleum and solid fuel services 
Utilities (6) DeKalb school system 
Decatur school system Transportation services 
  
  
Food services (7) Board of health Health and medical services (8) Department of family and children services Social services 
Shelter and temporary housing  
(Ord. No. O-94-10, § 171/2-42, 7-5-94) 
Sec. 30-35. - Powers during an emergency or disaster. 
    In the event of a manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of citizens of the city, the mayor of the city, separately, or jointly with the CEO, county commission or in their absences, their legally appointed successors, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues, the following powers: 
(1)  Enforce all rules, laws, and regulations relating to emergency management and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources; 
(2)  Seize or take for temporary use, any private property for the protection of the public; 
(3)  Sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies; and 
(4)  Perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
(Ord. No. O-94-10, § 171/2-43, 7-5-94) 
Sec. 30-36. - Volunteers. 
    All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as city officers and employees. 
(Ord. No. O-94-10, § 171/2-44, 7-5-94) 
Chapter 34 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Georgia Municipal Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 34-1. - City to maintain elector's registration list. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 21-3-125(d) the city elects to maintain its own voter registration list. 
(Code 1967, § 71/2-1) 
Chapter 38 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Civil emergencies, ch. 30; law enforcement, ch. 62; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70; traffic and vehicles, ch. 98. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Operation of electronic alarm systems by county or municipality, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12; license required to engage in low voltage alarm system contracting, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-8.1. 

Sec. 38-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Automatic dialing device means any device connected to a security alarm system which automatically sends a prerecorded message or coded signal indicating the activation of the security alarm system to a predetermined location. 
    Calendar year means the period of time from January 1 through December 31. 
    False alarm means the activation of a security alarm system by other than a forced entry or attempted forced entry to the premises and at a time when no burglary or robbery is being committed or attempted on the premises. 
    Response means the dispatch of a police officer to the premises where a security alarm system has been activated. 
    Security alarm system means an assembly of equipment and/or devices designated and arranged to detect and signal an unauthorized intrusion into premises or to signal an attempted burglary or robbery on protected premises, and, with respect to such signal, department of public safety personnel are expected to respond. 
(Ord. No. O-93-09, § 16-70, 12-20-93) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-32. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person or business violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be summoned to the municipal court for each violation and noncompliance and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(b)  The city and the city schools shall be exempt from compliance with this article for security alarm systems installed in city-owned facilities within the boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-93-09, § 16-71, 12-20-93) 
Sec. 38-33. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It is unlawful for anyone to activate any security alarm system for the purpose of summoning police except in the event of an actual or attempted burglary or robbery or other unauthorized intrusion into premises. 
(b)  It is unlawful for anyone to notify the department of public safety of an activated security alarm system while having knowledge that such activation was apparently caused by an electrical or other malfunction of the security alarm system or by maintenance or service to the security alarm system and/or to fail at the same time to notify the police of such apparent malfunction or repair. 
(c)  It is unlawful to directly notify the department of public safety of any alarm activation by means of any automatic dialing device or any telephonic recording, message, signal, or warning. 
(Ord. No. O-93-09, § 16-72, 12-20-93) 
Sec. 38-34. - False alarm fines. 
    For a response to any false alarm, the municipal court shall fine and collect such fines as follows from the person or business having and/or maintaining a security alarm system on the premises owned or occupied by such person: 
(1)  For a first response to premises at which no other false alarm has occurred within a calendar year, there shall be no penalty. 
(2)  For a second response to premises after a first response within a calendar year period, a written warning and a copy of this article shall be given, but the person having or maintaining such security alarm shall, within three working days after notice to do so, make a written report to the police chief, and if applicable, on prescribed forms setting forth the cause of such false alarm, the corrective action taken, whether such alarm has been inspected by an authorized service person, and such other information as may be required to determine the cause of such false alarm and necessary corrective action. Provision of this information is the sole responsibility of the offender. 
(3)  For a third response to premises after a second response within a calendar year period, a fine as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall be charged, but a written report may be required as for a second response and the police chief shall be authorized to inspect or cause to be inspected the security alarm system at the owner's expense by a certified service person and to prescribe necessary corrective action. 
(4)  For a fourth and a fifth response to premises after a third and/or fourth response within a calendar year, a fine as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall be charged, but a written report may be required as for a third and/or fourth response, and the police chief shall be authorized to inspect or cause to be inspected the security alarm system at such premises, prescribe necessary corrective action, and shall give notice to the person or business having or maintaining such security alarm system of the conditions and requirements of this article, including the fee requirements for six or more false alarm responses by the police division within each calendar year. 
(5)  After a sixth response to premises within a calendar year, and for all succeeding responses within that calendar year, a fine as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall be charged, and if such false alarms are as a result of failure to take necessary corrective action prescribed by the police chief, disconnection of such security alarm system may be ordered. It shall be unlawful to reconnect such security alarm system until such corrective action is taken. No disconnection shall be ordered as to any premises required by law to have a security alarm system in operation. 
(Ord. No. O-93-09, § 16-73, 12-20-93) 
Sec. 38-35. - User fees. 
    Any person or business which maintains a security alarm system or fire alarm system which has a direct connection to an alarm display panel located in the communications center of the department of public safety shall be charged a fee per month, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, for such connection. 
(Ord. No. O-93-09, § 16-74, 12-20-93) 
Sec. 38-36. - Requirements for owners of businesses, residences or structures. 
    The owner of each business, residence, or structure equipped with a security alarm system must provide the police department or their alarm company with a minimum of three emergency phone numbers of persons who can be contacted in the case of an emergency or malfunction of the system. Listed persons must be able to enter the business, residence, or structure and secure the system within 30 minutes of its reported failure. These names and numbers shall also be posted in a conspicuous location on the premises where an independent alarm is located. 
(Ord. No. O-93-09, § 16-75, 12-20-93) 
Chapter 42 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-14-Z-26, § 2, adopted Nov. 17, 2014, repealed arts. IV-XII, §§ 42-80-42-500, which pertained to soil erosion and sedimentation control, post-development stormwater management for new development and redevelopment, illicit discharge and illegal connection, stormwater management, stormwater management rates, floodplain management/flood damage prevention, Decatur greenspace commission, stream buffer protection, and miscellaneous-outdoor landscape watering, respectively; and derived from the Ord. No. O-99-20, 12-20-99; Ord. No. O-00-04, 3-20-00; Ord. No. O-02-02, 4-15-02; Ord. No. O-04-06, 3-15-04; Ord. No. O-04-07, 3-15-04; Ord. No. O-04-09, 3-15-04; Ord. No. O-05-02, 2-7-05; Ord. No. O-07-03, 1-16-07; Ord. No. O-07-15, 12-17-07; Ord. No. O-09-01, 2-2-09; Ord. No. O-10-03, 4-5-10; Ord. No. O-10-09, 12-6-10.   Ord. No. O-14-Z-26, §§ 1, and 2, further amended and re-codified soil erosion and sedimentation control, post-development stormwater management for new development and redevelopment, illicit discharge and illegal connection, stormwater management, stormwater management rates, floodplain management/flood damage prevention, and stream buffer protection to read as set out in part IV of this Code, Unified Development Ordinance, art. 9; outdoor landscape watering to read as set out in § 7.2.3. of the UDO; and Decatur greenspace commission to read as set out in § 11.1.6. of the UDO. 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, ch. 54; parks and recreation, ch. 74; solid waste, ch. 82; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Zoning board of appeals. 
    The zoning board of appeals, as established in Appendix A, Zoning, of the Decatur Code of Ordinances, is designated to hear appeals and variance requests as specified in Chapter 42, Environment, of the Code of the City of Decatur, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. O-04-04, 3-15-04) 
Cross reference- Zoning Board of Appeals, App. A, Art. XII, et seq. 
Secs. 42-2-42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 42-31. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
    Section 16-20 of the 1967 Code on the subject of nuisances is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Secs. 42-32-42-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Limits on sound volume produced by radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; sale of muffler which causes excessive noise prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71(c). 

Sec. 42-56. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person guilty of a violation of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1967, § 15-5) 
Sec. 42-57. - Creation of unreasonably loud and disturbing noises. 
    Subject to the provisions of this article, the creating of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise within the city is prohibited. 
(Code 1967, § 15-1) 
Sec. 42-58. - Noise detrimental to life or health, or disturbing the public peace or welfare. 
    Noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual or in disturbance of the public peace and welfare is prohibited. 
(Code 1967, § 15-2) 
Sec. 42-59. - Enumeration of certain loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises. 
    The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises and noises in violation of this article, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Blowing horns or signaling devices. The sounding or blowing of any horn or signal device on any automobile, truck, bus, motorcycle or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or if in motion only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Radios, televisions, musical instruments and similar devices. The following uses of radios, televisions, musical instruments and similar devices are prohibited: 
a.  The operating or playing of any radio, musical instrument or similar device which produces or reproduces sound on the public rights-of-way in such manner as to be audible to any person other than the operator of the device. 
b.  The operating or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument or similar device which produces or reproduces sound in a motor vehicle or public park in a manner as to be audible at a distance of 50 feet. 
c.  Loudspeakers and sound amplifiers. The using or operating of any loudspeaker, loudspeaker system, sound amplifier or other similar device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, and 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on weekends and holidays, within or adjacent to residential or noise sensitive areas such that the sound therefrom is audible across the real property line of the source; provided, however, that this shall not apply to any public performance, gathering or parade for which a permit has been obtained from the city. A "noise sensitive area" is an area where a school, hospital, nursing home, church, court, public library or cemetery is located. 
(3)  Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on streets. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any hospital, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of persons in the vicinity. 
(4)  Animals. The owning, possessing or harboring of any animal which frequently, or for continued duration, howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes other sound which creates excessive and unnecessary noise across a residential or commercial real property line or within a noise sensitive area. For the purposes of this subsection the term "barking dog" shall mean a dog that barks, bays, cries, howls or makes any other noise continuously and/or incessantly for a period of ten minutes, or barks intermittently for one-half hour or more to the disturbance of any person at any time of day or night, regardless of whether the dog is physically situated in or upon private property; provided, however, that a dog shall not be deemed a barking dog if, at the time the dog is barking or making any other noise, a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon property in or upon which the dog is situated. 
(5)  Use of vehicles. The use of any automobile, truck, bus, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair or loaded in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(6)  Blowing whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authorities. 
(7)  Exhaust discharge. To discharge into the open air the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or motor boat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)  Building operations, excavation of streets; permit from city manager. The erection (including excavation and site development), demolition, alteration or repair of any building in or within 300 feet of any residential zoning district in the city, and the excavation of streets and highways in or within 300 feet of any residential zoning district in the city, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturday, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit of the city manager, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed 30 days while the emergency continues. 
Exception: This subsection shall not apply to operations which are carried on in such a manner or in such a location as not to create sound exceeding 60 dB(A), when measured at or beyond the property boundary of the property from which the sound emanates. 
(9)  Noises near schools, hospitals, churches, court or institution of learning. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same is in session, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings or sessions thereof, provided that signs must be displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, institution of learning, church, court or hospital. 
(10)  Loading and unloading operations. The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates or containers. 
(11)  Noise to attract attention. The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise to any performance, show or sale or display of merchandise. 
(12)  Loudspeakers or amplifiers on vehicles. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on automobiles, trucks, buses or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other purposes. 
(13)  Emergency signaling devices. The following uses of emergency signaling devices are prohibited: 
a.  Except in case of an emergency, the intentional sounding of any audible alarm between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
b.  The testing of any alarm for a period in excess of 60 seconds at any time. 
c.  Permitting an audible alarm which has been activated by a malfunction to continue for more than 30 minutes. 
(14)  Maximum permissible sound levels; Table I. The following subsections and table detail the maximum permissible sound levels: 
a.  No person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound from any location in such a manner as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth in Table I for the receiving land use category more than ten percent of any measurement period, which period shall not be less than ten minutes, when measured at or beyond the property boundary of the property from which the sound emanates; provided, however, that in the case of the multifamily dwelling land use category, the sound level shall be measured within an adjacent intrabuilding dwelling. 
b.  For any source of sound, the sound level shall not exceed the maximum permissible sound level limit set forth in Table I by 15 dB(A) for all land use categories. 
c.  Sound level measurement shall be made with a sound level meter using the A-weighting scale in accordance with the standards promulgated by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
TABLE I 
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE SOUND 
LEVELS BY RECEIVING LAND 
USE CATEGORY 
Land Use 
Category Time Sound 
Level 
Limit Residential, noise sensitive area, public space 10:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m. 60 dB(A) Multifamily dwelling 10:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m. 50 dB(A) Commercial 7:00 a.m.-11:59 p.m. 65 dB(A) 12:00 a.m.-6:59 a.m. 60 dB(A) Industrial At all times 75 dB(A)  
Notes to Table I. 
1.  The term "land use category" shall mean the use for which the property is zoned in the zoning ordinance of the city. 
2.  The term "noise sensitive area" shall mean an area where a school, hospital, nursing home, church, court, public library or cemetery is located. 
(15)  Exemptions. The following are exempt from the sound level limits of Table I: 
a.  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicles when responding to an emergency. 
b.  Noises made by persons having obtained a parade or concert permit from the city. 
(Code 1967, § 15-3; Ord. No. O-90-10, 9-17-90; Ord. No. O-98-16, § 1, 8-3-98; Ord. No. O-00-07, § 1, 7-5-00; Ord. No. O-01-17, 9-4-01) 
Sec. 42-60. - Exemptions. 
    None of the terms or prohibitions of this article shall apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Any vehicle of the city while engaged in necessary public business. 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways by or on behalf of the city or the state, at night, when the public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day. 
(Code 1967, § 15-4) 
Secs. 42-61-42-79. - Reserved. 
Chapter 54 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; animals, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 22; environment, ch. 42; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70; solid waste, ch. 82. 
State Law reference- Power of county board of health to adopt rules and regulations of local application, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-6; power of county board of health to adopt and enforce rules and regulations, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-4(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Violation of county health department rules and regulations for food service establishments; penalty for violation. 
    Violations of the rules and regulations for food service establishments adopted October 11, 1977, by the county health department, occurring within the city, are declared to be unlawful and the municipal court shall have jurisdiction over persons charged with any such violation. The penalty for violation of any such rule or regulation shall be as provided by section 1-12. 
(Code 1967, § 16-41) 
State Law reference- Promulgation of rules, regulations and standards by state department of human resources and county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-373. 
Secs. 54-2-54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CLEAN AIR ORDINANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-04-13, adopted July 1, 2004, repealed the former art. II, §§ 54-31-54-37, and enacted a new art. II as set out herein. The former art. II pertained to smoking policy and derived from Ord. No. O-93-05, §§ 16-63-16-69, adopted July 6, 1993. 

Sec. 54-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Child care facility means any institution, society, agency, or facility, whether incorporated or not, which either primarily or incidentally provides full-time care for children under 17 years of age outside their own homes, subject to such exceptions as may be provided in rules and regulations of the State Board of Human Resources, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 49-5-3, as amended. 
    Dining area means an enclosed interior or exterior area containing a counter or tables upon which food is served. 
    Employer means any person who employs the services of another person. 
    Employee means any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages of profit. 
    Enclosed means closed in by a roof and at least three sides with appropriate openings for ingress and egress. It includes areas commonly described as public lobbies or lobbies when those are in an area that is enclosed as defined herein. 
    Establishment means any business, store, office or other place where goods or services are sold or provided as part of a commercial venture. The term establishment includes but is not limited to the following: (1) automobile dealerships, furniture or other showrooms for the display of merchandise offered for sale; (2) grocery, pharmacy, specialty, department and other stores which sell goods or merchandise; (3) service stations, stores or shops for the repair or maintenance of appliances, shoes, motor vehicles or other items or products; (4) barbershops, beauty shops, cleaners, laundromats and other establishments offering services to the general public; (5) video arcade, pool hall and other amusement centers; (6) offices providing professional services such as legal, medical, dental, engineering and architectural services; (7) banks, savings and loan offices, and other financial establishments; (8) hotels and motels and other places that provide accommodations to the public; and, (9) restaurants and cafeterias. 
    Health care facility means any licensed general or specialized hospital, institutional infirmary, public health center or diagnostic and treatment center, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 31-7-1(2), as amended. 
    Intermediate care (nursing) home means any long-term custodial care facility that provides for the physical and mental welfare of the aged. 
    Personal care home means a residential facility having at least 25 beds and providing, for compensation, protective care and oversight of ambulatory, nonrelated persons, including the elderly, who need a monitored environment but who do not have injuries or disabilities which require chronic or convalescent care, including medial, nursing, or intermediate care, personal care homes include those facilities which monitor daily residents' functioning and location, have the capability for crises intervention, and provide supervision in areas of nutrition, medication, and provision of transient medical care. Such term does not include residential facilities which are devoted to independent living units with kitchen facilities in which residents have the option of preparing and serving some or all of their own meals, or boarding facilities which do not provide personal care. 
    Place of employment means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees frequent during the course of employment including, but not limited to, work areas, restrooms, hallways, employee lounges, cafeterias and snack bars, conference and meeting rooms, lobbies and reception areas. 
(1)  A private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a childcare facility, an adult day care facility, or a health care facility. 
(2)  The dining area of a restaurant shall be treated as a place of employment under this article. 
    Private enclosed offices means any enclosed area within a place of employment. Private enclosed offices must have walls that extend from floor to ceiling and a closable door. 
    Public park means any public park, playground, greenspace, plaza or outdoor recreation area maintained and operated by the city, including but not limited to, all city parks, the MARTA Plaza, the Decatur Cemetery and the Old Courthouse lawn. 
    Public place means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted including, but not limited to, restaurants; stores; waiting rooms; lobbies; reception areas, hallways, public transit; restrooms; enclosed shopping malls; elevators, service lines, service stations, offices providing professional services, banks and other financial institutions, educational, recreational and health care facilities; child care facilities; auditoriums; theaters; arenas; meeting rooms, repair shops, automobile dealerships, conventional halls, bowling facilities, polling places and bingo games. A private residence is not a public place unless it is used as a childcare facility, and adult day care facility or a health care facility. 
    Restaurant means any establishment or enclosed area which is primarily devoted to the serving of food by which more than 50 percent of its total annual gross sales are derived from food sales to the public or guests and which contains a dining area; or, an establishment by which at least 40 percent of its total annual gross sales are from the sale of prepared meals or food and provides chairs, tables and counters to seat and serve 50 or more persons. The term restaurant shall include any dining area located within a health care, educational, or childcare facility. Food courts within enclosed shopping malls shall be treated as restaurants under this article. 
    Retail tobacco store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
    Service line means any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service involved the exchange of money. 
    Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, e-cigarette, oral smoking device, or pipe containing any weed, plant, nicotine based liquid or other combustible substance in any manner or in any form. 
(Ord. No. O-04-13, 7-1-04; Ord. No. O-16-09, § 1, 5-16-16) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-32. - Public places, places of employment, and public parks; generally. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, smoking is prohibited in all public places within the city, all places of employment within the city, and all public parks. All ashtrays and similar smoking paraphernalia shall be removed from any place where smoking is prohibited. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, smoking is prohibited: 
(1)  Within 20 feet of any outside entrance, operable window or ventilation system of any public place within the city and of any place of employment within the city; 
(2)  Within 20 feet of any exterior seating or service area of any restaurant within the city. 
(Ord. No. O-04-13, 7-1-04; Ord. No. O-16-09, § 2, 5-16-16) 
Sec. 54-33. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The regulation of smoking pursuant to this article shall not apply in the following areas: 
(1)  Designated smoking rooms in hotels and motels rented to guests, provided that such designated smoking rooms shall not comprise more than 25 percent of the total number of rooms available for rent. 
(2)  Retail tobacco stores. 
(3)  Private clubs when associated with and incidental to any apartment or office development. 
(4)  Private residences, including those, which may serve as an office workplace, except if, used as a childcare, an adult day care or a health care facility. 
(5)  Any property owned or leased by the State of Georgia or the federal government. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment described in this article may declare that the entire establishment is a non-smoking establishment. 
(Ord. No. O-04-13, 7-1-04; Ord. No. O-16-09, § 3, 5-16-16) 
Sec. 54-34. - Posting of signs. 
(a)  "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in every building where smoking is prohibited by this article, by the owner, operator manager or other person having control of such building or area. 
(b)  Every public place and every place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(c)  Notice of the provisions set forth in this article shall be given to all applicants obtaining an occupational tax certificate or professional license in the city. 
(Ord. No. O-04-13, 7-1-04) 
Sec. 54-35. - Employers' responsibility. 
    It is the responsibility of employers to provide a smoke-free workplace for all employees of public places and places of employment. 
(Ord. No. O-04-13, 7-1-04) 
Sec. 54-36. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be punished, upon conviction, as provided in section 1-12. 
(b)  Any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls a public place or a place of employment and who upon notice from any person authorized to enforce this article, knowingly violates any provision of this article shall be punished, upon conviction, as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. O-04-13, 7-1-04) 
Sec. 54-37. - Enforcement of article. 
(a)  Any police officer, as defined by Georgia law, may issue a citation for any violation of this article. 
(b)  The designated fire marshal of the city may issue a citation for any violation of this article. 
(c)  Any designated codes enforcement officer, building inspector, building official or fire inspector of the city may issue a citation for any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-04-13, 7-1-04) 
Secs. 54-38-54-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNSANITARY OR DANGEROUS PREMISES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Ordinances relating to repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation or buildings or structures that imperil health, safety or morals, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11; nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; authority to demolish structures where drug crimes are committed, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 et seq. 

Sec. 54-56. - Prohibited conditions. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property within the city to maintain such property with weeds, briars, vines, dead limbs, and branches from trees, underbrush, garbage, trash or other things thereon that will constitute an unsanitary or dangerous condition, health menace or fire hazard. 
(Code 1967, § 16-35(a); Ord. No. O-91-21, 11-4-91; Ord. No. O-92-06, 3-16-92) 
Sec. 54-57. - Storage of abandoned vehicles and junk. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property within the city to utilize the premises of such property for the open storage of any abandoned motor vehicle, ice box, refrigerator, stove, appliance, glass, building material, building rubbish, or similar items that will constitute an unsanitary or dangerous condition, health menace or fire hazard. For the purposes of this section, an abandoned motor vehicle is defined as one that is in a state of disrepair and incapable of being moved under its own power. 
(Code 1967, § 16-35(b); Ord. No. O-91-21, 11-4-91; Ord. No. O-92-06, 3-16-92) 
Sec. 54-57.1. - Maintenance of graffiti. 
(a)  "Graffiti" is defined according to O.C.G.A. § 17-15A-2 as "any inscriptions, words, figures, paintings, or other defacements that are written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of real property or improvements thereon without prior authorization of the owner or occupant of the property by means of any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any surface." 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property within the city to allow any graffiti that is visible from the street or other public or private property to remain upon any building, structure, appurtenance, equipment, any container used for storage of commercial refuse, recyclables or litter, or any fixed or portable box, container or storage unit, any sign, any surface, paving or similar feature located, installed, used or maintained on such property after the 15-day compliance period provided below. 
(Ord. No. O-08-03, 2-19-08) 
Sec. 54-58. - Unsecured vacant buildings. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or person entitled to possession of any dwelling house, commercial or institutional building within the city to allow a vacant building to remain unsecured and open to the public for a period of ten or more days. Any such vacant building having broken, unlocked or missing doors or windows shall be deemed to be open to the public and to constitute a dangerous condition, health menace or fire hazard. 
(Code 1967, § 16-35(c); Ord. No. O-91-21, 11-4-91; Ord. No. O-92-06, 3-16-92) 
Sec. 54-59. - Failure to abate unlawful conditions after notice; violation of article. 
    If the owner or occupant of any such property shall so maintain such property and shall fail to clean the premises or remove such items and/or graffiti as described in sections 54-56, 54-57 and 54-57.1, or if the owner or person entitled to possession of such vacant building as described in section 54-58 shall not close and secure such vacant building within 15 days after having been notified in writing by an official of the city public works department, fire department, or development department, such action on the part of the owner or occupant of the property shall constitute a violation of this article. A separate violation shall be deemed to occur for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of the requirements of this article is committed or continued. 
(Code 1967, § 16-35(d); Ord. No. O-91-21, 11-4-91; Ord. No. O-92-06, 3-16-92; Ord. No. O-08-03, 2-19-08) 
Sec. 54-60. - Notice contents; service. 
(a)  Such written notice shall state what items or conditions constitute the graffiti, unsanitary or dangerous condition, health menace or fire hazard that must be cleared, removed or secured. 
(b)  Service of such notice shall be as follows: 
(1)  By delivery to the owner and occupant personally; 
(2)  By registered or certified mail with postage prepaid deposited in the United States mail addressed to the owner's and occupant's last known address. 
(3)  If service of notice cannot be accomplished by using the methods stated in subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section, by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(Code 1967, § 16-35(e), (f); Ord. No. O-91-21, 11-4-91; Ord. No. O-92-06, 3-16-92; Ord. No. O-08-03, 2-19-08) 
Sec. 54-61. - Appeal of notice. 
    Any person receiving written notice from an official designated in section 54-59 of deficiencies in his property under this article may, within 15 days following the date of such notice, enter an appeal in writing to the housing board of adjustments and appeals at city hall. Such appeal shall state the location of the property and the date of the notice of violations. The appeal must state the reasons upon which the appeal is made. Such appeal shall be heard and determined according to the provisions of section 106, housing board of adjustments and appeals, of the Southern Standard Housing Code, 1973 edition, as adopted by the city. 
(Code 1967, § 16-35(g); Ord. No. O-91-21, 11-4-91; Ord. No. O-92-06, 3-16-92) 
Sec. 54-62. - Citation for violation of article without further notice; conditions. 
    Any person shall be considered to be in violation of this article and shall be subject to immediate citation without further notice if such person: 
(1)  Has been found guilty of one violation of this article within the previous 12 months; and 
(2)  Thereafter again, after the prior violation was cured, maintains the property on which the prior violation occurred in a manner described by sections 54-56, 54-57 and/or 54-58. 
(Code 1967, § 16-35(h); Ord. No. O-91-21, 11-4-91; Ord. No. O-92-06, 3-16-92) 
Sec. 54-63. - Report of violation; abatement procedure. 
    In the event of a violation of this article, the city public works department, fire department or development department, may make a written report of its findings to the city commission with recommendation that the city have the premises cleaned and have removed therefrom such items as described in this article, that constitute an unsanitary or dangerous condition, health menace or fire hazard or, in the case of a building which is vacant, unsecured and open to the public, that the city close and secure the building. When such report with recommendations has been filed: 
(1)  Placement on city commission agenda for hearing. The city commissioners shall have full power and authority, in their discretion, to place the matter upon their agenda for hearing at such time and place as the city commissioners may fix. 
(2)  Service of report and notice to owner or occupant prior to hearing. A copy of the written report aforesaid and a written notice of the time and place fixed for hearing the matter shall be served upon the owner or occupant of such property at least 15 days prior to the date fixed for the hearing, such service to be made by the building official or other designated officer of the city in the manner specified in section 56-60. The hearing may be continued upon request of either party for reasonable cause. 
(3)  Hearing; finding. The city commissioners shall hear the matter, including the response of such owner or occupant and witnesses introduced, and make their finding. 
(4)  Abatement by city; lien; collection of lien. The city commissioners shall have the full power and authority to order that the offending premises be cleaned and/or secured and to authorize entry upon such premises for such purpose; to have graffiti removed or obliterated; to have the premises cleaned; and to have removed therefrom weeds, briars, vines, dead limbs, and branches from trees, underbrush, garbage, trash or other things thereon that will constitute an unsanitary or dangerous condition, health menace or fire hazard. In the case of a building which is vacant, unsecured and open to the public, the city commission shall have the building closed and secured, and assess the property for the cost of the cleaning, removal and/or closing and securing. Such assessment shall constitute a lien on the property until paid. An execution in favor of the city in the amount of such assessment shall be issued by the city clerk and bear attest in the name of the mayor or mayor pro-tem and be collected in accordance with the provisions of section 85 of the city Charter as set forth in this Code. 
(Code 1967, § 16-35(i); Ord. No. O-91-21, 11-4-91; Ord. No. O-92-06, 3-16-92; Ord. No. O-08-03, 2-19-08) 
Chapter 62 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; animals, ch. 14; civil emergencies, ch. 30; emergency services, ch. 38; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70; traffic and vehicles, ch. 98. 
State Law reference- Law enforcement officer appreciation day, O.C.G.A. § 1-4-6; peace officer memorial day and police week, O.C.G.A. § 1-4-7; authority to provide for police protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; training requirements for police chiefs, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-20; special policemen, O.C.G.A. § 35-9-1 et seq.; compensation of municipal law enforcement officers to be by fixed salary only, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-9; municipality's liability for torts of police or other officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-3; definition of police officer for purpose of state traffic laws, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1; fleeing or attempting to elude police officers; impersonating law enforcement officer, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-395; assault under color of office, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-3; extortion generally, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-5; tort liability for false arrest, O.C.G.A. § 51-7-1 et seq.; tort liability for false imprisonment, O.C.G.A. § 51-7-20; tort liability for malicious prosecution, O.C.G.A. § 51-7-40; public officer causing arrest or detention for violation of O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1 not civilly liable, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1(d). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Cash bonds. 
(a)  The chief of police, the captains of police and the desk sergeants of the police department of the city are hereby designated to accept cash bonds under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 17-6-10, whereby designated officials of municipalities are authorized to accept cash bonds and to issue a receipt to the applicant for same. 
(b)  All cash bonds so accepted shall be posted or accepted at the office of the police department in the city hall and at no other place, and likewise at the time such bond is so posted or accepted a receipt shall be issued at such office and at no other place. 
(Code 1967, § 2-10) 
Sec. 62-2. - Charge for furnishing information relative to police records. 
    The chief of police is authorized to make a charge for furnishing information as to arrest records created by and in the custody of the police department. Such charges shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Code 1967, § 171/2-1) 
Secs. 62-3-62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT, IDENTIFICATION DIVISION 

Sec. 62-31. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article may, upon conviction, be punished by the provisions of section 1-12. 
(Code 1967, § 171/2-30) 
Sec. 62-32. - Maintenance of identification and fingerprint division for certain persons. 
(a)  The chief of police or his representative shall maintain an identification and fingerprint division within the police department of the city on the following persons: 
(1)  Those persons arrested by the city police department and charged with a violation of a city ordinance or state or federal law. 
(2)  Those persons engaged in the operation of cars for hire, and owners of same. 
(3)  Those persons engaged in the operation or owners of a health club or reducing salon. 
(4)  Those persons including, but not limited to, managers, shift managers and/or persons responsible for on-site supervision of the premises, who control the sale or service of any alcoholic beverage within the city limits in any store, restaurant or club or any other type of establishment. 
(b)  A correct identification system shall be maintained with the fingerprints, photographs and personal history of those persons named in subsection (a) of this section. The records maintained in this section will be classified as "Temporary-Long term" as defined by the Georgia Secretary of State's Office - Archive Division and will be retained for at least the minimum time period required by the retention schedule published by the Georgia Secretary of State's Office - Archive Division. 
(Code 1967, §§ 171/2-21, 171/2-22; Ord. No. O-07-02, 1-17-07) 
Sec. 62-33. - Application by persons specified in section 62-32(4) to be fingerprinted and photographed; work permit required; contents, cost and renewal. 
    Those persons in any way mentioned in section 62-32(4) shall, before engaging in any of the services mentioned, make application to the chief of police, for the purpose of being fingerprinted and photographed and shall have received a work permit which shall be valid for 12 months from the date of issue. This permit shall bear the name, date of birth, date of issue, person issuing the permit and a photograph of the applicant. The cost of this permit shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for the first year and for each additional year thereafter. The chief of police may deem it not necessary to refingerprint each applicant at the end of a 12-month period after a check of records, but a renewal permit will be required. 
(Code 1967, § 171/2-23) 
Sec. 62-34. - Provisions of section 62-33 applicable to persons specified in section 62-32(2), (3). 
    Those persons engaged in any way with section 62-32(2), (3) shall be governed by and issued work permits as provided in section 62-33. 
(Code 1967, § 171/2-24) 
Sec. 62-35. - Permit to be kept on premises or in vehicle for hire; permits required under section 62-32(2) nontransferable. 
(a)  Any permit issued by the chief of police for persons under section 62-32(2), (3) or (4) shall be kept on the premises where the applicant is employed or in the vehicle for hire, and shall be the property of the applicant unless revoked or expired. 
(b)  Any permit issued under section 62-32(2) shall not be transferable to any other company for car or cars for hire. 
(Code 1967, § 171/2-25) 
Sec. 62-36. - Revocation of permit; appeal from denial of permit. 
(a)  Any and all permits issued by the chief of police shall be revoked by the chief of police, the mayor, or the city commission upon proof of any violations of this article, or any laws or ordinances of the city or any state or federal laws which are pertinent to the business covered by such permit. 
(b)  Any person denied a permit for any of the purposes mentioned in this article may have the right to appeal to the city commission. 
(Code 1967, § 171/2-26) 
Sec. 62-37. - Records to be used for purpose of law enforcement and licensing only. 
    Any and all records maintained in the identification and fingerprint division shall be of use for the purpose of law enforcement and licensing only and shall not be a matter of public record. 
(Code 1967, § 171/2-27) 
Sec. 62-38. - Right to review and challenge records. 
    Any person having a record in the identification division of the city police department shall have the right to review any and all records maintained on the person, upon making written request to the chief of police, and then being fingerprinted and identifying himself to challenge the accuracy of such records. 
(Code 1967, § 171/2-28) 
Chapter 70 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; animals, ch. 14; civil emergencies, ch. 30; emergency services, ch. 38; health and sanitation, ch. 54; law enforcement, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; traffic and vehicles, ch. 98. 
State Law reference- Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 

Sec. 70-1. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided by section 1-12. 
(Code 1967, § 16-36) 
Sec. 70-2. - Handbills, dodgers or commercial advertising notices-Distributing, throwing generally. 
    It shall be unlawful to distribute to pedestrians upon any street, sidewalk, park or other public place in the city, or to distribute to passengers in any bus, or to throw into or upon any bus or automobile or other vehicle, any handbill, dodger or advertising notice of a commercial character. 
(Code 1967, § 3-2) 
Sec. 70-3. - Same-Depositing, distributing on private property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or deposit any handbills, advertisements, printed matter or rubbish upon any real property located in the city without the consent of the owner thereof. 
(Code 1967, § 3-3) 
Sec. 70-4. - Same-Strewing on the streets or public places. 
    No person shall strew about or cause to be strewn about in any street or public place, any circular, handbill, dodger or advertising notice of a commercial character. 
(Code 1967, § 3-4) 
Sec. 70-5. - Same-Signs restricting. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the sale of merchandise, the taking of orders for any merchandise, the distribution of written materials or the solicitation of charitable contributions to disturb the peace of any occupant of any residential living unit by ringing the doorbell, knocking upon the door or otherwise attempting to attract the attention of the occupant when such residential living unit is properly labeled to forbid such conduct. 
(b)  A residential living unit shall be properly labeled if a sign stating "No Soliciting" is placed on or about the door of the unit at a height of no less than 40 inches and no more than 66 inches from the bottom of the door and is either placed on the door or within 12 inches of either side of the door. The letters on such sign shall be a minimum of one-half inch high. 
(c)  As an alternative, a residential living unit shall be deemed to be properly labeled if a sign stating "No Soliciting" is placed adjacent to the driveway, sidewalk or walkway leading to such residential living unit. A sign shall be deemed to be "adjacent" to the driveway, sidewalk or walkway if the nearest edge of the sign is no more than 12 inches from the driveway, sidewalk or walkway. Such sign shall be mounted at a height of no less than 12 inches and no more than 60 inches from the surface of the ground and the letters on such sign shall be a minimum of one inch high. 
(Code 1967, § 16-25) 
Sec. 70-6. - Failure to appear. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who has been served with a citation, accusation, summons, subpoena or other court document requiring that person's appearance in the municipal court for the city to fail to appear in municipal court on the date and at the time as set forth in such citation, accusation, summons, subpoena or other court document or fail to provide a satisfactory explanation for their absence. 
(Code 1967, § 1-8; Ord. No. O-15-13, §§ I, II,, 10-5-15) 
Sec. 70-7. - Escape from prison, jail or work gang. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, who has been convicted in the municipal court for the violation of any provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the city and sentenced to serve a term in the city prison or county jail, or to work on the streets of the city in the city work gang, to escape from such prison, jail or work gang. 
(Code 1967, § 18-1) 
Sec. 70-8. - Fortunetelling and related practices. 
    From and after the adoption of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or participate in the practice of fortunetelling, phrenology, clairvoyance, palmistry, or other kindred practices, businesses, or professions where a charge is made or a donation accepted for such services. 
(Code 1967, § 16-40; Ord. No. O-93-06, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 70-9. - Deposit of wastes on public or private property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit the deposit of, in any unsanitary manner, human or animal excrement, garbage or objectionable wastes on any public or private property within the city. 
(Ord. No. O-90-16, 12-17-90) 
Sec. 70-10. - Fill dirt or fill material-Prerequisite to placing on property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any fill dirt or fill material of any type to be placed upon any property within the corporate limits of the city unless same is rough graded, to five-tenths of a foot, within a period of 30 days following the placing of such fill dirt or fill material upon the property. 
(Code 1967, § 16-6.1) 
Sec. 70-11. - Same-To be free of glass, metal, construction debris and organic material. 
    Any and all fill dirt or fill material so deposited upon any property within the corporate limits of the city shall be free of glass, metal, construction debris and organic materials. 
(Code 1967, § 16-6.2) 
Sec. 70-12. - Same-Responsibility of owner. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the owner of such property upon which such fill dirt or fill material is placed to cause same to be rough graded to five-tenths of a foot within the 30-day period stated in section 70-10. 
(Code 1967, § 16-6.3) 
Sec. 70-13. - Firearms, air rifles and slingshots-Discharging in city. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any gun, pistol, cannon, air rifle or shoot a slingshot within the city; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any police officer or other law enforcement officer who shall find it necessary to fire such weapon while in the discharge of his duties as such officer. 
(b)  In the event of the conviction under this section of any person who is a minor, the chief of police shall seize and retain the firearm or other instrument until any fine and costs imposed by the municipal court judge are paid. 
(Code 1967, § 16-7) 
Sec. 70-14. - Iceboxes, refrigerators and other containers-Abandoning, discarding and leaving unattended without removing door or lock. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave in any place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door, or which has a lock which may not be released for opening from the inside thereof, without first removing such lock or door from such icebox, refrigerator or container. 
(Code 1967, § 16-14) 
State Law reference- Abandonment of containers which lock or fasten automatically, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-100. 
Sec. 70-15. - Ice cream or other edible products-Sale near schools. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, within 250 yards of any public school building located in the city, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., any ice cream, milk, fruit or other edible products from a pushcart, truck or other conveyance, or by any means other than from a regularly established building or store duly licensed to operate such a business. 
(Code 1967, § 16-15) 
Sec. 70-16. - Knives and other dangerous implements. 
    It shall be unlawful to have, possess or carry upon the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the city any of the following implements unless such implements are securely wrapped so as to be not readily available for harmful use: 
(1)  Any knife which has a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two inches. 
(2)  Any knife which has an obstruction or other device of any kind which holds the blade partly open, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two inches. 
(3)  Any knife of any kind, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than three inches, including all knives such as butcher knives or other knives which do not close. 
(4)  Any razor. 
(5)  Any icepick or similar device having a sharp point, provided that this subsection shall not apply to any person delivering ice. 
(Code 1967, § 16-17) 
Sec. 70-17. - Pistols, revolvers and derringers; sale of certain types. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, possess for sale, exhibit for sale, display or advertise for the purpose of sale, any .22 caliber pistol, revolver or derringer with a barrel three inches or less in length, which sells at a retail price of less than $39.00. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, to possess for sale, exhibit for sale, display or advertise for the purpose of sale, any pistol, revolver or derringer described in subsection (a) of this section, designed and manufactured to fire blank cartridges and ammunition containing explosive charges only, if such pistol, revolver or derringer may be adapted to fire cartridges and ammunition containing projectiles; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to any pistol, revolver or derringer to be used in any organized high school, college, professional or other recognized athletic events. 
(Code 1967, § 16-25.1) 
Sec. 70-18. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to violate any of the following subsections of this section: 
(1)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in danger of safety of his life, limb or health; 
(2)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damages; 
(3)  Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health, or property of another; 
(4)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose or with the intent to engage in gaming; 
(5)  Any person who shall frequent any public place with intent to obtain money from other persons by illegal and fraudulent schemes, tricks, artifices or devices; 
(6)  Any person who assembles for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick, to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in the city, or who shall aid or abet therein; 
(7)  Any person who shall use fighting words directed towards any person who becomes outraged and thus creates a turmoil; 
(8)  Any person who shall by acts of violence interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; or 
(9)  Any person who shall congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered by the city police or other lawful authority. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate any subsection of this section may be charged with the offense of disorderly conduct and, on conviction thereof, may be found guilty of disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1967, § 16-38) 
Sec. 70-19. - Loitering or prowling. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to commit the offense of loitering or prowling. 
(b)  A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when one is in a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
State Law reference- Loitering or prowling, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. 
(c)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure, or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(d)  A person committing the offense of loitering or prowling shall be guilty of a violation of this section and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1967, § 16-43) 
Sec. 70-20. - Vehicle repair and towing operations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a business engaged in the major repair of automobiles, trucks, buses, trailers, boats, engines, motors, recreational vehicles, farm tractors and machines, and all other motorized and towed vehicles and parts thereof to park, store, or repair such vehicles and parts anywhere within the corporate limits of the city except in an enclosed building whose doors shall be kept tightly shut during painting and storage of vehicles and parts, or in an area which is screened by an opaque fence, wall or landscaped buffer at least six feet in height. Such fence, wall or buffer shall be maintained in good condition at all times. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a business engaged in the towing and storage of automobiles, trucks, buses, trailers, boats, engines, motors, recreational vehicles, farm tractors and machines, and all other motorized and towed vehicles and parts thereof to park or store such vehicles and parts anywhere within the corporate limits of the city except in an enclosed building whose doors shall be kept tightly shut during storage of vehicles and parts, or in an area which is screened by an opaque fence, wall or landscaped buffer at least eight feet in height. Such fence, wall or buffer shall be maintained in good condition at all times. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a business engaged in the minor repair of automobiles, trucks, buses, trailers, boats, motors, recreational vehicles, farm tractors and machines, and all other motorized and towed vehicles and parts thereof to repair such vehicles and parts in an area adjacent to or within 150 feet of a residential zoning district unless such area is screened from the residential zoning district by an opaque fence, wall or landscaped buffer at least six feet in height. Such fence, wall or buffer shall be maintained in good condition at all times. 
(d)  For the purposes of subsection (a) of this section, the term "major repair" shall include such activities as painting or spray painting; repair to body, fender, bumper, clutch, transmission, differential, axle, spring, or similar part; overhaul or repair of engine requiring removal of cylinder head or crankcase pan; repair of radiator requiring removal from vehicle; recapping and retreading of tires; or similar activities. 
(e)  For the purposes of subsection (c) of this section, the term "minor repair" shall include such activities as engine tune-up; servicing of spark plugs, batteries, distributors and similar items; replacement of mufflers, tail pipes, water hose, fan belts, brake fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat belts, seat covers, windshield wipers and blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors and similar items; cleaning and flushing of radiators; repair or replacement of fuel pumps and lines; minor servicing or repair of carburetors; minor repairs to electrical system; minor adjustment of motors not involving removal of head or crankcase or racing motors; or similar activities. 
(Code 1967, § 16-44) 
Sec. 70-21. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
    Section 16-39 relating to outdoor storage and processing and section 16-42 relating to open storage of materials are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city commission. 
Sec. 70-22. - Public drunkenness. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be and appear in an intoxicated condition, by alcoholic beverages or drugs, in any public place or any place accessible to the public, or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, or by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud, or unbecoming language. 
(Code 1967, § 16-16.1) 
Sec. 70-23. - Keeping a disorderly place. 
    Keeping a disorderly place is unlawful and is the intentional maintaining of any place where disturbances and illegal activities occur in a habitual or regular manner in means that disturb or alarm the neighborhood. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining violation of this section are frequency of citizen complaints, prior warning to the person to curtail illegal activities on the premises, frequency of arrests, investigations or calls for police services at the location. No person shall be found guilty of this section unless he is an occupant of the place or maintains the place in question. 
(Code 1967, § 16-4) 
Sec. 70-24. - Loitering for purposes of engaging in drug-related activity. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or near any thoroughfare, place open to the public, or near any public or private place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose to engage in drug-related activity contrary to any of the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-1 et seq. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such purpose is manifested are: 
(1)  Such person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller. For purposes of this chapter, a "known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller" is a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted in any court within this state of any violation involving the use, possession or sale of any controlled substance as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-1 et seq., or such person has been convicted of any violation of any of the provisions of such title and chapter of the Official Code of Georgia or substantially similar laws of any political subdivision of this state or of any other state; or a person who displays physical characteristics of drug intoxication or usage, such as needle tracks, burned or calloused thumb and index fingers, underweight, nervous and excited behavior; 
(2)  Such person is currently subject to a court order prohibiting his or her presence in a high drug activity geographic area; 
(3)  Such person behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion that he or she is about to engage in or is then engaged in an unlawful drug-related activity, including by way of example only, such person acting as a lookout or hailing or stopping cars, or alerting others to the presence of police officers; 
(4)  Such person is physically identified by the officer as a member of a gang, or association which has as its purpose illegal drug activity; 
(5)  Such person transfers small objects or packages in a furtive fashion; 
(6)  Such person takes flight or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself upon the appearance of a police officer; 
(7)  Such person manifestly endeavors to conceal any object which reasonably could be involved in an unlawful drug-related activity; 
(8)  Such person possesses any instrument, article, or thing whose customary or primary purpose is for the sale, administration or use of controlled substances such as, but not limited to, crack pipes, push wires, chore boys, hand scales, hypodermic needles, plastic bags or other containers used to package controlled substances, razor blades, or other cutting tools; 
(9)  The area involved is by public repute known to be an area of unlawful drug use and trafficking; 
(10)  Any vehicle involved is registered to a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller, or a person for whom there is an outstanding warrant for a crime involving drug-related activity. 
(c)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. O-95-03, 5-1-95) 
Sec. 70-25. - Pinball machines, pool tables, miniature game tables, video games and similar amusements. 
(a)  The place of operation of such machines, pool tables, miniature game tables, video games and similar amusements shall be (1) an eating establishment regularly serving prepared food where chairs, tables and counters are provided to seat 50 or more persons; or (2) a coin laundromat with ten or more washing machines, and where such establishments are located in zoning districts which permit such establishments and conforming uses. 
(b)  A permit must be obtained by all persons wishing to establish a location where such machines, pool tables, miniature game tables, video games and similar amusements are located. The application for the permit shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner-applicant; 
(2)  The address of the establishment; 
(3)  The number of such machines, pool tables, miniature game tables, video games and/or similar amusements; 
(4)  If the owner-applicant is a partnership, the names and residence addresses of all the partners; 
(5)  If the owner-applicant is a corporation, the names of the corporate officers; 
(6)  The name of the manager; 
(7)  The names of all shareholders holding more than ten percent of any class of corporate stock, or other entity having a financial interest in each entity which is to own or operate the licensed establishment. 
(c)  No license shall be granted to any person who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the last ten years prior to the filing of the application for such license. 
(d)  No license shall be granted to any person who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony within the last ten years prior to the filing of the application for such license. 
(e)  No license shall be granted to any person who has had any license previously issued by any jurisdiction revoked within the last two years prior to filing of the application for such license. 
(f)  All licenses granted shall be for a full calendar year period. License fees shall not be prorated and are nonrefundable. 
(g)  All licenses granted under this section shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
(h)  Licensees who desire to renew their licenses shall file application with all the applicable fees with the city clerk's office on the form provided before November 30 of each year. 
(i)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this section to be served upon the licensee or owner may be served. This person must be a resident of the county. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with written consent of such agent with the city in the form as prescribed. 
(j)  The license fee for the operation of pinball machines, pool tables, miniature game tables, video games and similar amusements shall be $10.00 per machine, table or game per year. 
(k)  A license may be suspended or revoked by the city commission: 
(1)  When the licensee furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license or omits information required in the application for a license or for failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  Where alcoholic beverages have been sold or distributed during a period of suspension; 
(3)  For good cause after hearing upon five days' written notice to the holder of such license of the time, place and purpose of the hearing and general statement of the charges to be considered. "Good cause" for the suspension or revocation of any such license shall consist of the violation of any laws or ordinances regulating such business; or violations of any alcoholic beverage regulations; or for the violation of any city ordinance, rule, regulation other than traffic ordinances; or for irregularities, omissions, or untruths in the application for a license; 
(4)  In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. In making such a determination, the city commission shall assess the extent to which the granting of the license or the continued holding of the license would contribute to the following problems: littering in the area of the establishment, loitering in the area of the establishment, gambling in or around the area of the establishment, the public consumption of alcoholic beverages in the area of the establishment, the exposure of minors to the sale of alcoholic beverages without adult supervision. 
(l)  Sworn officers of the department of safety, the building inspector or codes enforcement officer or a designated representative of the above shall have authority to inspect establishments for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(m)  The place of operation of pinball machines, pool tables, miniature game tables, video games and similar amusements shall not be located where an entrance to the establishment is located: 
(1)  Within 100 yards of the property line of a private residence, unless such residence is in a "C-2" zoning district; 
(2)  Within 100 yards of the property line of any school ground or college campus; 
(3)  Within 100 yards of the entrance to any MARTA rapid transit station; or 
(4)  Within 100 yards of the entrance to an existing establishment that is licensed for the purpose of providing pinball machines, pool tables, miniature game tables, video games and similar amusements. 
(n)  For purposes of this section, distances shall be measured by the most direct legal route of travel on the ground. 
(Ord. No. O-95-09, 7-10-95) 
Sec. 70-26. - Certain acts prohibited in transit. 
(a)  A person who commits or attempts to commit any of the following acts on a public transit bus, a rapid rail car, or a rapid rail station or intermodal bus station shall be guilty of a misdemeanor: 
(1)  Spits, defecates or urinates. 
(2)  Discards litter, except into receptacles designated for that purpose. 
(3)  Smokes tobacco in any form. 
(4)  Consumes food or beverage or possesses any open food or beverage container, provided that this paragraph shall not apply to an operator of a public transit bus at an authorized layover point or to a person providing food or beverage to any child under the age of five. 
(5)  Plays any radio, cassette, cartridge, or tape player; or similar device unless such device is connected to an earphone that limits the sound to the hearing of the individual user. 
(6)  Carries or possesses any explosives, acids, other dangerous articles, or live animals, except for the following: 
a.  A guide dog or service dog, as described in O.C.G.A. § 30-4-1, provided that such guide dog or service dog is accompanied by a physically disabled person, blind person, person with visual disabilities, deaf person or a person who is responsible for training a guide or service dog. 
b.  Small pets confined to rigid pet carriers with locks or latches. 
(7)  Obstructs, hinders, interferes with, or otherwise disrupts or disturbs the operation, operator or passengers of a public transit bus or rapid rail car. 
(8)  Boards any public transit bus through the rear exit door, unless so directed by an employee or agent of the carrier. 
(9)  Remains on board any public transit bus or rapid rail car after such vehicle has completed its scheduled route and passengers have been advised to exit the vehicle or remains aboard any public transit bus or rapid rail car after having been warned and after such vehicle has entered a garage or other restricted area not open to the public. 
(10)  Enters, exits or passes through any emergency door of any rapid rail car or public transit bus in the absence of a bona fide emergency. 
(11)  Enters the operator's cab or driver's seat of any rapid rail car or public transit bus in the absence of a bona fide emergency. 
(b)  Employees of a public transportation authority or carrier while at work performing the duties of their employment shall be exempted from the restrictions of paragraphs (8), (9), (10) and (11) of subsection (a). 
(c)  A person convicted of a first offense of violating subsection (a) of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 and not more than $100.00. Upon a second or subsequent conviction, a person shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $250.00 or by imprisonment for not more than ten days, or both. 
(d)  This section shall be cumulative to and shall not prohibit the enactment of any other general and local laws, rules and regulations of state or local authorities or agencies, and local ordinances prohibiting such activities which are more restrictive than this section. 
(Ord. No. O-98-11, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 70-27. - Fare evasion. 
    A person who commits or attempts to commit any of the following acts shall be guilty of a misdemeanor: 
(1)  Sells, makes or possesses any coin, note token, transfer, transaction card or similar article which has been altered from its original condition contrary to its intended use to enter or gain entry into or on any bus, rail vehicle or station. 
(2)  Sells or exchanges any token, transfer, transaction card, ticket, fare medium or similar article used or to be used as payment for entry into or on any bus, rail vehicle, or terminal without the express consent of the public transit agency owning or operating such vehicles or stations. 
(3)  Offers entry or provides entry into or on any bus, rapid rail car, or station to any person without the payment of the proper fare to the public transit agency owning or operating such vehicles or stations. 
(4)  Gains entry into or on any bus, rapid rail car or station without the payment of the proper fare to the public transit agency owning or operating such vehicles or stations. 
(5)  Gains entry into or on any bus, rapid rail car or station through the use of a transcard, transaction card or other similar fare media which is the property of another person. 
(Ord. No. O-98-11, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 70-28. - Parking on public transit. 
(a)  In all parking lots, parking decks and other such facilities owned or operated by any public transit authority or established for the exclusive purpose of providing parking for passengers of rapid rail or public transit busses, it shall be unlawful to: 
(1)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle other than in marked spaces designed for that purpose. 
(2)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle on any yellow curb. 
(3)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle in any location which results in impeding ingress or egress to said facility which results in impeding the free passage of any other vehicle. 
(4)  Leave any vehicle unattended in areas designated as 'kiss-ride' or designated as 'attended vehicles only'. 
(5)  Stop, stand or park any taxicab or other vehicle for hire, whether attended or unattended, in any area not specifically designated for such vehicles. 
(6)  Stop, stand or park any vehicle for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers, except in areas specifically designated for that use, such as 'kiss-ride' or 'passenger drop-off' areas. 
(7)  Stop, stand or park any vehicle for a period in excess of 24 hours unless such parking area in designated 'overnight' or 'long-term' parking. 
(8)  Stop, stand or park any vehicle for any purpose other than to board the rapid rail car or public transit bus serving such parking lot. 
(9)  Create or maintain any fire or flame, including fires and/or flames for cooking or grilling, or fail to extinguish said fire or flame and to remove from such public transit parking facility all debris and residue associated with the creation and maintenance of said fire or flame. 
(b)  Any person violating subsection (a) shall be subject to a fine levied by the city municipal court. Such offense shall be cited by the issuance of a written citation which shall be left on the violator's vehicle and which shall contain at a minimum: 
(1)  The nature of the violation. 
(2)  The amount of the fine which will be levied for such violation. 
(3)  That the cited individual has the right to contest the citation and be given an opportunity to be heard. 
(4)  The location of the court in which the cited individual must appear within five days of the citation to contest same. 
(5)  The location at which fines may be paid. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the enforcement of any other provision of state law which may be applicable, including but not limited to, "Parking Law for Persons with Disabilities" and the uniform rules of the road. 
(Ord. No. O-98-11, 6-15-98) 
Sec. 70-29. - Graffiti prohibited. 
(a)  Graffiti is defined according to O.C.G.A. § 17-15A-2 as "any inscriptions, words, figures, paintings, or other defacements that are written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of real property or improvements thereon without prior authorization of the owner or occupant of the property by means of any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any surface." 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to commit the offense of application of graffiti. 
(c)  In determining the appropriate punishment under Code section 1-12, the municipal court may suspend a portion of or the entire sentence upon such conditions to include but not be limited to the restoring of the property so defaced, damaged or destroyed, or other remedial action. 
(Ord. No. O-08-03, 2-19-08) 
Sec. 70-30. - Aggressive panhandling prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    After dark means any time from 30 minutes after sunset to 30 minutes before sunrise. 
    Aggressive panhandling shall mean: 
(1)  Approaching or speaking to a person, or following a person before, during or after soliciting, in a manner that would cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm to oneself, or damage to or loss of property in one's immediate possession; or 
(2)  Soliciting from a person who is waiting in line for entry to a building or for another purpose; or 
(3)  Soliciting from a person who is eating, drinking, dining or sitting at a table in an outdoor dining area; or 
(4)  Continuing to solicit from a person after the person has given a negative response to an initial solicitation; or 
(5)  Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person without that person's consent in the course of soliciting; or 
(6)  Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person soliciting; or 
(7)  Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person being solicited; or 
(8)  Speaking in an unreasonably loud volume under the circumstances or using profane or abusive language, either during a solicitation or after a refusal; 
    Automated teller machine shall mean a device, linked to a financial institution's account records, which is able to carry out transactions, including, but not limited to: account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries, and mortgage and loan payments. 
    Outdoor dining area means an outdoor dining area of a restaurant or other establishment serving food for immediate consumption. 
    Public place shall mean streets, highways, and roadways (including shoulders and medians), sidewalks, alleys, parking lots, plazas, parks, playgrounds, schools, transportation facilities and other public property, including city-owned property and any other property where public gatherings occur on a regular basis and/or where public meetings are conducted, such as schools, libraries, and places of worship. 
    Soliciting shall mean asking in person for money or objects of value, with the intention that the money or object to be transferred at that time, and at that place. Soliciting shall include using the spoken, written, or printed word, bodily gestures, signs, or other means with the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation of money or other thing of value or soliciting the sale of goods or services. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to violate any of the following subsections of this section: 
(1)  No person shall engage in aggressive panhandling in any public place. 
(2)  No person shall solicit on private property if the owner or other person lawfully in possession of such property has notified the person that they are not allowed to solicit on the property. 
(3)  No person shall solicit within 20 feet of any automated teller machine or an entrance or exit of any bank or financial institution. 
(4)  No person shall solicit an operator or passenger of a motor vehicle while such persons are operating or occupying a motor vehicle; provided, however, that this paragraph shall not apply to persons soliciting other occupants of a vehicle in which the solicitor is lawfully traveling or to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the operator or passengers of such vehicle. 
(5)  No person shall solicit while under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance. 
(6)  No person shall solicit in a group of two or more persons. 
(7)  No person shall solicit within six feet of an entrance to a building. 
(8)  No person shall solicit within 20 feet of an outdoor dining area. 
(9)  No person shall solicit in any public place after dark. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. O-08-09, 8-4-08) 
Chapter 74 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Cemeteries, ch. 26; environment, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; zoning, pt. IV. UDO. 
State Law reference- State parks, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-1 et seq.; authority of municipality to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation grounds and buildings used for sports, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; establishment of recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.; recreation boards, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-5; Georgia state games commission, O.C.G.A. § 50-12-40 et seq.; power to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5). 

Sec. 74-1. - Hours for public parks. 
    Public parks maintained and operated by the city shall be opened at 7:00 a.m. and closed at one-half hour after sunset; provided, however, that the closing time may be extended if, and only if, at the regularly scheduled closing time there is an ongoing activity supervised by the recreation department of the city or having a permit issued by the recreation department, in which event the closing time shall be ten minutes after the ending of such supervised activity or permitted event. 
(Code 1967, § 161/2-1; Ord. No. O-91-07, 5-20-91) 
Sec. 74-2. - Firearms prohibited in city parks; exception. 
    No firearms shall be permitted in public parks owned and operated by the city except those in the possession of duly authorized law enforcement officers. 
(Code 1967, § 161/2-2) 
Sec. 74-3. - Glass containers in parks. 
    No person shall be permitted to bring glass containers, including those used to hold beverages, into public parks owned and operated by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, 8-5-91) 
Sec. 74-4. - Motor vehicles in parks. 
    No person shall operate a motorized vehicle of any kind or nature in or on any park or other area owned or operated by the city for recreation purposes, provided that this section shall not apply to vehicles used for maintenance purposes or to licensed vehicles using marked roadways, marked driveways and parking areas. 
(Ord. No. O-92-04, 3-16-92) 
Sec. 74-5. - Animals in the parks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who harbors, possesses or is in charge of a domestic restrained or unrestrained animal (such as dogs, cats, etc) to bring said animal onto athletic fields or designated playgrounds of the City of Decatur without obtaining permission from the recreation department. 
(b)  All animals in city-owned parks must be properly restrained as defined in section 14-31 and section 14-34. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person who possesses, harbors or is in charge of any domestic restrained or unrestrained animal not to immediately remove excrement deposited by the animal while in a city park. Animal waste must be removed and deposited in suitable sanitary containers. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, graze or walk a horse or other type of hoofed animal within city parks without obtaining permission from the recreation department. 
(Ord. No. O-01-06, 3-5-01; Ord. No. O-05-06, 4-4-05) 
Sec. 74-6. - Public address systems in the parks. 
    No public address systems, loud speakers or amplifying devices shall be used in city parks unless written authorization for use is given by the recreation department. 
(Ord. No. O-05-06, 4-4-05) 
Chapter 82 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; scrap tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249; transportation of biomedical waste, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253.1; solid waste management education program; establishment of Georgia Clean and Beautiful Advisory Committee and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approved commercial refuse container means a manufactured container suitable for emptying by mechanical equipment and approved by the director of sanitation. The following standards are prescribed for commercial containers: 
(1)  All containers shall be steel with properly reinforced, full-seam welds. 
(2)  All lids shall be flanged and reinforced for strength. 
(3)  The pickup side of the container shall be reinforced inside or outside at the point of torque tube contact. 
(4)  Inside reinforcement shall be pressed steel angle. 
(5)  Bottoms shall be reinforced with a 11/2 inch drain plug, installed flush with bottom. 
(6)  All containers shall be primed and finished with enamel or epoxy paint. 
(7)  Body dimensions as to length and height of the container may vary with the size of container; however, all container widths shall be 72 inches. Minimum gauges of steel shall be as follows: 
Walls 12 gauge Ends 12 gauge Bottoms 12 gauge for four cubic feet and below; 10 gauge for all over four cubic feet Lids 16 gauge (or durable molded plastic) Doors 14 gauge  
    Approved recyclables container means a durable plastic container of a capacity not to exceed 18 gallons, with the recycling symbol clearly visible on one side. 
    Approved refuse container means a galvanized metal or durable plastic container of a capacity of not less than 20 gallons and not to exceed 32 gallons, having two handles on the sides or a bail by which it may be lifted, with a tight fitting metal or plastic top with a handle or so constructed as to permit the free discharge of its contents. Containers shall be waterproof. Oil or grease drums, paint cans, and similar salvaged containers shall not be acceptable. 
    Approved litter container means a stone, metal, plastic or wooden container with a plastic or metal insert designed to be used for the collection of litter. Such containers may be placed at strategic locations to encourage pedestrians to use them for discarded packaging, bottles and cans. It shall be a violation of this chapter to use litter cans for the disposal of garbage, trash (other than litter) or yard trimmings. 
    Approved single-use refuse container means a plastic bag, watertight paper bag, or corrugated cardboard box used to contain refuse for disposal and intended to be discarded with its contents. The capacity of the container shall not exceed 30 gallons, shall be of sufficient strength to be loaded into a collection vehicle without spilling its contents, and its total filled weight shall not exceed 50 pounds. 
    Approved single-use yard trimmings container means a watertight paper bag or corrugated cardboard box used to contain yard trimmings for disposal and intended to be discarded with its contents. The capacity of the container shall not exceed 30 gallons, shall be of sufficient strength to be loaded into a collection vehicle without spilling its contents, and its total filled weight shall not exceed 50 pounds. 
    Collector means a person who, under agreements, oral or written, with or without compensation, does the work of collecting or transporting refuse or recyclables, from residential dwellings, businesses, institutions, offices, retail outlets, or similar locations; provided, however, that this definition shall not include an individual collecting or transporting refuse or recyclables from his/her own dwelling unit. 
    Commercial and industrial refuse means waste material from industrial processes, manufacturing canneries, packing plants, or similar industries, and large quantities of condemned foods. Commercial refuse also includes waste material from the construction, remodeling and repair operations on houses, commercial buildings, multiple dwellings and other structures, such as concrete, bricks, plaster, stone, rocks, earth, lumber, roofing materials, gutters, shavings and sawdust. 
    Commercial establishment means any hotel, motel, apartment house, rooming house, business, industrial, public or semipublic establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever other than a single dwelling unit, residential unit or condominium. 
    Compactor container means a manufactured commercial container of any size with a self-contained compacting mechanism or an external compactor which is designed to be used in conjunction with a front loading vehicle other than those used in conjunction with individual home appliances. 
    Compost means rich black soil suitable for use as fertilizer or for conditioning land. 
    Compost facility means any installation operated by, under contract to, or licensed by the county or other jurisdictional authority to which yard trimmings may be transported by public or private transportation to be converted to mulch or compost. 
    Condominium means individual ownership units in a multifamily structure with a front and back entrance to each such unit on the ground level. 
    Disposal facility means any landfill, pulverization plant, transfer station or incinerator operated by, under contract to, or licensed by the county or other jurisdictional authority to which refuse may be transported by public or private transportation. 
    Dwelling unit means a residence for one family. 
    Front building line means the line established by the front of the dwelling between a property's two side property lines. 
    Garbage means food waste, including waste accumulation of animal or vegetable matter used or intended for use as food, or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
    Hazardous waste means any refuse which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the Georgia Board of Natural Resources, Chapter 391-3-11. 
    Home composting means collecting yard trimmings in piles or bins in the backyard and allowing them to become mulch or compost onsite. 
    Incinerator means the incinerator operated by the county. 
    Landfill means a disposal site for disposing of refuse, other than putrescible wastes or hazardous wastes, on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
    Litter means scattered garbage or trash. 
    Managing agent means a third party-organization or person that manages apartment and condominium buildings. Most apartment and condo buildings will hire a managing agent to maintain the building, collect rent or monthly maintenance fees, manage the building staff, etc. 
    Multiple dwelling means (for the purpose of this chapter) a building designed for and containing more than four dwelling units. 
    Municipal landfill means a landfill operated by the county or some other jurisdictional authority for disposal of putrescible solid waste in compliance with Subtitle D of the United States Resource Conversion and Recovery Act of 1976 as amended. 
    Noncombustible trash means materials which are unburnable in the incinerator or at incinerator temperatures of 800 to 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit such as dirt, concrete, bricks, plaster, rocks, stone, metal furniture, large metal straps and wires, auto bodies or parts, logs over six inches in diameter and other similar material, or construction debris. 
    Owner means any person owning, leasing, renting, occupying or managing any premises within the jurisdiction of the city. 
    Person means the state or any agency or institution thereof, any municipality, political subdivision, public or private corporation, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management or recycling activities, individual, partnership, association or other entity, and includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, special district empowered in solid waste or recycling activities, or public or private corporation. 
    Approved single-use plastic bag means a polyethylene or other heavy-duty plastic bag meeting the National Sanitation Foundation standard of at least 1.5 mils and having either a 30-gallon or 15-gallon capacity to be used for the disposal of trash and garbage. The city manager shall designate an approved single-use plastic bag. 
    Private contractor or commercial solid waste or recycling firm means any person, other than a municipality, who collects, removes, salvages, or disposes of refuse or recyclables from one or more public or private premises, other than his/her own, whether or not under written contract, and whether or not for compensation. 
    Putrescible waste means wastes that give off foul odors while being decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of putrescible wastes include, but are not necessarily limited to, animal manure, feces, and garbage. 
    Recyclables means items designated by the city to be collected separately from refuse for diversion from a municipal landfill and conveyed to a recycling firm. Recyclables may include newspapers, cans, glass containers, and similar materials, but the list of recyclable items will vary with market conditions. Other items such as yard trimmings, appliances and motor vehicle tires may sometimes be considered to be recyclables. 
    Recycling means any process by which materials which would otherwise become refuse are collected, separated, or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
    Refuse means garbage or trash. It is interchangeable with solid waste. 
    Residential unit (for the purpose of this chapter) means any freestanding structure that contains from one to four dwelling units. 
    Scavenge means unpermitted removal of refuse or recyclables. 
    Solid waste means refuse that is free from liquid. It does not include recyclables, yard trimmings, appliances or motor vehicle tires. 
    Special fee basis means subject to the availability of personnel and equipment, and when the director of sanitation considers such action to be in the best interests of the city, he/she may authorize the collection by the city of refuse which does not otherwise comply with the standards of this chapter. Where such collection is made at the request of the owner or other responsible individuals, a special charge shall be made based on the actual time required at a rate as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
    Special industrial waste container means any container such as a metal box, bucket, an open bed container or special container used for transporting chemicals, paint, metals, glass, oil products, plastics or any type of material that requires special handling and cannot be incinerated. 
    Stationary compactor means an object of a refuse container system which compacts refuse at the site of generation into a pull-on detachable container. 
    Trash means discarded solid waste that is not considered recyclable by the city including paper, cartons, boxes, clothing, lumber, furniture, crockery, dunnage, and similar materials. 
    Yard trimmings means plant leaves, brush, grass clippings, vines, discarded Christmas trees, and plant branches (up to six inches in diameter). Also, known as landscape materials. 
(Code 1967, § 10-2; Ord. No. O-96-07, 4-15-96; Ord. No. O-97-04, § 1, 1-21-97; Ord. No. O-98-08, § I, 3-16-98; Ord. No. O-07-13, 12-3-07) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-2. - Administration and enforcement of chapter. 
(a)  The director of sanitation shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. He/she may call upon the city chief of police and the county director of public health for assistance in its enforcement. All regulatory actions of the director of sanitation shall be subject to review and approval by the public works director, city manager and city commission. 
(b)  The director of sanitation and the sanitation services supervisor shall be sanitation inspectors who shall have authority, and whose duty shall be, to make routine inspections of refuse and recyclables containers and collection areas and determine the serviceability and condition of said containers and collection areas. Upon determining that a container or area is becoming or has become unserviceable or unsanitary or likely to cause an unsanitary condition, the inspector shall issue a notice to the owner or occupant of the premises upon which said container or condition exists to inform him/her of the existing condition. It shall be the duty of the inspector to issue a summons directed to the owner or occupant to whom such notice has been issued and who has failed to take corrective action within a reasonable time as determined by the director of sanitation to appear in the municipal court to answer the charge of violation of the appropriate section of this chapter. 
(c)  Inspectors shall have the authority to enforce all the provisions of this chapter and may issue a summons to any violator of any provision to appear in the municipal court to answer to the charge of violation of the appropriate section of this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 10-3; Ord. No. O-96-07, 4-15-96) 
Sec. 82-3. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any violation of this chapter is punishable, upon conviction, according to the provisions of section 1-12. 
(Code 1967, § 10-12) 
Secs. 82-4-82-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 82-31. - Establishment of collection routes and areas. 
    The director of sanitation shall divide the city area into collection areas and routes, with areas and routes plainly outlined on a map of the city and listed numerically. The director shall prepare a list of the names of all the streets, roads, alleys, drives, highways and other public thoroughfares within each such route and shall keep such map and lists in his office for public inspection and shall furnish a copy of the map showing any particular route along with a list of the names of the public thoroughfares therein to any person who requests same upon the payment of the actual cost for the reproduction of such map and list by either a city or commercial facility, whichever in his discretion is available. 
(Code 1967, § 10-4; Ord. No. O-96-07, 4-15-96) 
Sec. 82-32. - Preparation and storage of residential refuse and recyclables for collection; placement of certain refuse and recyclables for collection prohibited. 
    It shall be the duty of the occupant or owner of any premises to keep all refuse and recyclables pending collection and disposal as follows: 
(1)  Garbage. All garbage shall be free from liquid and placed in an approved single-use plastic bag with the top secured and placed in an approved refuse container. The total filled weight of an approved single-use plastic bag shall not exceed 50 pounds. Containers adequate to hold the garbage normally accumulating between scheduled removals shall be provided on each premises. 
(2)  Trash. Trash shall be free from liquid and placed in an approved single-use plastic bag in an approved refuse container. Trash may be placed in the same bag as garbage as long as the total filled weight of an approved single-use plastic bag does not exceed 50 pounds. Packing materials such as styrofoam "peanuts" shall be placed in an approved single-use plastic bag to prevent scattering. Trash that does not completely fit in an approved single-use plastic bag and large items such as furniture shall be set on the curb separately from yard trimmings and metal appliances. 
(3)  Recyclables. Recyclables shall be placed in an approved recyclables container. If one container is too small to hold all recyclables, additional approved containers may be placed beside the first container at the curb of each premises. 
(4)  Yard trimmings. Yard trimmings shall not be mixed with other solid waste. To the maximum extent feasible, yard trimmings shall be chipped, composted, used as mulch or otherwise beneficially reused or recycled. Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored for collection in such a manner as to facilitate collection, composting or other handling. Yard trimmings shall be containerized in approved refuse containers, or approved single-use yard trimmings containers, except that tree branches and heavy brush which will not fit into containers shall be cut in lengths not exceeding four feet and stacked in a compact pile on the curb (or property line in the case of streets where curbing has not been installed) in front of the premises, but such piles shall not extend into the street or obstruct the sidewalk. Sticks, hedge clippings and small brush shall be gathered into bundles and tied securely so that each bundle does not exceed four feet in length nor weigh more than 50 pounds. Yard trimmings or containers shall be placed or piled on the curb in such location or manner so as not to impede passengers from boarding or departing from vehicles. The city shall not collect logs and limbs over four feet in length, larger than six inches in diameter or weighing more than 50 pounds. 
(5)  Noncombustible trash. Noncombustible trash, except as provided under subsection (9) below of this section and liquids shall not be collected by the city and shall be properly disposed of by the owner. 
(6)  Cleanliness of containers. All refuse and recycling containers, except single-use containers, shall be kept clean and free of accumulated waste and shall be treated with an effective insecticide, if necessary, to prevent nuisance. 
(7)  Accumulations of refuse or recyclables; responsibility of the owner. Each owner shall prevent, or otherwise be held responsible for, unsightly accumulations of refuse or recyclables upon the property occupied by him/her or public thoroughfares adjoining his/her property. 
(8)  Dangerous or corrosive materials. It shall be a violation of this chapter to place or cause to be placed in any refuse or recyclables container for collection any acid, explosive material, inflammable liquids or dangerous or corrosive material of any kind. 
(9)  Household appliances. Inoperable or worn out privately used household appliances (refrigerators, stoves, washing machines, dryers) shall be collected at the curb for recycling. Refrigerators and freezers must have their doors removed or secured shut prior to being left at the curb. 
(10)  Commercial waste. Commercial waste generated from the conduct of business or commercial enterprise carried on from residential units shall not be collected except on a special fee basis. 
(11)  Pet litter; disposable diapers; other similar waste. Pet litter, disposable diapers and similar waste must be contained in a securely tied plastic bag and placed in a refuse container at the curb. 
(Code 1967, § 10-5; Ord. No. O-96-07, 4-15-96; Ord. No. O-97-04, § 2, 1-21-97; Ord. No. O-98-08, § II, III, 3-16-98) 
Sec. 82-33. - Preparation and storage of commercial and multiple dwelling refuse and recyclables for collection. 
(a)  Arrangements for storage of refuse and recyclables, and location of containers; approval required. It shall be the responsibility of each commercial establishment, condominium, or multiple dwelling to provide adequate containers for storage of its own waste. Before a building permit shall be issued for construction of a commercial establishment, condominium, or multiple dwelling, arrangements for the storage of refuse and recyclables, and location of containers shall be approved by the director of sanitation. 
(b)  Location. Commercial refuse containers at existing commercial establishments and multiple dwellings serviced by city collection vehicles shall be placed at locations approved by the director of sanitation for collection by the sanitation department. The city shall not collect refuse from commercial establishments or multiple dwellings unless it is placed in commercial containers, properly located, except where space or other limitations dictate other arrangements which shall be specifically approved by the director of sanitation. Similarly, if recyclables are collected by city collection vehicles, recyclables containers and their location for collection must be approved by the director of sanitation. 
(c)  Joint responsibility of owners sharing use of a container. Where the occupants of two or more commercial establishments share the use of a commercial refuse container or recyclables container, it shall be the joint responsibility of the users to maintain the area surrounding such container clean and free of accumulations of refuse or recyclables. 
(d)  Maintenance of surrounding area. The occupant of a commercial establishment and the management of multiple dwellings serviced by a commercial refuse container or a recyclables container shall be responsible for maintaining the area surrounding the container clean and free of refuse and recyclables. 
(e)  Preparation of refuse. All refuse shall be free of liquid and placed in watertight paper or plastic bags with the tops secured prior to being placed in a commercial refuse container. 
(f)  Cardboard boxes. Empty cardboard boxes shall be flattened before being placed in a commercial refuse or a recyclables container. 
(g)  Prohibited items. A commercial refuse container containing the following items shall not be emptied until such items are removed: 
(1)  Large household or industrial appliances. 
(2)  Furniture and wooden crates. 
(3)  Tires and heavy motor vehicle parts such as engines and transmissions. 
(4)  Liquids, including paint, cooking oil and motor vehicle fluids and lubricants. 
(5)  Logs or limbs over four feet in length or six inches in diameter. 
(6)  Bed springs and mattresses. 
(7)  Rocks, dirt, bricks, concrete, stone, plaster, sheetrock, roofing or other similar materials. 
(8)  Uncontainerized refuse. 
(9)  Items such as lumber that protrude from the container or refuse placed on top or in front of the container. 
(10)  Yard trimmings. 
(h)  Household appliances. Normal household appliances shall be collected at multiple dwellings served by commercial refuse containers, when placed adjacent to (but not in front of) the container and reported to the sanitation department. Refrigerator and freezer doors shall be removed or secured shut prior to the appliance being left by the container. 
(i)  Maintenance of containers. The users of commercial refuse containers and recyclables containers shall be responsible for the appearance, maintenance and serviceability of containers procured by them or placed for their use. 
(j)  Continuation of service. The city shall continue to empty commercial refuse containers presently in use, subject to their serviceability, as determined by the director of sanitation. All commercial containers put into service after enactment of the ordinance from which this section derives shall meet the requirements set forth under section 82-1 and shall have a capacity of not less than four cubic yards or more than eight cubic yards when emptied by front loading refuse vehicles and not more than three cubic yards when emptied by rear loading refuse vehicles. 
(Code 1967, § 10-6; Ord. No. O-96-07, 4-15-96; Ord. No. O-97-04, § 3, 1-21-97; Ord. No. O-07-13, § 2, 12-3-07) 
Sec. 82-34. - Collection of refuse and recyclables generally; conditions for collection by the city. 
(a)  Collection by licensed persons or firms under city contract. Refuse or recyclables may be collected for disposal by the city by persons or commercial solid waste or recycling firms under contract to or authorized by the city. 
(b)  Conditions for refuse and recyclables collection. The city shall collect refuse and recyclables under the following conditions: 
(1)  Refuse and recyclables shall be collected once each week from residential units; except for exceptionally large piles of limbs which may require an excessive period of time to load. 
(2)  Refuse and recyclables shall be collected from commercial establishments and multiple dwellings as often as the director of sanitation determines is necessary. Recyclables shall be collected at least once per week. 
(3)  Dead dogs and house pets shall be collected only from animal hospitals, curbsides and public rights-of-way. Dead house pets shall be in a plastic bag placed at the curb and shall be collected on an on-call basis to the sanitation department during normal working hours. Large dead animals shall be disposed of by the individual concerned, the animal owner or property owner, since the city has no responsibility to supply service for the removal and disposal of large dead animals. 
(4)  Collection service shall be discontinued where refuse and recyclables containers are inadequate or have been condemned as unfit by a sanitation inspector and notice of same has been given to the owner or occupant of the premises who has refused to correct the situation. If the owner or occupant continues to use improperly a city-issued recyclables container after a notice has been given by a sanitation inspector, the container shall be collected by the sanitation department. Similarly, if a litter container is repeatedly used for refuse other than litter, it shall be removed from that location. 
(5)  Collection on special fee basis. The city shall not be responsible for collecting or hauling discarded building material, dirt, rock or discarded furniture and appliances from private property, nor shall it be responsible for collecting or hauling trees, bushes or other vegetation from or generated by commercial tree trimmers, landscapers or building contractors. 
(c)  Conditions for removal of residential units on a scheduled basis. City collectors will remove household garbage from residential units on a scheduled basis under the following conditions: 
(1)  Garbage containers shall be located behind the front building line and no more than 150 feet from the curb or street edge in front of the building, except that, in the case of existing units which are sited at a greater distance, garbage containers shall be placed no farther from the curb or street edge than the rear building line. 
(2)  Garbage containers must be readily accessible. Containers shall not be emptied which are: 
a.  Inside a garage or carport; or 
b.  Inside a fenced area which has a gate that is locked or otherwise secured; or 
c.  In a yard where a dog is loose or secured in such a manner as to represent a threat to the collector; or 
d.  Not readily accessible using a refuse collection vehicle because of obstructions such as overgrown brush, trash or parked motor vehicles, or unsafe driveways. 
(d)  Location of prepared residential trash. City collectors will remove properly prepared residential trash from the curbside only. 
(e)  Timing for placement of prepared refuse. The owner or occupant shall place the approved refuse and recyclables containers at the curb at or before 7:30 a.m. or prior to the arrival of the collectors. Placement of refuse and recyclables shall not be made before 5:00 p.m. on the day prior to collection day. Yard trimmings, furniture and appliances shall be placed at the curb as close as practical to the next collection day. 
(f)  Removal of emptied containers. The owner or occupant shall remove all refuse and recyclables containers from the curb to the storage location not later than 12:00 midnight on the day the contents are collected. 
(g)  Abandoned motor vehicles or parts and refuse generated by commercial tree trimmers and building contractors. The city shall not collect abandoned motor vehicles, or discarded parts therefrom, or trees, bushes or other vegetation from or generated by commercial tree trimmers, or trash resulting from work done by building contractors. Such items shall be disposed of by other means by the respective owner or contractor concerned. 
(h)  Paint cans. Paint cans shall be collected if empty or if the paint therein is dry or solidified with sand or pet litter and the cans are placed at the curb with lids off. 
(Code 1967, § 10-7; Ord. No. O-96-07, 4-15-96; Ord. No. O-07-13, § 3, 12-3-07) 
Sec. 82-35. - Establishment of multiple dwelling recycling program. 
    All multiple dwelling properties with more than four units not serviced under the residential unit collection process must provide on-site recycling services. Multiple dwelling properties may choose their own private contractors or commercial solid waste haulers or recycling firms and negotiate prices for these services. 
(Ord. No. O-07-13, § 5, 12-3-07) 
Sec. 82-36. - Program requirements. 
(a)  Service responsibility. All multiple dwelling properties in the City of Decatur with more than four dwelling units not serviced under the residential unit collection process shall provide an on-site recycling program and shall recycle a minimum of four designated materials. Multiple dwelling properties may sell or exchange at fair market value their own recyclable materials. The multiple dwelling property owner shall not be responsible for tenants' actual use of the recycling system, so long as the system itself has been properly established and maintained. 
(b)  Service agreements. All multiple dwelling properties may enter into a written service agreement with a collector or private contractor or commercial solid waste or recycling firm. The service agreement must provide, at a minimum, once per week on-site collection of recyclable materials. The on-site recycling program shall be initiated by a multiple dwelling property owner by the effective date. 
(c)  Effective date. 
(1)  For existing multiple dwelling properties, the effective date of this article is January 1, 2009, or the end date of the property's refuse-collection service contract in effect on the date of adoption, whichever is later; 
(2)  For new multiple dwelling properties or those that are under construction, this article shall be effective six months after the issuance of the property's first certificate of occupancy (CO). 
(d)  Private collectors. Collectors or private contractors or commercial solid waste or recycling firms who collect solid waste, and/or recyclable materials from multiple dwelling properties in the City of Decatur must comply with all applicable federal, state, county and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(e)  Termination of service. Such recycling programs shall be maintained regardless of any change of building ownership or private collection service. 
(f)  Schedules and locations. Recycling collection schedules and pickup locations shall be mutually agreed upon by the multiple dwelling property owner and the collector or private contractor or commercial solid waste or recycling firm. The city shall not be responsible for unauthorized collections, liabilities, or any other problems that may arise between the service provider and the multiple dwelling property. 
(g)  Recyclable materials to be collected from multiple dwelling properties. The multi-dwelling property shall recycle a minimum of four materials listed below. Materials should be prepared and/or separated in a manner mutually acceptable to the collector or private contractor or commercial solid waste or recycling firm and the multiple dwelling property owner. 
    This requirement shall not limit the recycling of additional materials as desired by the multiple dwelling property, nor does it prohibit a multiple dwelling property from self-hauling material to a material recovery facility, processor, or material broker, subject to other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
Steel cans (vegetable, soup, beans, cat food, etc.) 
Aluminum cans 
Glass bottles - any color 
Newspapers 
Magazines 
Cardboard 
Junk mail and catalogs 
White milk jugs 
Clear and green plastic soda and water bottles 
Chipboard (cereal boxes, six pack containers, shoe boxes, etc.) 
All PET or No. 1 plastic containers 
All HDPE or No. 1 plastic containers, including black planting trays and black plastic flower pots, bleach bottles, yellow plastic milk cartons, etc. 
    Substitutions for items on the list will be considered by City of Decatur City Manager or his or her designee on a case-by-case basis subject to the applicable procedural requirements and collection of any material under this article. 
(h)  Containers. Containers provided by the collector or private contractor or commercial solid waste or recycling firm for recyclables, including compactors, shall be clearly labeled in English and in other languages if appropriate, including an indication of the material to be placed in the container and the word "recycling" or "recyclable" or the "chasing arrows" recycling symbol. 
    The types of containers used for collection of recyclables shall be established between the multiple dwelling property owner or owner's representative and the collector or private contractor or commercial solid waste or recycling firm. 
    The collector or private contractor or commercial solid waste or recycling firm or multiple dwelling property owner will provide any recycling containers needed to establish the recycling program. 
    The recycling containers at a multiple dwelling property shall be placed in a location or locations at least as convenient to tenants as the refuse containers, including trash chutes, insofar as is practical. 
    Indoor common-area collection/storage areas shall be established in accordance with appropriate City of Decatur fire and/or life safety codes. 
    Exterior recyclables storage areas shall be established in accordance with City of Decatur requirements for approved commercial refuse containers. 
    The multiple dwelling property owner shall maintain all recycling areas, including the containers, in a clean, sanitary and litter-free manner. 
(i)  Minimum capacity of recycling containers. Containers used to collect the recyclable material should have adequate capacity and durability to function efficiently and meet the spatial constraints of the multiple dwelling. 
(j)  Promotion and education. A multiple dwelling property owner and/or the managing agent of the property, if applicable, is responsible for notifying and educating residents of the property on recycling issues and practices through an informal and on-going education campaign. Every new resident of a multiple dwelling property shall be provided, within 30 days of occupancy, general recycling information and current program recycling guidelines. All existing residents of multiple dwelling properties shall be provided at least annually with general recycling information and current program recycling guidelines by the property owner and/or the managing agent of the property. 
(k)  Reporting. All multiple dwelling properties shall maintain records and reports as directed herein and promptly respond to periodic requests for such records and reports. 
(1)  Delivery of reports. For reporting purposes, the delivery address for the reports or correspondence pertaining to this ordinance is City of Decatur, Public Works Department, P.O. Box 220, Decatur, Georgia 30031. The City of Decatur fax number for reporting purposes is 404-378-4153. Reports may be submitted in hard copy or readable fax form. Reports faxed to any other number are not considered to have been submitted. 
(2)  Report due date. A multiple dwelling property required to provide recycling services under this article must file a quarterly volume report on the amount of recyclable materials collected on or before January 15, April 15, July 15, and October 15 of each calendar year for the prior three-month period (for example, October/November/December report due on or before January 15). When the specified quarterly report dates fall on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the report is due on the next business day. This data should include scale tickets or receipts from the processor if the business self-hauls, or invoices from collectors or private contractors or commercial solid waste or recycling firms, showing the amount and type of each of the recyclable materials collected from the property, including additional optional recyclables, for the preceding reporting quarter. 
Failure to submit required information within ten days following the due date shall constitute a violation of this article. 
All reports are public record to the extent required by the Georgia Open Records Act. All such reports, data and information once received by the City of Decatur or its designee shall become the property of the City of Decatur to be used, as it shall determine without obligation to any person, firm or corporation. 
(l)  Compliance and enforcement. City inspection. In determining whether a violation of this article has occurred, City of Decatur staff shall have the right to visit the premises as provided in Ch. 82, Section 2 of the City Code and to inspect the presence and capacity of recycling containers, the presence and quantities of recyclables in recycling containers, the presence of signs, flyers, stickers and other information which promotes recycling, and to question employees, tenants and owners, and collectors or private contractors or commercial solid waste or recycling firms, regarding the applicable recycling program. 
    Any processing and storage of recyclables shall be undertaken in a location suitable and adequate for such activity. Processing and storage facilities shall comply with all applicable zoning ordinances and any other applicable local and state statutes, ordinances and regulations. 
(m)  Assistance. City of Decatur Public Works staff shall provide assistance to multiple dwelling property owners in setting up a recycling program and achieving compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. O-07-13, § 5, 12-3-07) 
Sec. 82-37. - Assessment and collection of special charges for collection by the city of refuse on a special fee basis. 
    When, at the request of the owner or other responsible individuals, the director of sanitation authorizes the collection by the city of refuse which does not otherwise comply with the standards of this chapter, the special charge made therefor shall be assessed, based upon the actual time required at the rate as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, and the amount of such assessment shall be a lien on the real estate from which such refuse is collected, such lien dating from the time of collection. The city commissioners shall have full power and authority to enforce collection of the amount of such assessment so made for such refuse collection, by execution to be issued by the clerk of the city against the real estate and the owner thereof. Such executions shall be levied by the marshal of the city and, after advertising and other proceedings, as in the case of sale of realty for city taxes, such property so levied upon, or so much thereof as may be necessary to bring the amount of such assessment and costs, may be sold by the marshal of the city at public outcry to the highest bidder. Such sale shall vest absolute title to such property in the purchaser, provided that the defendant in execution shall have the right to file an affidavit denying that the whole or any part of the amount of such execution is due and stating what he/she admits to be due, if any, which amount so admitted to be due shall be paid before the affidavit shall be received. The affidavit shall be filed with the marshal of city and, when received, shall be returned by him/her to the county superior court, and there shall be tried and the issue determined as in cases of illegality, subject to all the penalties provided by law in cases of illegality of delay. The lien for the assessment on real property shall have rank and priority of payment next in point of dignity to lien for taxes and liens for assessment of street and sidewalk improvement, if any. 
(Code 1967, § 10-7.1; Ord. No. O-96-07, 4-15-96; Ord. No. O-07-13, § 4, 12-3-07) 
Editor's note- Section 4 of Ord. No. O-07-13, adopted Dec. 3, 2007, renumbered §§ 82-35-82-39 as §§ 82-37-82-41. 
Sec. 82-38. - Regulation of private transportation of refuse and recyclables. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person including city collectors and solid waste and recycling contractors to haul, convey, or cause to be conveyed any refuse or recyclables, including discarded building material or discarded furniture, upon or along the public streets and roadways except when the material transported is adequately secured in such a manner as to prevent it from falling, leaking, or being blown from transporting vehicles. The operator or owner of the offending vehicle shall be personally responsible for any violation of this section. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, not approved by the city, to collect and haul any refuse or recyclables other than that arising from his own accumulation. All areas are serviced by the city. 
(Code 1967, § 10-8; Ord. No. O-96-07, 4-15-96; Ord. No. O-07-13, § 4, 12-3-07) 
Editor's note- See editors note following § 82-37. 
Sec. 82-39. - Regulation of commercial solid waste and recycling firms. 
(a)  Provision of service by solid waste and recycling firms. The director of sanitation shall maintain a list of solid waste and recycling firms authorized to provide or service commercial refuse containers, stationary compactors, stationary compactor containers or industrial waste containers in the city. 
(b)  Authorization to provide service and pertinent information supplied by the director of sanitation. Commercial solid waste and recycling firms providing service in the city shall submit a letter of intent to the director of sanitation listing the type, size and frequency of service of all commercial containers, stationary compactors (excluding residential units), stationary compactor containers, and industrial waste containers to be installed or serviced by them. The director of sanitation shall provide each applicant firm with a written authorization for the service proposed and furnish a copy to the office of the inspector. The director shall, upon request, provide applicant firms with pertinent information as to any other provisions of this chapter relative to the service they propose to provide. 
(c)  List of containers supplied to the director of sanitation. Commercial solid waste or recycling firms authorized to provide service within the city shall provide the director of sanitation with a list showing the type, size and frequency of service of all commercial refuse containers, recyclables containers, stationary compactors (excluding residential units), stationary compactor containers, and industrial waste containers serviced by them. Such list shall be provided within 30 days following enactment of the ordinance from which this section derives. Failure to comply may result in suspension or cancellation of the authorization to provide such service. Changes to the list shall be provided to the director of sanitation by the firm as they occur. 
(d)  Permit decal, name, address and phone number of the firm required on containers. Each commercial refuse container, recycling container, stationary compactor, and industrial waste container serviced by a commercial solid waste or recycling firm shall have affixed in a conspicuous place a distinctive red decal issued by the city sanitation department which shows it is authorized to operate in the city. Commercial solid waste or recycling firms authorized to provide service within the city shall obtain decals from the sanitation department and shall place them on the containers that they service. In addition each commercial refuse container, recyclables container, stationary compactor, or waste container shall carry in a conspicuous place the name, telephone number and address of the firm authorized to service it. Distinctive decals shall be placed on commercial refuse containers serviced by the city sanitation department. 
(Code 1967, § 10-9; Ord. No. O-96-07, 4-15-96; Ord. No. O-07-13, § 4, 12-3-07) 
Editor's note- See editors note following § 82-37. 
Sec. 82-40. - Disposal of refuse. 
(a)  Prohibited without approval. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or to cause to be dumped any refuse such as garbage, trash, litter, building material, motor vehicle parts, or equipment, or recyclables such as appliances, cans, bottles, newspapers, telephone books, grass clippings, trees, tree limbs, brush or parts thereof anywhere in the city without the expressed approval by action of the city commission under such terms and conditions as may be invoked from time to time by the city commission. 
(b)  Exception; conditions. The provisions of subsection (a) of this section do not apply to the dumping on private property with the owner's permission of sand, dirt, broken brick, blocks or broken pavement or other suitable materials for use as to fill to raise the elevation of the land, provided the same is not maintained in an unsightly condition and provided the owner of the property on which such material is dumped agrees to level such dumped material with appropriate grading equipment, and to cover it with dirt, upon direction of the city commission. 
(c)  Identification of party engaging in illegal dumping. If any of the material dumped in violation of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section can be identified as having last belonged to, been in the possession of, sent to or received by, or to have been the property of any person prior to its being dumped as prohibited therein, such identification shall be presumed to be prima facie evidence that such owner dumped or caused to be dumped such matter and material in violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 10-10; Ord. No. O-96-07, 4-15-96; Ord. No. O-07-13, § 4, 12-3-07) 
Editor's note- See editors note following § 82-37. 
Sec. 82-41. - Sanitation fees; assessment and payment. 
(a)  Sanitary fees shall be established by the city commission. 
(b)  Fees for sanitary purposes shall be due on or before the first day of June, 1998. Sanitary fees not paid on or before June 1, 1998, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from June 1, 1998; and, penalty of ten percent of such unpaid fees shall be added and attached to the total amount of said fees due and payable unless paid by June 15, 1998; and, the interest at said rate on the principal sum and said penalty shall be collected at the time of collecting such taxes thereafter. 
(c)  Unpaid sanitary fees may be collected by execution against the parcel of real estate for which the fee was established and the owner thereof. On or after the first day of August, 1998, the city clerk shall issue an execution against the real property for which such sanitary fee was established and remains unpaid, and the owner thereof; and the unpaid amount, interest, penalty and cost and shall be a lien on such property from the date the fee was established. Executions are to be issued and enforced in the same manner as tax executions are issued and enforced in the city. 
(Code 1967, § 10-11; Ord. No. O-96-07, 4-15-96; Ord. No. O-98-08, § IV, 3-16-98; Ord. No. O-07-13, § 4, 12-3-07) 
Editor's note- See editors note following § 82-37. 
Secs. 82-42-82-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTER CONTROL 

Sec. 82-50. - Description. 
    Litter found throughout our community often finds its way into our streams, rivers and lakes and detracts from our quality of life. Pollutants carried into our streams, rivers, and lakes by litter, diminish the quality of our water and its aquatic resources. Litter control ordinances provide a prohibition against littering and provide an enforcement mechanism with penalties for dealing with those found littering. 
(Ord. No. O-04-10, 3-15-04) 
Sec. 82-51. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property; and, 
(2)  To prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall apply to all public and private property within the City of Decatur, Georgia. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(d)  Severability. If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-04-10, 3-15-04) 
Sec. 82-52. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term is defined in O.C.G.A., § 16-7-51, paragraph 6. 
    Public or private property means the right of way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
(Ord. No. O-04-10, 3-15-04) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-53. - Prohibition against littering public or private property or waters. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the city or any waters in the city unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or, 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Ord. No. O-04-10, 3-15-04) 
Sec. 82-54. - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
    No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(Ord. No. O-04-10, 3-15-04) 
Sec. 82-55. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  Evidence. 
(1)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (1), whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  According to the provisions of section 1-12 of the City Code; and 
(2)  In addition to the penalties described in subsection (1) above, the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the city; and 
(3)  a.  In the sound discretion of the municipal court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
b.  In the sound discretion of the municipal court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and, 
(4)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(d)  Enforcement. 
(1)  General. All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(2)  In addition to those described in item (1) above, the city public works director or his/her designees, the city engineer or his/her designees, and codes enforcement officers are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. O-04-10, 3-15-04) 
Chapter 86 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 22; environment, ch. 42; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70; parks and recreation, ch. 74; solid waste, ch. 82; vehicles for hire, ch. 102; zoning, pt. IV. UDO. 
State Law reference- Obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; Georgia Code of Public Transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 et seq.; governmental authorization by any county or municipality for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; state, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; grant by municipal corporation of right to obstruct public street prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; municipalities may permit enclosure of lanes or alleys, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-11; power of city to open, close or extend public streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; municipal street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); executions for collection of municipal assessments for paving streets and laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person guilty of a violation of this article shall be punished, upon conviction, as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1967, § 20-19) 
Sec. 86-2. - Property owners to keep sidewalks and/or pedestrian rights-of-way clean. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all property owners to keep sidewalks, and/or pedestrian rights-of-way on all sides of their property clean and free of papers, cups and waste of any kind on any day except refuse collection day. If the property is leased to a tenant, then the tenant shall be responsible for keeping sidewalks and/or pedestrian right-of-way clean. Upon being notified by a codes enforcement officer of any dirty condition of such sidewalks and rights-of-way the property, the owner or tenant shall be given seven days to clean such sidewalks or rights-of-way. 
(b)  The codes enforcement officer, public works director and his/her designees, and the city engineer and his/her designees are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. O-05-13, 8-1-05) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-05-13, adopted August 1, 2005, repealed the former § 86-2, and enacted a new § 86-2 as set out herein. The former § 86-2 pertained to duty of merchants to keep streets and sidewalks clean and derived from Code 1967, § 20-1. 
Sec. 86-3. - Merchants, or others to keep produce, fruits or merchandise off sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any merchant or individual offering for sale any kind of produce, fruits or merchandise, to put the same in front of their respective places of business or premises on the sidewalks, excepting mobile food facilities where allowed as a limited use and where such activities do not conflict with standards set forth by the city. 
(Code 1967, § 20-2; Ord. No. O-17-04, § 1.1, 5-15-17) 
Sec. 86-4. - Sidewalks not to be obstructed for more than 30 minutes. 
    No obstructions shall be placed on any sidewalks in the city for a period exceeding 30 minutes, excepting mobile food facilities where otherwise allowed as a limited use and where such activities do not conflict with standards set forth by the city. 
(Code 1967, § 20-3; Ord. No. O-17-04, § 1.2, 5-15-17) 
Sec. 86-5. - Protection of streets and sidewalks from accumulation of dirt. 
    All persons who own real estate in the city which abuts on any of the streets and/or sidewalks of the city which are paved shall be required to sod the banks or earth abutting such paved streets and/or sidewalks with grass, or by other means, and to further protect by proper drainage all property so as to prevent washing or in other ways allowing dirt from abutting property to wash and accumulate on the street and/or sidewalk. 
(Code 1967, § 20-5; Ord. No. O-05-13, 8-1-05) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-05-13, adopted August 1, 2005, repealed the former § 86-5 and renumbered § 86-6 to read as § 86-5. The former § 86-5 pertained to property owners to keep sidewalks clean and derived from Code 1967, § 20-4. 
Sec. 86-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- See editor's note at § 86-5. 
Sec. 86-7. - Construction of certain curbs. 
    All new curbs which are constructed in the city and all existing curbs which are part of any reconstruction, within any block, which is contiguous to any public street or highway and in which more than 15 percent of the territory is devoted to or zoned for business, commercial, industrial or multifamily residential use; in which any public educational institution is located; which curb is within any block that is adjacent to a block in which more than 15 percent of the territory is devoted to or zoned for business, commercial, industrial or multifamily residential use; or in which a public educational institution is located shall comply with this section. In order to enable persons using wheelchairs to travel freely and without assistance, at each crosswalk a ramp shall be built within a curb so that the sidewalk and street blend to a common level. Such ramp shall be not less than 32 inches wide and shall have a slope not greater than one inch rise per 12 inches length. Where because of surrounding buildings or other features of the terrain it is impossible to conform the slope with this section, the ramp shall contain a slope with as shallow a rise as possible under the circumstances. 
(Code 1967, § 20-6) 
Sec. 86-8. - Excavations; filling and compacting; lighting and barricading at night. 
    It is hereby the duty of every plumber or other person making excavations in and upon the sidewalks or streets of the city for the purpose of making closet, sewer pipe or other connections, or making excavations on sidewalks or streets for any purpose whatever, after the completion of his work, to so fill and compact such excavations as to prevent the excavations or any portion thereof from sinking, caving or settling, so as to in any degree endanger or inconvenience pedestrians or vehicles passing thereover. Such filling and compacting shall be approved by city engineer. It is made the further duty of all persons making such excavations, until the excavation is pronounced safe by the city engineer, to place thereon and keep placed and lighted thereon between dark and daylight, a sufficient number of red lanterns or torches to warn the public, and in the day to fence or otherwise protect such excavations. 
(Code 1967, § 20-7) 
Sec. 86-9. - Opening and reconstruction of streets and sidewalks. 
    After proper procedure, as set out in the ordinances governing such procedure has been complied with, and after the necessary authorization has been obtained for the opening or reconstruction of any old or new street, sidewalk or alley, it shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the work and construct grading, draining, paving, curbing, sidewalks or any appurtenance or structure pertaining thereto without first submitting plans and specifications in detail for such work to the city engineer and seeking approval on the type, size, dimensions and kind of materials to be used in such construction and the grades and elevations of such new or old construction or reconstruction. The city engineer may withhold such approval until the constructing party has met the minimum requirements of the standard specifications of the city in use at the time, relating to such construction, and he may appoint representatives to enter upon the work during the construction thereof to see that the requirements of the city are fully complied with. 
(Code 1967, § 20-8) 
Sec. 86-10. - Contractors and other persons building or repairing shall place red lights around obstructions on streets and sidewalks at night. 
    Whenever any contractor or other person is building or repairing buildings in the city and has material of any kind piled on the sidewalks or streets, it shall be the duty of the contractor, builder or other person to place red lights or torches around such obstructions at night in sufficient numbers to warn pedestrians and other people on such streets. 
(Code 1967, § 20-9) 
Sec. 86-11. - Driveway requirements. 
(a)  Permit. It shall be unlawful for any property owner, lessee or tenant to construct or cause to have constructed a driveway entering upon a city street without first obtaining a permit for such work. 
(b)  Other construction requirements. When such permit is issued the owner, lessee, tenant or other constructing party shall conform to all requirements of the standard specifications of the city in use at the time for that portion of the driveway from the curb or gutter line to the property line. Such constructing parties shall conform to all grades established and other special requirements as may be set out at the time by the city engineer or his duly authorized representative. 
(c)  Surface. It shall be unlawful for any property owner, lessee or tenant to maintain within the city any driveway opening onto the sidewalks or streets of the city unless such driveway is covered with chert, stone, concrete, brick, or some similar material that will prevent dirt from such property from washing on the sidewalk or street. If such covering does not prevent dirt from such property washing onto the sidewalk or street, the sidewalk or street at such place shall be kept free of all dirt or washings by such owner, lessee or tenant. 
(d)  Removal of dirt or washings; responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any such property owner, lessee or tenant to fail to remove such dirt or washings within 24 hours after the same has been deposited upon the street or sidewalk and after the attention of such owner, lessee or tenant has been called thereto. Where a driveway is joint, all of such joint owners, lessees or tenants shall be liable for any noncompliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1967, § 20-10) 
Sec. 86-12. - Entrances and exits to public streets. 
(a)  Approval required. All entrances and/or exits of any street or drive from or to any public street shall be approved by the city manager or his designated representative prior to the construction of the street or drive or to the issuance of any building permit for any improvement to be served by such street or drive. 
(b)  Items to be considered in approval or disapproval. The following items shall be considered in approving or disapproving entrances and exits to public streets: 
(1)  The width of proposed entrance or exit. Unless approved by the city manager, the maximum width of curb cuts, not including flares or returns at the throat of the facility, for entrances, exits, service drives and similar facilities shall be as follows: 
a.  Commercial and industrial developments, including offices, retail establishments, banks, restaurants, warehouses, manufacturing and similar developments, 40 feet. 
b.  Attached single-family residences, multiple-family residential and institutional developments, including apartment buildings, churches, schools, colleges, hospitals and similar developments, 24 feet for two-way entrances and 12 feet for one-way entrances. 
c.  Single- and two-family residences and townhouses, 12 feet. 
(2)  The distance of proposed entrance or exit to an existing intersection, to any property line, and/or to any existing or proposed entrance or exit to any existing or proposed street or drive. Except for a single-family residence, two-family residence or townhouse residence, entrances and exits shall be a minimum of 50 feet from the right-of-way line of any existing or proposed intersection, 40 feet from any existing or proposed curb cut, and 20 feet from any existing or proposed property line, unless approved by the city manager. 
(3)  The number of proposed entrances and exits. 
(4)  The suitability of the proposed entrance and exit in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property. 
(5)  The suitability of the proposed entrance and exit in view of the amount of traffic on adjacent and nearby streets and the amount of traffic expected from the proposed development. 
(6)  The suitability of the proposed entrance and exit in view of the impact on the public health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(c)  Appeals. All persons denied an entrance or exit to a public street by decision of the city manager shall have the right to appeal such decision to the city commission. Such appeal shall be made within 15 days of the date of notice of such decision, shall be in writing, shall state the location of the subject property, the date of the decision being appealed and the reasons upon which the appeal is made. 
(Code 1967, § 20-10.1; Ord. No. O-17-09, §§ 1.1-1.4, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 86-13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-17-03, § 2, adopted March 29, 2017, repealed § 86-13, which pertained to telegraph and telephone poles and derived from the Code of 1967, § 20-11. 
Sec. 86-14. - Work in the public streets and rights-of-way-Permit and bond required. 
(a)  Any person desiring to make any improvement or perform other work in any public street or right-of-way of the city shall make an application for a permit for such work to the city engineer or his designee and shall deposit a sum not to exceed $500.00 as a bond to guarantee the replacement or repair of the street or right-of-way to the same condition as it was prior to the improvement or other work. The amount of the bond shall be determined by the city engineer or his designee according to the nature and extent of the work proposed. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the expression "work in the public streets and rights-of-way" shall include but not be limited to, utility connections, including water, sewer, gas, electrical, telephone, cable television and/or other connections or taps to any water main, sewer, or other utility or service line, any curb, wall, walkway, drive or other work or improvement therein of any nature, but shall not include activities by utilities governed by Article VII of this Chapter 86. 
(c)  When work on any public street or right-of-way takes place by any person for any of the purposes set out in section 84-14(b), such street or right-of-way shall be repaired and placed in the same condition as it was prior to the work within seven days of the start of such work. If the repairs required by this section are not completed within such time, the city engineer may make such repairs, deducting the cost thereof from the bond deposited as a guaranty and refunding the amount of deposit remaining, if any. 
(Code 1967, §§ 20-12, 20-13; Ord. No. O-90-08, §§ 1, 2, 6-4-90; Ord. No. O-17-03, § 3, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-15. - Same-Refunding of deposit. 
    Subject to the provisions of section 86-14(c), the bond required by section 86-14(a) as a guaranty shall remain on deposit for a period of 30 days after the work on the public street or right-of-way is completed, and then shall be refunded to the depositor, provided that the repairs to the street or right-of-way have been properly made. 
(Code 1967, § 20-14; Ord. No. O-90-08, § 3, 6-4-90) 
Sec. 86-16. - Hauling dirt, soil, sand, rubbish, or other material. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to haul or transport for any distance, any dirt, soil, sand, rubbish or other material, over or upon or in the streets or sidewalks of the city, in any wagon, cart, wheelbarrow, truck or other vehicle from which such dirt, soil, sand, rubbish or any like substance escapes or leaks. 
(Code 1967, § 20-15) 
Sec. 86-17. - Wastewater-Allowing to run across sidewalk; when filling station premises may be washed. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to allow wastewater from washing cars or from other sources to run across the sidewalk, and such person shall provide a cesspool or sewer to receive such water. Operators of filling stations may not wash their premises between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(Code 1967, § 20-16) 
Sec. 86-18. - Same-Using streets, sidewalks or gutters for drainage. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use the streets, sidewalks or gutters as a means of drainage to carry off any used and dirty water or other filthy fluids. 
(Code 1967, § 20-17) 
Sec. 86-19. - Same-Discharging or throwing liquids from buildings so as to render street or sidewalk surface unsafe. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or discharge from any lot or building any water, fluid or liquid substance so as to injuriously affect the surface of any city street or sidewalk so as to make it unsafe for travel. 
(Code 1967, § 20-18) 
Sec. 86-20. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
    Section 14-16 of the 1967 Code requiring permits for parades and processions is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Sec. 86-21. - Urban camping and improper use of public spaces. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Camp shall mean residing in or using a public street, sidewalk or park for private living accommodations, such as erecting tents or other temporary structures or objects providing shelter; sleeping in a single place for any period of time exceeding 60 minutes; regularly cooking or preparing meals; or other similar activities. 
(2)  Storing personal property shall mean leaving one's personal effects, such as, but not limited to, clothing, bedrolls, cookware, sleeping bags, luggage, knapsacks or backpacks unattended for any period of time exceeding one hour. This term shall not include parking a bicycle or other mode of transportation. 
(3)  Public park includes all municipal parks, public playgrounds, public plazas, attractions and monuments. 
(4)  Public street includes all public streets and highways, public sidewalks, public benches, public parking lots and medians. 
(b)  Public parks. It shall be unlawful to camp or to store personal property in any park owned by the city. 
(c)  Public streets. It shall be unlawful to camp, to store personal property or to sit or to lie down on any public street as defined above. 
(d)  Other public property blocking ingress and egress. It shall be unlawful to camp, to store personal property or to sit or to lie down on any public property so as to interfere with ingress or egress from buildings. 
(e)  Warning. No person may be arrested for violation of this section until he or she has received a written warning and has been given an opportunity to cease the unlawful conduct. If, after receiving such warning and opportunity, a person fails to comply with the warning, he or she is subject to arrest for violation of this section. 
(f)  Exceptions. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, this section shall not apply to nor be construed to prohibit the following behavior: 
(1)  Persons sitting or lying down as a result of a medical emergency; 
(2)  Persons sitting in wheelchairs while using parks, sidewalks or other public places; 
(3)  Persons sitting down while attending parades for which valid permits have been issued; 
(4)  Persons sitting down while patronizing outdoor cafes; 
(5)  Persons sitting down, lying down or napping while attending performances, festivals and concerts taking place in any park, street or sidewalk; 
(6)  Persons sitting on chairs or benches supplied by a public agency or abutting private property owner; 
(7)  Persons sitting on seats in bus zones occupied by people waiting for the bus; 
(8)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line outside a box office to purchase tickets to any sporting event, concert, performance, other special event; 
(9)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line awaiting entry to any building, including shelters, or awaiting social services, such as provision of meals; or 
(10)  Children under the age of 13 years sleeping in parks, or sleeping anywhere else while being carried by an accompanying person or while sitting or lying in a stroller or baby carriage. 
(11)  Persons operating mobile food facilities, where allowed as a limited use and where such activities do not conflict with standards set forth the by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-97-20, 6-16-97; Ord. No. O-17-04, § 1.3, 5-15-17) 
Sec. 86-22. - Downtown Decatur Streetscape Design Guidelines. 
    The Downtown Decatur Streetscape Design Guidelines shall be used to design streetscape improvements in the C-2 General Commercial Zoning District. The Downtown Decatur Streetscape Design Guidelines are a part of this section and have the same force and effect as if they were all fully set forth or described herein, and shall be properly attested and kept on file with then city clerk of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-99-03, 3-15-99) 
Sec. 86-23. - Regulation of publication vending devices. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Person: Any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public. 
    Publication vending device: Any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display, distribution or sale of publications, newspapers, periodicals, magazines or similar items. 
    Street: All that area dedicated to public use for public transportation purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, alleys and sidewalks. 
    Roadway: That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
    Public sidewalk: Any surface provided for the use of pedestrians, on any public right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the city. 
    Publication vending device area: An area of the public sidewalk or other public right-of-way that has been determined by the city commission to be a suitable location for the installation and maintenance of publication vending devices. 
(b)  Blocking of roadway; placement on sidewalks. 
(1)  No person shall install, place or maintain any publication vending device which projects onto, into or over any part of the roadway of any public street, or which rests, wholly or in part, upon, along or over any portion of the roadway of any public street. 
(2)  No person shall install, place or maintain any publication vending device which in whole or in part rests upon, in, or over any public sidewalk, when such installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property; or, when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or public safety purposes; or, when such publication vending device unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle or the ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business. 
(3)  No person shall install, place or maintain any publication vending device outside of the assigned publication vending device area. 
(c)  Permit. 
(1)  No person shall install, place or maintain any publication vending device which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk without first obtaining a permit from the city manager or his/her designee. 
(2)  An administrative fee shall be required for the issuance of a publication vending device permit in an amount set by the city manager. 
(3)  Applications for all permits shall be in writing and must contain the following information: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant to include the address at which the applicant will receive notices as provided through the United States Postal Service and the telephone number to which any notice of repairs or complaints can be directed; and 
b.  The total number of, and exact location of, each publication vending device to be installed or maintained in the city by the applicant; and 
c.  An indemnification and hold harmless agreement. 
(4)  Only one permit shall be required for the placement of any number of publication vending devices by one person, to the extent each location has been listed on the permit application submitted by such person. 
(5)  Each person is allowed to maintain a maximum of three publication vending device locations. 
(6)  A permit is valid for one year from date of issue. 
(7)  A permit shall be granted if the application contains the required information and if the requested installation does not violate the prohibitions set forth in section (b) above and in section (d) below. 
(8)  Denial of a permit shall be provided in writing listing the reason or reasons for denial. 
(9)  The applicant shall be given notice of the opportunity to appeal the denial of a permit in writing to the city manager or his/her designee. The written appeal must include specific information as to why the permit should not be denied and must be filed within 30 days of the date of the notice of the denial of the permit. In considering an appeal, the city manager or his/her designee will apply the standards as described in section (b) above and in section (d) below. 
(d)  Standards for installation, maintenance and operation. Any permitted publication vending device which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Any person granted a publication vending device permit shall have his, her, or its name, address, telephone number, and permit number affixed to each publication vending device in a place where such information may be easily located and recognized. 
(2)  No publication vending device shall exceed 42 inches in height, 30 inches in width and 24 inches in depth. All publication vending devices shall provide for an enclosed, secure and weatherproof area for the storage of publications, newspapers, periodicals, magazines or similar items during the time they are provided for display, distribution or sale. The publication vending device must be on the approved list of publication vending devices maintained in the city manager's office. 
(3)  Publication vending devices shall be placed adjacent to the wall of a building, parallel to such wall and not more than six inches from the wall. 
(4)  No publication vending device shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any property without the permission of the owner or person in possession of the property. 
(5)  No publication vending device shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any city property, including, but not limited to, the sidewalk, trees, benches, light poles, bicycle racks, or trash receptacles. 
(6)  No publication vending device shall be placed, installed, used or maintained outside an assigned publication vending device area. 
(7)  Each publication vending device shall be maintained in a clean, neat and attractive condition and in good repair at all times. 
(e)  Removal of publication vending device. 
(1)  The city shall cause to be removed any publication vending device on any street or sidewalk in a location in violation of this section. Any publication vending device causing a traffic hazard or other hazard or illegally placed shall be removed at once, with notice given to the owner as soon as practical thereafter. The owner of any such publication vending device shall be assessed the costs for removing the rack as well as any storage costs. The costs shall be satisfied before the publication vending device is released to the owner. The city shall not retain such publication vending devices for more than 30 calendar days. 
(2)  If a publication vending device is found in a state of disrepair the city will notify the owner via certified United States mail and notice on the machine that the device must be repaired within ten days of notification. 
(3)  Any publication vending device which has been in disuse for at least 30 days shall be considered abandoned and will be subject to removal as described in subsection (e) above. 
(Ord. No. O-03-11, 1-1-04; Ord. No. O-04-02, 1-21-04; Ord. No. O-09-12, 11-2-09) 
Sec. 86-24. - Regulation of mobile food facilities. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Operation area : The amount of area needed to operate a particular mobile food facility, including both the amount of area occupied by the mobile food facility and an amount of area adjacent to the mobile food facility reasonably sufficient for an individual to operate the mobile food facility. 
    Person: Any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, or other group or combination acting as a unit, whether public, private, or quasi-public. 
    Mobile food facility: A non-motorized, non-self-propelled vehicle that is readily movable or towable and that is commercially-designed to handle food preparation and service from which food or beverage is sold or offered for sale directly to a consumer. 
    Street: All that area dedicated to public use for public transportation purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, alleys and sidewalks. 
    Roadway: That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
    Public sidewalk: Any surface provided for the use of pedestrians, on any public right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Blocking of roadway; placement on sidewalks. 
(1)  No person shall operate, place or maintain any mobile food facility which projects onto, into or over any part of the roadway of any public street, or which rests, wholly or in part, upon, or over any portion of the roadway of any public street. 
(2)  No person shall operate, place or maintain a mobile food facility within a public sidewalk, in whole or in part, in a manner that endangers the safety of persons or property or that unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle or the ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business. 
(3)  No person shall place a mobile food facility that reduces the clear zone of a public sidewalk to a width of less than five feet. 
(c)  Permit. 
(1)  No person shall operate, place or maintain any mobile food facility upon, in, within or over any public sidewalk or private property without first obtaining a permit from the city manager or his/her designee. 
(2)  An administrative fee shall be required for the issuance of a mobile food facility permit in an amount set by the city commission. 
(3)  Applications for all permits shall be in writing and must contain the following information: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant to include the address at which the applicant will receive notices as provided through the United States Postal Service and the telephone number to which any notice of complaints can be directed; and 
b.  The dimensional height, width and length of the mobile food facility, and the location where the applicant proposes to operate the mobile food facility; and 
c.  An indemnification and hold harmless agreement (sidewalk permits only); and 
d.  An affidavit attesting that the applicant either has applied for or will immediately apply for the applicable permit for the operation of the mobile food facility from the DeKalb County Board of Health in accordance with its rules and regulations and certify that the proposed mobile food facility will meet and be operated in conformance with all applicable state laws and regulations, including the Georgia Department of Agriculture, county ordinances and regulations, and city codes and regulations. 
(4)  If the city manager or their designee determines that an application to operate a mobile food facility is in compliance with the applicable requirements, the city manager or their designee shall approve the application for a permit, but the permit for operation shall not be issued until the applicant has obtained the applicable permit from the DeKalb County Board of Health. 
(5)  Each person is allowed to operate a maximum of one mobile food facility in the city. 
(6)  A permit is valid for one year from date of issue. 
(7)  A permit shall be granted if the application contains the required information and if the requested operation does not violate the prohibitions set forth in section (b) above and in section (d) below. 
(8)  Denial of a permit shall be provided in writing listing the reason or reasons for denial. 
(9)  The applicant shall be given notice of the opportunity to appeal the denial of a permit in writing to the city manager or his/her designee. The written appeal must include specific information as to why the permit should not be denied and must be filed within 15 days of the date of the notice of the denial of the permit. In considering an appeal, the city manager or his/her designee will apply the standards as described in section (b) above and in section (d) below. 
(10)  No permit for the operation a mobile food facility shall be transferable. 
(11)  Permits may be revoked by the city commission for failure of the permittee to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Standards for operation. Any permitted mobile food facility shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Any person granted a mobile food facility permit shall have his, her, or its name, address, telephone number, valid city permit, and valid permit from the DeKalb County Board of Health affixed to the mobile food facility in a place where such information is easily visible to the customer. 
(2)  A mobile food facility shall not exceed a maximum operation area of 36 square feet. 
(3)  No such mobile food facility shall be operated, placed or maintained within ten feet of any other mobile food facility, said distance to be measured in a straight line from the closet boundary of the operating area of a neighboring facility. 
(4)  No mobile food facility shall be operated, placed or maintained within 50 feet of any primary entrance of any restaurant within the city. 
(5)  No mobile food facility shall be operated, place or maintained within 20 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines extended of two streets or of a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way line. 
(6)  No sale or serving of alcohol. 
(7)  No sale to persons in vehicles. 
(8)  No amplified sound or loudspeakers. 
(9)  No lighting, except localized lighting that is used on or in the mobile food facility for the purpose of operating the mobile food facility. 
(10)  Each mobile food facility shall be maintained in a clean, neat and attractive condition and in good repair at all times. 
(11)  The on-site presence of an individual owner or employee during hours of operation is required. 
(e)  Removal of mobile food facility. 
(1)  The city shall cause to be removed any mobile food facility on any street or sidewalk in a location in violation of this section. Any mobile food facility causing a traffic hazard or other hazard or illegally placed shall be removed at once, with notice given to the owner as soon as practical thereafter. The owner of any such mobile food facility shall be assessed the costs for removal as well as any storage costs. The costs shall be satisfied before the mobile food facility is released to the owner. The city shall not retain such mobile food facility for more than 30 calendar days. 
(f)  Hours of operation. Mobile food facilities shall only be operated, including sales, set up, take down, and removal, between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday, between 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Fridays and Saturdays, and between 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Sundays. 
(Ord. No. O-17-04, § 1.4, 5-15-17) 
Secs. 86-25-86-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UTILITY CONNECTIONS PRIOR TO PAVING OF STREETS 

Sec. 86-46. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person found guilty of a violation of this article, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1967, § 20-26) 
Sec. 86-47. - Required; notice by chief of construction; subsequent disturbing of streets. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of construction, when any street of the city has been ordered paved or repaved by the mayor and city commission, to give notice to persons owning property on such street ordered paved or repaved requiring such owners to enter into the street and make all connections required for their property with pipes, conduits, or similar service furnished either by the city or public service corporations, for water, sewer, and gas connections, before the time at which such pavement is begun. Thereafter such pavement or public improvement shall not be disturbed for the purpose of laying pipes, conduits or connecting therewith, except by special permit of the mayor and city commission. 
(Code 1967, § 20-20) 
Sec. 86-48. - Notice provision; making of connections by city upon failure of property owner to begin work. 
    The notice required in section 86-47 shall provide for the property owner to begin work on the connections referred to in such section within five days. If the work is not begun within such time, the city shall proceed to make such connections at the expense of such property owner. 
(Code 1967, § 20-21) 
Sec. 86-49. - Completion of work by city upon failure of property owner to do so. 
    If any property owner begins work on any connections referred to in section 86-47 and fails and refuses to complete such work within a reasonable time, the city shall take up such work and complete it at the expense of such property owner. 
(Code 1967, § 20-22) 
Sec. 86-50. - Assessment of costs-Issuance of execution against property owner and property. 
    Should it be necessary for the city to make any of the connections referred to in section 86-47, the city clerk shall render to each property owner a bill for the cost of such improvement, and, if such bill is not paid within ten days after receipt, the city clerk shall issue an execution against such property owner and against such property so improved for the cost of such improvement. 
(Code 1967, § 20-23) 
Sec. 86-51. - Same-Levy and sale of property. 
    The executions issued under the provisions of section 86-50 shall be turned over to the marshal of the city who shall proceed to levy and sell the property so improved to satisfy such execution in the same manner as is provided by the Charter of the city for executions issued for street improvement and for the cost of laying sewers in the streets of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 20-24) 
Sec. 86-52. - Same-Right of property owner to file affidavit of illegality. 
    Any property owner shall have the right to file his affidavit of illegality to any execution issued under the provisions of section 86-50, returnable to the county superior court, as provided by the Charter of the city to be done in the case of executions issued for street improvements of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 20-25) 
Secs. 86-53-86-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- See part IV of this Code, Unified Development Ordinance, sec. 9.1. Tree Protection. 

Secs. 86-76-86-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NEIGHBORHOOD IMPACT STUDIES FOR MAJOR UTILITY PROJECTS 

Sec. 86-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Major projects means any of the following: 
(1)  Electrical transmission lines in excess of 100 kv. 
(2)  New overhead lines by any utility where none presently exist, but not to include local service lines or service that is internal to a new residential development project. 
(3)  New underground utility construction unless it is accomplished within existing public rights-of-way, is a local service line or is internal to a new residential development project. The adding of an additional cable in an existing underground conduit shall not constitute a major project. 
(4)  Rapid transit facilities. 
    Neighborhood impact study means a study and a written report on the effects on the residential neighborhood in which the major project is proposed, such study to be conducted by the utility proposing the project. Such study shall include an analysis of the effect on public health, safety, welfare and aesthetics; the consideration of alternative actions as to cost, feasibility and impact; and the consideration of ameliorating measures to be taken to reduce negative impacts on public health, safety, welfare and aesthetics. 
(Code 1967, § 20-37) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 86-102. - Required. 
    No permit shall be issued for the construction of a major project in areas zoned for residential use in the city, according to the official zoning map, until a neighborhood impact study has been completed and such study has been accepted as complete and accurate by the city commission. 
(Code 1967, § 20-38) 
Sec. 86-103. - Public inspection. 
    Upon completion, a neighborhood impact study shall be filed with the city clerk and made available for public inspection. No action shall be taken by the city commission in approving or rejecting the study earlier than 15 days or later than 30 days after it is filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1967, § 20-39) 
Sec. 86-104. - Acceptance or rejection of study. 
    The city commission may accept the neighborhood impact study as being accurate and complete, or it may reject the study as not being accurate or complete. If the study is rejected by the city commission, the reasons for such rejection shall be specified, and the utility preparing the study shall have 15 days to respond. The city commission shall have 15 days to make a final determination. 
(Code 1967, § 20-40) 
Secs. 86-105-86-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - REQUIREMENTS FOR PARKING LOTS 

Sec. 86-131. - Applicability; barrier curb and landscaping requirements. 
    All surface parking lots within commercial C-2 zoning districts, with a total of 30 or more parking spaces, whether primary or accessory in use and whether commercial or noncommercial, shall have minimum barrier curb and landscaping requirements as follows: 
(1)  Barrier curbs shall be installed around the perimeter of the parking lot and around landscaped areas that are required herein, except where the perimeter abuts an adjacent building or structure and at points of ingress and egress into the facility, so as to prevent encroachment of vehicles onto adjacent property, rights-of-way and landscaped areas. 
(2)  Barrier curbs shall be a minimum of six inches in height and a minimum of eight inches in width and permanent in nature. Barrier curbs shall be concrete or stone. Such curbs shall be securely installed and maintained in good condition. 
(3)  Where the end of a parking space abuts a landscaped area, barrier curbs may be placed in the parking space at a maximum of two feet from the end of the parking space. This two-foot-wide area may have the pavement removed and be developed as part of the required landscaped area. 
(4)  Surface parking lots shall have a minimum landscaped area equal to at least ten percent of the paved area within such lot. In no case shall a parking lot owner be required to provide landscaped areas that exceed ten percent of the paved area. 
(5)  A minimum of one tree per eight parking spaces shall be included in the required landscaped areas. For the purpose of satisfying this requirement, existing trees that are two and one-half inches or more in caliper as measured at a height of 36 inches above ground level shall be considered to be equivalent to one or more newly planted trees on the basis of one tree for each two and one-half inches of caliper. 
(6)  In addition to trees, ground cover shall also be provided in order to protect tree roots and to prevent erosion. Ground cover shall consist of shrubs, ivy, liriope, pine bark mulch, and other similar landscaping materials. 
(7)  Shrubs shall be maintained at a maximum height of two and one-half feet, except where such shrubs are screening the parking surface from an adjacent residential use. 
(8)  In the event that landscaped areas are in the interior of a parking lot, they shall be a minimum of six feet in length with a minimum area of 36 square feet. 
(9)  Continuous landscaped buffer strips shall be constructed along sidewalks and public rights-of-way where surface parking lots are adjacent to such sidewalks or public rights-of-way except at points of ingress and egress into the facility. Such landscaped buffer strips shall be a minimum of five feet in width and shall contain, in addition to ground cover, trees planted a maximum of 421/2 feet on center along the entire length. 
(10)  Newly planted trees shall be a minimum of two and one-half inches in caliper as measured at a height of six inches above ground level, shall be a minimum of ten feet in height, shall have a 40-foot minimum mature height, and shall be drought tolerant. Trees shall be planted at a minimum of 30 inches from any barrier curb, so as to prevent injury to trees from vehicle bumpers. 
(11)  Where landscaped areas are located adjacent to vehicle overhangs, the trees shall be planted in line with the side stripes between parking spaces in order to avoid injury to trees by vehicle bumpers. 
(12)  All landscaped areas, including trees located in the public right-of-way that are counted in the fulfillment of this requirement, shall be properly maintained in accordance with approved landscape plans. In the event that a tree or any plant material dies, it shall be replaced within six months so as to meet all requirements of this section and to allow for planting in the appropriate planting season. 
(13)  If it is determined by the city arborist that implementation of these regulations will result in the loss of parking spaces in existing lots, the public works director may increase the allowable percentage compact car spaces from 25 percent up to 35 percent so as to minimize the loss of parking spaces. 
(14)  Notwithstanding subsection (13) above, existing parking lots shall not be required to reduce the number of parking spaces by more than three percent as a result of implementing these landscaping regulations. 
(15)  Upon written application by any person subject to the provisions of this section, the city manager and/or his/her designee is hereby authorized to grant administrative variances to the requirements of this section only upon making all of the following findings: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, topography, subsurface conditions, overhead structures, or the existence of sufficient trees in the public right-of-way within ten feet of the property line; 
b.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and 
c.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-95-06, 6-19-95) 
Secs. 86-132-86-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT 

Sec. 86-150. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person guilty of a violation of this article shall be punished, upon conviction, as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. O-96-10, 7-8-96) 
Sec. 86-151. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates another meaning: 
    Permit fee means the charge required to be paid pursuant to this article for the issuance of a permit to hold a special event. 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    Sanitation bond fee means the deposit, conditioned upon good performance, which shall be required of any applicant or sponsoring organization to ensure the cleaning of streets, public parks or public lands upon completion of a permitted special event. 
    Special event means any parade, march, ceremony, demonstration, show, exhibition, pageant, athletic event or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, sidewalk, park or other public property, within the city limits, that interferes with the normal flow of traffic or use of public property by the public. Movement from one point to another is not a required element of a special event. 
    Special event permit means a permit required by this article. 
(Ord. No. O-96-10, 7-8-96) 
Sec. 86-152. - Permit required. 
    No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any special event unless a special event permit shall have been obtained from the office of the director of public safety. 
(Ord. No. O-96-10, 7-8-96) 
Sec. 86-153. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions; 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in school sponsored educational activities or athletic events, provided such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; 
(3)  A public event which is directly related to a recognized function of city, state or local government and which is in a major part initiated, financed and executed by the city, state or local government, or subdivision of the state; 
(4)  City block parties that have received a block party permit from the office of the city manager; and 
(5)  Peaceful picketing in connection with labor disputes. 
(Ord. No. O-96-10, 7-8-96) 
Sec. 86-154. - Application for permit. 
    A person seeking issuance of a special event permit shall file in writing an application with the office of the director of public safety on forms provided by the city. Such application shall be filed not less than 14 days nor more than 60 days before the date on which the proposed special event is to be conducted. 
(Ord. No. O-96-10, 7-8-96) 
Sec. 86-155. - Application contents. 
    The application for a special event permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct the special event; 
(2)  If the special event is to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the special event leader and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
(4)  The name of the special event and its purpose; 
(5)  The date when the special event is to be held; 
(6)  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point; 
(7)  If a parade, the approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles which will constitute the parade, including the type of animals and description of vehicles; 
(8)  The approximate number of spectators and participants that will attend or participate in any part of the special event. If the special event is to take place on more than one day, the approximate number of spectators and participants per day. If a spectator or participant is present for only a part of the special event, that person shall be included in the approximate number; 
(9)  The hours when the special event will start and terminate; 
(10)  A statement as to whether the special event will occupy all or only a portion of the widths of the streets proposed to be used; 
(11)  If such a special event is to be held in a city park or other public area, a statement as to whether the special event will occupy all or only a portion of the area; 
(12)  The location of any assembly areas for the special event; 
(13)  The time at which units of the special event will begin to assemble at any assembly area; 
(14)  A description of any public address or loudspeaker system to be used; 
(15)  If the special event is designed to be held by, on behalf of, or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file with the office of the director of public safety a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the special event authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his/her behalf; 
(16)  The estimated number of vehicles requiring parking at the special event; 
(17)  Whether any temporary outdoor structures are proposed to be built, describing them in detail and their location; and 
(18)  Such other information as the director of public safety or a designated representative may deem reasonably necessary. 
(Ord. No. O-96-10, 7-8-96) 
Sec. 86-156. - Late applications. 
    The director of public safety or a designated representative, where good cause is shown, shall have the authority to consider any application which is filed less than 14 days before the date the special event is proposed to be held. 
(Ord. No. O-96-10, 7-8-96) 
Sec. 86-157. - Standards for issuance. 
    The director of public safety shall issue a special event permit as provided for in this article when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, it is determined: 
(1)  The conduct of the special event will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route or place of occurrence; 
(2)  The conduct of the special event will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city; 
(3)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the special event will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the assembly areas; 
(4)  The conduct of the special event will not unreasonably interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment in route to a fire; 
(5)  The conduct of the special event is not likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or to promote immediate lawless activity; 
(6)  The special event is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays; 
(7)  The information contained in the application is not found to be false or nonexistent in any material detail; and 
(8)  The applicant agreed to abide by or comply with all conditions of the permit, in particular, the responsibility to clean all areas used. 
(Ord. No. O-96-10, 7-8-96) 
Sec. 86-158. - Time for action on application or notice of denial. 
    The director of public safety or a designated representative shall act upon the application for a special event permit within five working days after the receipt thereof. The director of public safety or a designated representative shall deliver or mail to the applicant within five days after the date upon which the application was filed the special event permit or, if not approved, a notice of the action, stating reasons for the denial of the permit. If the application is incomplete, the director of public safety will state which parts of the application have not been completed. 
(Ord. No. O-96-10, 7-8-96) 
Sec. 86-159. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Any person not receiving a special event permit shall have the right to appeal the denial of a permit to the city manager within ten working days after the denial was issued. The city manager or a designated representative shall hear the appeal within five working days of receipt of a request for an appeals hearing. The city manager shall review the manner in which the director of public safety evaluated the special event application with regards to the criteria set out in this article. The city manager shall either approve, deny, or amend the application within five days of the appeal hearing and deliver or mail the results to the applicant. 
(b)  Any applicant denied a special events permit by the city manager shall be granted a hearing in the municipal court provided the applicant files a request in writing with the municipal court within ten days of receipt of notification by the city manager. The applicant shall notify the city manager in writing, by person or by mail, of the appeal within three days of filing an appeal with the municipal court. 
(c)  The municipal court judge shall hear the appeal at the next available court session. The judge shall hear evidence as to the reasons the application was denied by the director of public safety and the city manager. The judge shall approve, disapprove, or amend the application. The judge shall notify the applicant of the decision within five working days after the hearing in municipal court, such notification being sent by registered mail. The decision of the municipal court judge is final. 
(Ord. No. O-96-10, 7-8-96) 
Sec. 86-160. - Alternative permit. 
    The director of public safety or a designated representative, in denying an application for a special event permit, may authorize the conduct of the special event on a date, a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall within two days after notice of the action file a written notice of acceptance with the office of the director of public safety. An alternate permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a special event permit under this article. 
(Ord. No. O-96-10, 7-8-96) 
Sec. 86-161. - Notice to city and other officials. 
    Immediately upon application for or issuance of a special event permit, the director of public safety or a designated representative shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  The city manager; 
(2)  The police chief; 
(3)  The fire chief; 
(4)  The director of public works; and 
(5)  The city attorney. 
(Ord. No. O-96-10, 7-8-96) 
Sec. 86-162. - Contents of a special event permit. 
    Each special event permit shall state the following: 
(1)  Starting and ending time; 
(2)  The route to be transversed; 
(3)  The portions of the streets to be transversed that may be occupied; 
(4)  The portions of any parks or public property to be occupied; 
(5)  The maximum length of the special event; and 
(6)  Such other information as the director of public safety or a designated representative shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-96-10, 7-8-96) 
Sec. 86-163. - Duties of special event permittee. 
(a)  A permittee shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable local, state and federal laws and ordinances. 
(b)  The special event leader shall carry the special event permit upon his or her person during the conduct of the special event. 
(Ord. No. O-96-10, 7-8-96) 
Sec. 86-164. - Public conduct during special event. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any special event or with any person, animal or vehicle participating or used in a special event. 
(b)  The director of public safety or a designated representative shall have the authority to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a roadway constituting a part of the route of a special event. When necessary, the police department shall post signs to the effect and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. Police officers may cause to be impounded any vehicle unlawfully parked in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-96-10, 7-8-96) 
Sec. 86-165. - Distribution of material during parade or procession prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or cause to be distributed from any vehicle participating in a parade or procession in the public streets any item to any spectator or bystander. 
(Ord. No. O-96-10, 7-8-96) 
Sec. 86-166. - Revocation of permit. 
    The director of public safety or a designated representative shall have the authority to revoke a special event permit at any time during conduct of the special event in the event of failure to conform to or comply with the standards for issuance as set forth in section 86-156. The director of public safety or a designated representative may at any time revoke a parade permit when, by reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, the safety of public or private property requires such revocation. 
(Ord. No. O-96-10, 7-8-96) 
Sec. 86-167. - Classification of permit and bond fees. 
(a)  The director of public safety is authorized to classify the special event using the following criteria: 
(1)  The anticipated amount of extra personnel which shall be required to be furnished by the city to accomplish the necessary public safety and sanitation components of the special event. By agreement, as endorsed upon the special event permit, the applicant may furnish some or all of the personnel requirements and the classification shall be considered and reduced accordingly; 
(2)  The type and amount of special or technical assistance required from city employees; 
(3)  The anticipated number of spectators and participants over the entire period of the special event, determined in accordance with section 86-155(h); and 
(4)  Whether the organization(s) producing and/or sponsoring the special event is/are profit-making or nonprofit. 
(b)  The classes of special event permits shall be as follows: 
(1)  Class A permit: For a special event which will require between 100-200 extra staff hours by city employees in any department or in which the approximate number of spectators and participants, as determined in accordance with section 86-155(h), is 8,000 or more persons, and is being held by a profit-making organization. 
(2)  Class B permit: For a special event which has the characteristics of a class A permit but which is organized and executed by a nonprofit organization. 
(3)  Class C permit: For a special event which will require between 50-99 extra staff hours by city employees in any department or in which the approximate number of spectators and participants, as determined in accordance with section 86-155(h), is between 3,000 and 8,000 persons, and is being held by a profit-making organization. 
(4)  Class D permit: For a special event which has the characteristics of a class C permit but which is organized and executed by a nonprofit organization. 
(5)  Class E permit: For a special event which will require less than 50 extra staff hours by city employees in any department or in which the approximate number of spectators and participants, as determined in accordance with section 86-155(h), is 3,000 persons or less and is being held by a profit-making organization. 
(6)  Class F permit: For a special event which has the characteristics of a class C permit but is organized and executed by a nonprofit organization. 
(c)  The permit fee and the sanitation bond shall be as follows: 
Permit Fees Sanitation Bond Class A permit $500.00 $300.00 Class B & C permit 300.00 200.00 Class D & E permit 100.00 100.00 Class F permit 50.00 50.00  
    Any special event requiring in excess of the agreed upon city staffing hours shall be charged a prorated fee in addition to the initial base fee. Upon satisfactory completion of the sanitation bond agreement, the sanitation bond shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. O-96-10, 7-8-96) 
Sec. 86-168. - Indemnification agreement. 
    Prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the permit applicant or a duly authorized officer of the sponsoring organization must sign an agreement to reimburse the city for any costs incurred in repairing damage to city property resulting from or in connection with a permitted event. The agreement shall also provide that the permittee or sponsoring organization shall defend the city against, and indemnify and hold the city harmless from, any liability to or claims of liability by any persons resulting from any alleged damage or injury occurring in connection with the special event. 
(Ord. No. O-96-10, 7-8-96) 
Sec. 86-169. - Insurance. 
    The applicant or sponsoring organization must possess or obtain public liability insurance to protect against loss from liability imposed by law for damages on account of bodily injury and property damage arising from the special event. The insurance shall name on the policy as additional insured the city, its officers, employees and agents. Insurance coverage must be maintained for the duration of the event. A copy of the policy or a certificate of insurance along with all necessary endorsements must be filed with the city manager's office no later than seven days before the date of the special event. The minimum limit of insurance is $500,000.00. 
(Ord. No. O-96-10, 7-8-96) 
ARTICLE VII. - USE OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY BY UTILITIES 

Sec. 86-170. - Intent and purpose. 
    The city is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, and economic development of the city and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, has adopted this article for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-171. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-172. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. 
    Administrative standards means the written standards prepared by the city manager that contain additional application, technical and/or procedural requirements related to right-of-way permits that are applicable in the city of Decatur, at least including the latest editions of the GDOT "Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards" and the city "Right-of-Way Permit Standards for utilities;" 
    Code means the Code of Ordinances of the city of Decatur, Georgia; 
    Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs, or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the rights-of-way; 
    Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the rights-of-way; 
    City manager means the city manager of the city of Decatur, Georgia, or his or her designee; 
    Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety of a person, or of significant damage to or loss of real or personal property; 
    Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including but not limited to pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the rights-of-way within the city; 
    Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who is/are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives is available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations; 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto; 
    Rights-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities; 
    Service(s) means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public; 
    Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise, franchise agreement, intergovernmental agreement, or operating and maintenance agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city; 
    Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof; 
    Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert; 
    Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities; 
    Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "Utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
    Utility permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public rights-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code; 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-173. - Registration required. 
    Each utility that occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of this article, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the city manager within 90 days of the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-174. - Registration procedure. 
    The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city manager, which shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e., partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the rights-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
(2)  The name, street address, email address and telephone and facsimile numbers of one (1) or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s), in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times; 
(3)  A copy of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements. 
(4)  A copy of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the rights-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(5)  A copy of the approved annual work plan required by Section 9.1.8 of Part IV of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-175. - Incomplete registration. 
    If a registration is incomplete, the city manager shall notify the registrant and require that the registration be completed within 14 days of registrant's receipt of such notice. If a registration is complete, the city manager shall so notify the registrant in writing. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-176. - Registration acceptance. 
    Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein, nor does such acceptance relieve any responsibility for compliance with franchises previously granted by the city or with franchise requirements in Chapter 96 of Part III of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-177. - Facilities in place without registration. 
    Beginning one year after the effective date of this article, any facilities or part of a facility found in a rights-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and/or for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to: abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities; evicting the utility from the rights-of-way; prosecuting the violator and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-178. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the rights-of-way of the city without a utility permit from the city manager in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-179. - Permit procedure. 
    Utility permits shall be obtained from the city manager upon application made on forms prescribed by the city manager. The written application shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay for any damages to any part of the city road system or other public or private property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(2)  A copy, if requested, of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(3)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable, or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the rights-of-way for the purpose described in the application. 
(4)  The applicable permit fee. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-180. - Permit fees. 
    Fees shall be established by the city commission and set forth in the schedule of fees. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-181. - Issuance of permit. 
    If the city manager determines the applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the city manager may issue a utility permit: 
(1)  Whether issuing of the approval will be consistent with this article; and 
(2)  Whether applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and 
(3)  Whether the application provides sufficient mitigation of impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the rights-of-way and the difficulty and expected length of project construction or maintenance, and 
(4)  Whether the application includes adequate provisions for general public notice and direct notification to parties that will be impacted by issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-182. - Emergency situations. 
(a)  Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the city manager of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility that engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities and structures. 
(b)  In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility, through its facilities representative(s). The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cutting or moving any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility for such emergency actions and the reasonable cost of such work shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-183. - Effective period of permit. 
(a)  Each utility permit shall have set commencement and expiration dates based on information provided in the applicant's permit application. 
(b)  The utility permit shall remain in place until construction is completed or until its expiration date unless the utility is in default. The city manager may give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
(1)  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a utility permit application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; 
(2)  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this article; 
(3)  Engaged in any fraud or deceit upon the city; or 
(4)  Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-184. - Cancellation for cause. 
    If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 days of receipt of such notice provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and city may terminate the utility permit. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-185. - Expiration of permit. 
    If work is not begun within six months of the date of issuance, the utility permit will automatically expire. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-186. - Manual and policies adopted. 
    The latest edition of the utility accommodation policy and standards manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except Appendix B (permit forms and supporting documents), promulgated by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time, and the city's administrative standards are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in this article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this article. Copies of the manual and administrative standards shall be maintained by the city manager and available for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this article, the manual, and the administrative standards shall be resolved in the following order of superiority: administrative standards; followed by manual; followed by this article. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the city of Decatur municipal equivalents. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-187. - Protection of traffic and roadway. 
    Unless specifically provided in the permit, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless: 
(1)  Sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired; 
(2)  The installation does not prevent the city from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities; and 
(3)  Maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the rights-of-way or the rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-188. - Infrastructure modifications. 
    In the event the city needs to modify the grades, lines, or improvements for any street within the city's rights-of-way during the term of the utility permit and the modification involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, the utility shall, at its own cost and expense, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. Unless agreed to by the city, such actions shall be completed within 14 days of receipt of a written request from the city to undertake such actions. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-189. - Installation of facilities and relocation. 
    Unless otherwise expressly provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any facility of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the rights-of-way, and such facilities are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners in the immediate vicinity of the installation. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-190. - Notification prior to excavation. 
    As provided in O.C.G.A. § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next business day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than business days. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-191. - Restoration of property. 
    Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and any adjoining property or other facilities which are damaged by the utility or its facilities. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-192 - Cost of restoring property. 
    A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities. Such replacement or repair shall return the damaged street, facilities or property or structure to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair within 20 days after receipt of written notice from the city, the city may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-193. - Authorization to inspect. 
    The utility shall make the construction site available to the city manager and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-194. - Dangerous conditions. 
    At any time, including the time of inspection, the city manager may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or violates the terms and conditions of the utility permit and/or this article or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the utility permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-195. - Notification of completion. 
    When the construction under any utility permit is completed, the utility shall notify the city manager. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-196. - Additional permits required. 
    The utility shall obtain all construction, building and other permits and approvals required by city Code and by state and federal law. In addition, the holder of a utility permit shall comply with all requirements of laws, shall complete work in a rights-of-way as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and shall be responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way regardless of who performs the work. No obstruction of or excavation in the rights-of-way may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency as outlined in Section 86-182 of this article. registration in accordance with this article does not relieve an applicant of responsibility for compliance with Chapter 96 of Part III of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-197. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person guilty of a violation of this article shall be punished, upon conviction, as provided in Section 1-12 of Part III of this Code. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Sec. 86-198. - Reservation of regulatory and police powers. 
    The city, by issuing a written approval of registration under this article, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and Laws of the United States, State of Georgia and the City Charter, and under the provisions of the city Code to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility, by applying for and being issued a written utility permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 3-29-17) 
Chapter 94 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 22; vehicles for hire, ch. 102. 
Related laws references- Ad valorem tax deferral, art. III; homestead exemptions, art. IV. 
State Law reference- Limitation on taxing power of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VIII; taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 94-1-94-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ASSESSMENT FOR AD VALOREM TAXATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- The city enacts an ordinance each year fixing the rate of ad valorem taxes for ordinary current expenses, for support and maintenance of public schools, for the payment of interest on the bonded indebtedness, for the support and maintenance of the downtown development authority and for sanitation purposes. Official copies of the ordinance are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
State Law reference- Ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; municipal ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq. 

Sec. 94-31. - Percentage of fair market value. 
    For the purpose of raising revenues for the support and maintenance of the city, including support for the public schools in the city, taxable tangible property in the city shall be assessed at 50 percent of its fair market value and shall be taxed on a levy made according to 50 percent of the property's fair market value. 
(Ord. No. O-92-17, 9-21-92; Ord. No. O-96-11, 7-15-96) 
Secs. 94-32-94-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL/MOTEL EXCISE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-18-13, adopted July 16, 2018, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 94-51-94-61, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1967, §§ 121/2-91-121/2-101. 
State Law reference- Local excise taxes on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 94-51. - Intent, purpose, and authorization to levy excise tax. 
(a)  The intent of this article is to levy an excise tax on rooms, lodgings, and accommodations to provide additional funding for the promotion of tourism, conventions, and trade shows in the City of Decatur, Georgia. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to enact an excise tax upon the furnishing for value to the public of any room or rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished by any person or legal entity licensed by or required to pay business or occupational taxes to the City of Decatur, Georgia for operating within the city a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, rental cabin or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly furnished for value. 
(c)  This excise tax shall be imposed under the authorization of Act 532(SB 477) of the 2018 Regular Session of the Georgia General Assembly, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b). 
(Ord. No. O-18-13, 7-16-18) 
Sec. 94-52. - Definitions. 
    The following terms, for the purposes of this article, shall be defined as follows: 
    City. The City of Decatur, Georgia. 
    City manager. The duly appointed city manager, or his/her designee. 
    Destination marketing organization. A private sector nonprofit organization or other private entity which is exempt from federal income tax under Section 501(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 that is supported by the tax under this article, government budget allocations, private membership, or any combination thereof and the primary responsibilities of which are to encourage travelers to visit their destinations, encourage meetings and expositions in the area, and provide visitor assistance and support as needed. 
    Due date. The 20th day after the close of monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
    Guest room. Accommodations occupied, or intended, arranged, or designated for transient occupancy of not more than 30 continuous days, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
    Hotel. Includes any hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, campground, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly furnished for value and shall apply to the furnishing for value of any room, lodging, or accommodation. 
    Hotel/motel tax administrator. The individual or office designated by the city manager as the administrative entity to collect and administer the tax provided for in this section and to complete required annual reporting of the tax. 
    Innkeeper/lodging provider/operator. Any person who is subject to taxation under this article for the furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations or any person operating a hotel in the city including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in passion, licensee or any other such person operating such hotel. 
    Monthly period. Any calendar month of any year. 
    Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to use or possession, of any room or apartment in a hotel or motel, or the right to use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room or apartment. 
    Occupant. Any person (or persons utilizing as a single unit) who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess, any room or hotel or motel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, agreement or otherwise. 
    Permanent resident. Any occupant who as of a given date shall have occupied, or has or shall have the right of occupancy, of any guest room in a hotel for more than 30 consecutive days. 
    Person. An individual, firm partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust receiver, trustee, syndicate, business entity, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, to include the plural as well as the singular number, excepting, however, the United States of America, the State of Georgia, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
    Private sector non-profit organization. A chamber of commerce, a convention and visitors bureau, a regional travel association, or any other private group organized for similar purposes which is exempt from federal income tax under Section 501(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; provided, however, that a county or municipality which has prior to April 1, 1990, contracted for a required expenditure under this Code section with a private group which is exempt from federal income tax under provisions of Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code other than Section 501(c)(6) may continue to contract for required expenditures with such a private group. 
    Promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows. Planning, conducting, or participating in programs of information and publicity designed to attract or advertise tourism, conventions, or trade shows. 
    Rent. The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the lodging provider to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
    Return. Any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
    State authority. An authority created by state law which serves a state-wide function, including, but not limited to, the Georgia Agricultural Exposition Authority, Georgia Aviation Authority, Georgia Building Authority, Georgia Development Authority, Georgia Environmental Finance Authority, Jekyll Island Authority, Lake Allatoona Preservation Authority, Georgia Medical Center Authority, Georgia Ports Authority, Georgia Regional Transportation Authority, State Road and Tollway Authority, Sports Hall of Fame Authority, Georgia Technology Authority, and Georgia World Congress Center Authority, but shall not mean an authority created for support of a local government or a local purpose or function and shall not include authorities such as area planning and development commissions and any organizational entities they may create, regional commissions and any organizational entities they may create, or local water and sewer authorities. 
    Tax. The excise tax of eight percent on occupants imposed by this article, as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b). 
    Tourism product development. The expenditure of funds for the creation or expansion of physical attractions which are available and open to the public and which improve destination appeal to visitors, support visitors' experience, and are used by visitors. Such expenditures may include capital costs and operating expenses. Tourism product development may include: 
(a)  Lodging for the public for no longer than 30 consecutive days to the same customer; 
(b)  Overnight or short-term sites for recreational vehicles, trailers, campers, or tents; 
(c)  Meeting, convention, exhibit, and public assembly facilities; 
(d)  Sports stadiums, arenas, and complexes; 
(e)  Golf courses associated with a resort development that are open to the general public on a contract or fee basis; 
(f)  Racing facilities, including dragstrips, motorcycle racetracks, and auto or stock car racetracks or speedways; 
(g)  Amusement centers, amusement parks, theme parks, or amusement piers; 
(h)  Hunting preserves, trapping preserves, or fishing preserves or lakes; 
(i)  Visitor information and welcome centers; 
(j)  Wayfinding signage; 
(k)  Permanent, nonmigrating carnivals or fairs; 
(l)  Airplanes, helicopters, buses, vans, or boats for excursions or sightseeing; 
(m)  Boat rentals, boat party fishing services, rowboat or canoe rentals, horse shows, natural wonder attractions, picnic grounds, river-rafting services, scenic railroads for amusement, aerial tramways, rodeos, water slides, or wave pools; 
(n)  Museums, planetariums, art galleries, botanical gardens, aquariums, or zoological gardens; 
(o)  Parks, trails, and other recreational facilities; or 
(p)  Performing arts facilities. 
(Ord. No. O-18-13, 7-16-18) 
Sec. 94-53. - Tax rate. 
    There is hereby set and levied on the occupant of a guest room of any hotel/motel/cabin/residence/lodge located within the city a tax in the amount of eight percent of the gross rent for such occupancy. 
(Ord. No. O-18-13, 7-16-18) 
Sec. 94-54. - Exemptions. 
    In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(h), the tax imposed by this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Charges made for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided to any persons who certify that they are staying in such room, lodging, or accommodation as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty; 
(2)  The use of meeting rooms and other such facilities or any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided without charge; 
(3)  Any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more days for use by Georgia state or local governmental officials or employees when traveling on official business. Notwithstanding the availability of any other means of identifying the person as a state or local government official or employee, whenever a person pays for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations with a state or local government credit or debit card, such rooms, lodgings, or accommodations shall be deemed to have been furnished for use by a Georgia state or local government official or employee traveling on official business for purposes of the exemption provided by this paragraph. For purpose of the exemption provided under this paragraph, a local government official or employee shall include officials or employees of counties, municipalities, consolidated governments, or county or independent school districts; or 
(4)  Charges made for continuous use of any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations after the first 30 days of continuous occupancy. (O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(h)). 
(Ord. No. O-18-13, 7-16-18) 
Sec. 94-55. - Use of revenue. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b)(5)(A), an amount equal to not less than 50 percent of the total amount of taxes collected that exceed the amount of taxes that would be collected at the rate of five percent shall be expended for promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows by the destination marketing organization, as defined in this ordinance, designated by the city commission of the City of Decatur, Georgia; and 
(b)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b)(5)(B), the remaining amount of taxes collected that exceed the amount of taxes that would be collected at the rate of five percent which are not otherwise expended under section 94-56(a) of this article shall be expended for tourism product development, as defined in this ordinance; and 
(c)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3), the amount of taxes that would be collected at the rate of five percent, as referenced in sections 94-56(a) and 94-56(b) of this article, an amount equal to the amount by which the total taxes collected under this Code section exceed the taxes which would be collected at a rate of three percent for the purpose of: (A) promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows; (B) supporting a facility owned or operated by a state authority for convention and trade show purposes or any other similar or related purposes; (C) supporting a facility owned or operated by a local government or local authority for convention and trade show purposes or any other similar or related purposes, if a written agreement to provide such support was in effect on January 1, 1987, and if such facility is substantially completed and in operation prior to July 1, 1987; (D) supporting a facility owned or operated by a local government or local authority for convention and trade show purposes or any other similar or related purposes if construction of such facility is funded or was funded prior to July 1, 1990, in whole or in part by a grant of state funds or is funded on or after July 1, 1990, in whole or substantially by an appropriation of state funds; (E) supporting a facility owned by a local government or local authority for convention and trade show purposes and any other similar or related purposes if construction of such facility is substantially funded or was substantially funded on or after February 28, 1985, by a special county one percent sales and use tax authorized by Article 3 of Chapter 8 of this title, as amended and if such facility was substantially completed and in operation prior to December 31, 1993; or (F) for some combination of such purposes. Amounts so expended shall be expended only through a contract or contracts with the state, a department of state government, a state authority, a convention and visitors bureau authority created by local Act of the General Assembly for a municipality, or a private sector nonprofit organization, or through a contract or contracts with some combination of such entities, except that amounts expended for purposes (C) and (D) may be so expended in any otherwise lawful manner. 
(Ord. No. O-18-13, 7-16-18) 
Sec. 94-56. - Record keeping. 
(a)  Records required from operators; form. Every operator renting guestrooms in this city to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the hotel/motel tax administrator may require or may be required by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-53.4 and § 48-13-62. 
(b)  Examination of records; audits. The hotel/motel tax administrator or any person authorized in writing by the hotel/motel tax administrator may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guestrooms to a person and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(c)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the hotel/motel tax administrator may require the filing of reports by any persons or class of persons having in such person's possession or custody information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the hotel/motel tax administrator, when required by the hotel/motel tax administrator, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date of occupancy, and such other information as the hotel/motel tax administrator may require. 
(Ord. No. O-18-13, 7-16-18) 
Sec. 94-57. - Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
(a)  Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall immediately register with the hotel/motel tax administrator, on a form provided by the hotel/motel tax administrator. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives, and the tax is imposed as set forth in section 94-54, but such privilege of registration after the imposition of such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof, regardless of registration. 
(b)  Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of this place of business and such other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the hotel/motel tax administrator may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; and in the case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The hotel/motel tax administrator shall, after such registration, issue, without charge, a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. No. O-18-13, 7-16-18) 
Sec. 94-58. - Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes and returns . All amount of such taxes shall be due and payable as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-53.2. 
(b)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-52. 
(Ord. No. O-18-13, 7-16-18) 
Sec. 94-59. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the hotel/motel tax administrator is not satisfied with the return of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, he/she may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his/her possession or that may come into his/her possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly period. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof from the due date of taxes. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service. The hotel/motel tax administrator or his/her designated representatives shall give to the operator written notice of his/her determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the hotel/motel tax administrator. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. No. O-18-13, 7-16-18) 
Sec. 94-60. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the hotel/motel tax administrator shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the hotel/motel tax administrator. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 94-59(c). 
(b)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(Ord. No. O-18-13, 7-16-18) 
Sec. 94-61. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Unpaid tax. Any tax due and payable under this article shall become delinquent for each month after the 20th day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)  Action for delinquent tax. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the hotel/motel tax administrator may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(c)  Extensions. The governing authority may grant an extension for payment of the tax as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-53.3. 
(d)  Duty to withhold tax. Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. Governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-53.1. 
(e)  Liability. Liability for failure to withhold; certificate of notice of amount due; time to enforce successor's liability. Governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-53.1. 
(f)  Tax credit for interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this article, it may be offset by the hotel/motel tax administrator. If the operator or person determines that he/she has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the hotel/motel tax administrator, he/she will have three years from the date of payment to file a claim, in writing, stating the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the hotel/motel tax administrator, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid, or his/her administrators or executors. 
(Ord. No. O-18-13, 7-16-18) 
Sec. 94-62. - Penalties and punishments for violation of this article. 
(a)  Penalties. When any person fails to make a return or to pay the full amount of the tax, or when submitting a false or fraudulent return, penalties shall be imposed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-58. 
(b)  Punishments. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-12 except that any person in violation of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-58.1, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-59, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-60, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-61, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-62 and O.C.G.A. § 48-13-63 shall be subject to the applicable penalties and punishments specified on those sections. 
(Ord. No. O-18-13, 7-16-18) 
Sec. 94-63. - Effective date. 
    The ordinance from which this article derives shall take effect on the 1st day of October, 2018. 
(Ord. No. O-18-13, 7-16-18) 
Chapter 96 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND CABLE SERVICES FRANCHISES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 22; environment, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; traffic and vehicles, ch. 98; zoning, pt. IV. UDO. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 96-1. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words used in the singular number include the plural number. 
    Cable services means "cable services" as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and as may be further amended from time to time (the "cable act"). In the event that "cable services" is no longer defined in the cable act or the definition in the cable act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "cable services" shall mean "cable services" as defined in the cable act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the cable act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
    Cable system means any "cable system" as defined in the cable act. 
    City means the City of Decatur. 
    City commission means the city commission of the city and its designee or any successor thereto. 
    Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets to provide telecommunications services. 
    Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to construct, install, operate and maintain a system of equipment as necessary to furnish, supply and distribute cable or telecommunications services or both, to inhabitants within the franchise area. 
    May is permissive. 
    Ordinance means this chapter and all modifications and amendments thereto. 
    Person means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city. 
    Shall is mandatory, not merely directory. 
    Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city. 
    Telecommunications services means the receipt and/or distribution, through any means, including, without limitation, coaxial cable, optical fiber, or satellite or microwave transmission, of one or more audio, voice or data signals. Telecommunications services includes both cable services and noncable telecommunications services. 
(Ord. No. O-96-16, 12-2-96) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 96-2. - Delegation. 
    Consistent with applicable law, the city commission shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and to revoke any such delegation or redelegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this chapter to any body, organization or official. Any such delegation, redelegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this chapter or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or franchisee. The city commission may also establish and appoint one or more advisory boards, with such duration and such number of members as the city commission shall determine, to advise it on such of the matters which are the subject of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-96-16, 12-2-96) 
Secs. 96-3-96-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GRANTING AUTHORITY AND FRANCHISING PROCEDURE 

Sec. 96-31. - Granting authority. 
(a)  No person shall provide cable services or operate a cable system without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and no person shall use or occupy the streets to provide any telecommunications service other than cable services without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The city commission may grant one or more franchises in accordance with this chapter, provided that the city commission reserves the right to modify any provision of this chapter by amendment hereof. 
(c)  The grant of any franchise shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the city commission and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in such separate ordinance and/or a franchise agreement between the city and the franchisee. 
(d)  Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises as it deems appropriate and/or itself engage in the provision of telecommunications services. 
(e)  A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city and for all or less than all telecommunications services, and for telecommunications services for all or less than all purposes. 
(f)  The grant of franchises by the city shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, governing cable television franchises and renewals thereof. 
(Ord. No. O-96-16, 12-2-96) 
Sec. 96-32. - Franchise applications. 
(a)  Applications for franchises shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the city commission may determine, subject to applicable law. 
(b)  Any application for a franchise shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise and such other information as the city commission shall deem necessary or appropriate: 
(1)  Applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or social security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by applicant; 
(2)  A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including but not limited to the following, and to whatever extent required by the city: 
a.  The names and residence and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
b.  The names, residence and business addresses of all persons and entities having any share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each person or entity; 
c.  The names and address of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity, including but not limited to telecommunications or cable systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent, and subsidiary, and the areas served thereby; 
d.  A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the commission, setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed telecommunications or cable system in the city, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net, and uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed cable or telecommunications system in the city; 
e.  A detailed financial plan (pro forma) describing for each year of the franchise projected number of subscribers, rates, all revenues, operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedules, income statements, and a sources and uses of funds statement; and 
f.  A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable system or telecommunications franchise(s) awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary; the status of such franchise(s) with respect to completion thereof; the total cost of completion of such franchised cable or telecommunications system(s); and the amount of applicant's and its parent's or subsidiary's resources committed to the completion thereof; 
(3)  A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  A description of the cable services and any other telecommunications services proposed to be provided; 
b.  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be serviced; 
c.  A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications or rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of such classifications, including installation charges, cable service charges, and any other telecommunications service charges; 
d.  A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant; 
e.  A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking, or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber to cable or telecommunications services; and 
f.  A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm, or corporation which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the franchise; 
(4)  A copy of any agreement covering the franchise area, if existing between the applicant and any utility providing for the use of any facilities of the utility, including but not limited to, poles, lines, or conduits; and 
(5)  Any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the commission, or by any other provision of law. 
(Ord. No. O-96-16, 12-2-96) 
Sec. 96-33. - Nonrefundable application fees for new franchises. 
(a)  Payment of fee. No application for a new franchise shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded. 
(b)  Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal, and consultant's expenses. 
(c)  Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this chapter, each applicant must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $5,000.00 by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the city. 
(Ord. No. O-96-16, 12-2-96; Ord. No. O-98-09, 3-16-98) 
Sec. 96-34. - Responsibilities of applicants. 
    It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. O-96-16, 12-2-96) 
Sec. 96-35. - Public availability of applications. 
    To the extent determined by the city commission, applications for franchises, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designated city office during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. O-96-16, 12-2-96) 
Sec. 96-36. - Evaluation criteria. 
    In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a franchise, the city commission may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation: 
(1)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city, including the value of any facilities and telecommunications services offered by the applicant to the city; 
(2)  The legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications of the applicant; 
(3)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
(4)  The value and efficiency to the city and its residents of the cable services and other telecommunications services to be provided, including the type of telecommunications services to be provided, as well as alternatives to those services and services that may be precluded by the grant of the franchise; 
(5)  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise; and 
(6)  Any other public interest factors or considerations deemed pertinent by the city for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public. 
(Ord. No. O-96-16, 12-2-96) 
Sec. 96-37. - Procedure for consideration of and action on application. 
(a)  The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the city commission deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises and determine whether a franchise should be granted to an applicant, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In considering applications, the city commission may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one or more reports to be submitted to the city commission, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
(b)  If the city commission, after considering such information as it determines to be appropriate, elects to further consider one or more applications, the city commission shall set one or more public hearings for consideration of the application(s), fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objections thereto may file written comments and appear before the city commission and be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing(s) in accordance with applicable law. 
(c)  The city commission may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants to determine whether the city and such applicants are able to reach agreement on the terms of the proposed franchise. 
(d)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city commission, the city commission may grant the franchise, and may specify the conditions under which the franchise is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications from whatever source and whenever received except that a franchising authority may not grant an exclusive franchise and may not unreasonably refuse to award an additional competitive franchise. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby and may, if it so desires, request new or additional proposals. 
(Ord. No. O-96-16, 12-2-96) 
Sec. 96-38. - Terms and conditions of franchise. 
(a)  The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, shall address the following subjects: 
(1)  The term of the franchise; 
(2)  The franchise area and the cable services and other telecommunications services and purposes of such other telecommunications services, if any, which are the subject of the franchise; 
(3)  The compensation to be paid to the city, which may include the payment of fees or the provision of facilities or services, or both; 
(4)  The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or canceled; 
(5)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the franchisee's obligations under the franchise; 
(6)  The city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the franchisee; 
(7)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the franchisee; 
(8)  The obligation of the franchisee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
(9)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods; 
(10)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies, including, without limitation, those related to employment, purchasing and investigations; 
(11)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight and regulation of the franchisee by the city; 
(12)  Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise without the prior written consent of the city; 
(13)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the franchisee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise; 
(14)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the franchisee, including the Federal Communications Commission; 
(15)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will protect the property of the city and the delivery of public services from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise; 
(16)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise; and 
(17)  Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the public interest. 
(Ord. No. O-96-16, 12-2-96) 
Chapter 98 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Emergency services, ch. 38; law enforcement, ch. 62; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70; vehicles for hire, ch. 102. 
Related laws references- Parking authority, art. I; off-street parking, art. II. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; deposit of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; authority to regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on the highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3); prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq.; traffic offenses triable on complaint without indictment except in superior courts, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-3; alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183; uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq.; Handicapped Parking Law, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-220 et seq.; bicycles and play vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-290 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76; operation of motorcycles and motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7; authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); responsibility of railroad employees for obstructing crossings, O.C.G.A. § 46-8-197; jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a); sirens, whistles and bells prohibited on vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-70(b). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 98-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
(a)  The provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372-40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-2-40-6-395, known as the uniform rules of the road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12. 
Sec. 98-2. - Records of traffic violations-Generally; records to be serially numbered. 
(a)  The police department shall keep a record of all violations of this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged in the municipal court, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each. Such record shall accumulate during at least a five-year period, and from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period. 
(b)  All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be kept available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms. 
(c)  All such records and reports shall be public records. 
(Code 1967, § 14-147) 
Sec. 98-3. - Same-Drivers' files to be maintained. 
(a)  The police department shall maintain a suitable record of all arrests and convictions for violations of this chapter and other traffic ordinances reported for each driver which shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the person so arrested or convicted. 
(b)  Such records shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and from that time on such records shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period. 
(Code 1967, § 14-148) 
Sec. 98-4. - City-owned parking lots. 
(a)  No person shall park or stand in the city hall parking lot except employees of the city and then only in such places therein as designated by markings authorized by the city manager. 
(b)  No person shall park or stand in any city-owned parking lot or city-owned alley except employees of the city or patrons of a city-owned facility and then only in such places therein as designated by markings authorized by the city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 14-98; Ord. No. O-93-07, 8-2-93) 
Sec. 98-5. - Inoperable motor vehicles. 
    No owner or person having right of possession of a motor vehicle shall allow such motor vehicle to remain parked on a public street, public street right-of-way or public property for a period exceeding 24 hours if such motor vehicle is inoperable. For the purposes of this section, an inoperable motor vehicle shall mean one that is incapable of being moved under its own power, is in a state of disrepair which makes it unsafe to operate upon a public street or has one or more flat tires. 
(Ord. No. O-91-03, 3-4-91) 
Sec. 98-6. - Use of television and radio sets in vehicles. 
(a)  When any vehicle has a television or video set therein, it shall not be operated in view of the driver while the vehicle is in motion. 
(b)  When any vehicle has a radio set therein, such radio set shall not be operated at a volume great enough to prevent the driver of the vehicle from hearing horn signals of other vehicles or the warnings of emergency vehicles. 
(Code 1967, § 14-26) 
Sec. 98-7. - Towing. 
    No vehicle shall tow more than one other vehicle, nor shall the connection between vehicles exceed 16 feet in length. 
(Code 1967, § 14-27) 
Sec. 98-8. - Projecting loads. 
    No vehicle shall be allowed the use of the streets with a load projecting more than four feet in the rear of the body of such vehicle or more than one foot to either side of the vehicle, unless such load has a red flag at least 12 inches square attached to the extreme ends of such projecting load during the daylight hours, and a red light or lantern securely attached to the projecting load during the night hours. 
(Code 1967, § 14-28) 
Sec. 98-9. - Resident parking only districts. 
(a)  Resident parking only districts are those streets or parts of streets in residentially zoned areas of the city designated by the city commission where parking on the designated street or part of the street is permitted only for residents of the designated street or part of the street, for the guests and visitors of such residents and for commercial vehicles making deliveries to such residents. When a street or part of a street has been designated as such by the city commission and a sign with the legend "resident parking only" has or have been erected, it shall be unlawful for any person other than those permitted by this section to park a vehicle on such street or part of street. 
(b)  The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as resident parking only districts: 
(1)  Garden Lane, from Clairemont Avenue to Scott Boulevard. 
(2)  Montgomery Street, north side, from Ponce de Leon Place to Northern Avenue. Montgomery Street, south side, from Ponce de Leon Place to and including number 324. 
(3)  Ponce de Leon Place, from Montgomery Street to Plainview Street. 
(4)  Glenn Street, from East Ponce de Leon Avenue to Sycamore Street. 
(5)  Mountainview Street, from Sycamore Street to Oak Lane. 
(6)  Poplar Street, from Grove Street to East Ponce de Leon Avenue. 
(7)  North side of Sycamore Street, from the 700 block to Glenn Street. 
(8)  North Candler Street, from 119 North Candler Street to Sycamore Street. 
(9)  Sycamore Drive, from Hillcrest Avenue to Springdale Street. 
(10)  Oak Lane, from Hillcrest Avenue to its dead end. 
(11)  Barry Street. 
(12)  Commerce Drive, west side, Trinity to Robin Street. 
(13)  Fairview Avenue, between Montgomery Street and West Ponce de Leon Avenue. 
(14)  Beaumont Avenue, from number 119 to Ponce de Leon Place. 
(15)  Grove Street, from Sycamore Drive to Lockwood Terrace. 
(16)  Winter Avenue, east side only. 
(17)  Hillcrest Avenue, west side from 106 Hillcrest Avenue to Sycamore Drive. 
(18)  Hillcrest Avenue, east side from number 111 to number 301. 
(19)  Avery Street, from East College Avenue to Winnona Drive. 
(20)  West Trinity Place, south side, from Commerce to Electric Avenue. 
(21)  Poplar Circle, north side only. 
(22)  Pinehurst Street. 
(23)  Lockwood Terrace. 
(24)  Charter Court. 
(25)  West Trinity Place, south side, from its intersection with Charter Court to a point 200 feet east of such intersection. 
(26)  Park Drive, 40 feet from South Chandler Street to its easterly terminus. 
(27)  West Dearborn Circle from Park Drive to a distance 250 feet south. 
(28)  Kings Highway, the 100 block, west side only. 
(29)  Montgomery Street between Hampton Lane and Ponce de Leon Place, south side only. 
(30)  Northern Avenue from 117 Northern Avenue to Montgomery Street. 
(31)  Glendale Avenue, from 50 feet north of East Ponce de Leon Avenue to 123 Glendale Avenue. 
(32)  The south side of West Trinity Place from Charter Court to West Ponce de Leon Avenue. 
(33)  Avery Street, between Poplar Circle and Inman Drive, west side only. 
(34)  Eastlake Drive, between Second Avenue and Third Avenue, south side only. 
(35)  Pinetree Drive, between West Ponce de Leon Avenue to the eastern property line at 637 Pinetree Drive, north side only. 
(36)  Commerce Drive, west side from Robin Street to a distance 550 feet south. 
(37)  Robin Street, north side from Electric Avenue to Commerce Drive. 
(Code 1967, § 14-93.2; Ord. No. O-89-24, 11-20-89; Ord. No. O-92-14, 6-15-92; Ord. No. O-91-08, 5-8-91; Ord. No. O-96-12, 8-12-96; Ord. No. O-92-05, 1-21-97; Ord. No. O-97-15, 4-21-97; Ord. No. O-97-31, 12-15-97; Ord. No. O-00-06, 6-5-00; Ord. No. O-00-13, 8-7-00; Ord. No. O-02-03, 5-6-02; Ord. No. O-05-15, 11-7-05; Ord. No. O-09-07, 6-15-09; Ord. No. O-13-16, 12-16-13) 
Sec. 98-10. - Bus routes to be designated and observed. 
    Those city streets upon which it shall be permissible to operate public transit buses and common carrier buses shall be designated by resolution of the city commission. Under emergency conditions, the city manager shall be authorized to issue temporary regulations which prohibit the operation of buses on streets where such operations have been permitted by the city commission and to permit the operation of buses on streets where such operation has not been permitted by the city commission. No person shall operate a bus on a city street unless such street has been approved for the operation of buses by the city commission or by temporary regulation issued by the city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 14-191) 
Sec. 98-11. - Driving past persons working on streets. 
    The maximum rate of speed shall be 15 miles per hour when approaching or driving past persons working in the street who are city employees, public utility employees or those granted permission of the city; provided, however, that such workers have erected a sign reading: "Slow-Men Working," or such sign as may be prescribed by the city manager and chief of police, and such sign is in accordance with the specifications of the city manager and chief of police. 
(Code 1967, § 14-14) 
Sec. 98-12. - Use of coasters, roller skates, skateboards, in-line skates and similar devices. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Skateboard means a single platform which is mounted on wheels, having no mechanism or other device with which to power, steer or control the direction of movement thereof while being used, operated or ridden. 
(2)  Roller skates means a pair of shoes mounted upon two sets of wheels and is most often propelled by the user in an upright, standing position or kneeling. 
(3)  Coasters means a footboard mounted upon two or more wheels and controlled by an upright steering handle. This device is propelled by the user in usually an upright position. 
(4)  In-line skates means a pair of shoes or boots, mounted upon three or more sets of wheels located one behind the other under the attached shoe or boot, and is more often propelled by the user in an upright, standing position. 
(5)  Pedestrian preference area for purposes of this section, this term shall mean the following streets: 
Church Street between East Maple Street and Commerce Drive 
Clairemont Avenue between West Ponce De Leon Avenue and Commerce Drive 
North Candler Street between East Ponce de Leon Avenue and Commerce Drive 
Commerce Drive between West Trinity Place and Sycamore Street 
West Ponce De Leon Avenue between Water Street and Clairemont Avenue 
East Ponce De Leon Avenue between Clairemont Avenue and Commerce Drive 
East Court Square 
Swanton Way 
Sycamore Street between Church Street and Swanton Way 
North McDonough Street between Sycamore Street and East Maple Street. 
East Trinity Place between East Howard Avenue and North McDonough Street 
West Trinity Place between North McDonough Street and Commerce Drive 
Ponce de Leon Place between West Ponce de Leon Avenue and Swanton Way 
Sycamore Place between Commerce Drive and East Howard Avenue 
(b)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated a coaster, roller skates, skateboard, in-line skates or similar device in or upon any public street within the pedestrian preference area, any public sidewalk, path, streetscape, or driveway adjacent to any public street within the pedestrian preference area, or any municipally owned parking lot adjacent to any public street within the pedestrian preference area. However, this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any portion of the multi-modal path that is reserved for pedestrians or cyclists; 
(2)  Any street, while such street is set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinance of the city. 
(c)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated a coaster, roller skates, skateboard, in-line skates or similar device in any privately owned parking lot adjacent to any public street within the pedestrian preference area if such parking lot is open to the public for parking (whether free or for-charge). However, this section shall not apply to any person who has obtained the express written permission of the property owner to engage in such activity. 
(d)  No person shall take hold of or hang on to any automobile or other vehicle while operating a coaster, roller skates, skateboard or in-line skates. 
(e)  No person operating a coaster, roller skates, skateboard or in-line skates on any street shall interfere with the natural progress of automobiles. 
(f)  No person operating a coaster, roller skates, skateboard or in-line skates on any sidewalk shall interfere with the natural progress of pedestrians. 
(g)  The parent/guardian of any child and the guardian of the person of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1967, § 14-18; Ord. No. O-10-04, 5-3-10) 
Sec. 98-13. - Bicycles-Parking. 
    No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at a curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1967, § 14-130) 
Sec. 98-14. - Same-Riding on sidewalks. 
    Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(Code 1967, § 14-131) 
Sec. 98-15. - Same-Acrobatic or fancy riding on streets; racing. 
    No rider of any bicycle shall remove both hands from the handlebars or feet from the pedals, or practice any acrobatic or fancy riding on any street. Nor shall any person operating a bicycle upon a street participate in any race of speed or endurance in a contest with any other bicycle or vehicle. 
(Code 1967, § 14-133) 
Sec. 98-16. - Supplemental parking regulations. 
(a)  No person shall stand, stop or park a vehicle upon a public roadway for the following purposes: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except for repairs necessary by a sudden emergency, and in such emergency such vehicle shall be moved or towed away with all due haste. 
(3)  For displaying advertising. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in the following places: 
(1)  Between the front building line and the front property line except on a bona fide paved or graveled driveway leading to a garage, carport or other permanent parking space located to the rear of the front building line. 
(2)  Circular driveways leading to and from a street are permitted but may not be used to provide a parking space in conflict with item (1) above. 
(3)  Paved parking areas will not be permitted between the front building line and the front property line except where a variance permitting such parking has been approved by the zoning board of appeals according to the requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-95-19, 12-20-95) 
Sec. 98-17. - Parking restrictions for commercial vehicles on residential streets. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park any truck or other commercial or freight-carrying vehicle in excess of three-quarter ton capacity (8,700 pounds gross vehicle weight maximum), as identified, classified or defined by the manufacturer, nor any bus on any public street within a residentially-zoned district, as defined by the zoning ordinance of the city, for any period longer than two hours, except when actually engaged in loading or unloading operations. 
(Ord. No. O-98-01, § 1, 1-20-98) 
Sec. 98-18. - Parking prohibited on narrow streets. 
(a)  The city manager is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(b)  When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign. 
(Ord. No. O-00-08, 7-5-00) 
Sec. 98-19. - Restrictions on vehicle size. 
    No vehicle with a wheelbase greater than 16 feet or a total length greater than 25 feet shall be permitted on the following streets without a permit from the city manager: 
(1)  East Court Square from East Ponce de Leon Avenue to dead end. 
(2)  North McDonough Street from East Trinity Place to dead end. 
(Ord. No. O-03-02, 3-3-03) 
Sec. 98-20. - Bicycle lanes-Improper use. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Bicycle lane means a portion of the roadway that has been designated by striping, pavement, markings, or signage for the exclusive or preferential use of persons operating bicycles. 
(b)  No person shall drive or otherwise operate a motor vehicle in, on, or across a bicycle lane except: 
(1)  When turning into or leaving property adjacent to the roadway; 
(2)  When turning onto or from another public or private roadway; 
(3)  When turning into or leaving a designated, on-street parking space; 
(4)  When yielding the right of way to an authorized emergency vehicle; or 
(5)  When driving an authorized emergency vehicle in the performance of duty. 
(c)  No person shall park a motor vehicle in, on, or across a bicycle lane except: 
(1)  When necessary for an authorized emergency vehicle in the performance of duty; 
(2)  When necessary to do so because the motor vehicle is inoperable, as that term is defined in section 98-5; or 
(3)  When directed to do so by a police officer. 
(d)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. O-13-01, 2-4-13) 
Sec. 98-21. - Temporary permit parking only restrictions. 
    In order to facilitate traffic control during construction activity, special events, times of emergency, and similar circumstances, the city manager may designate streets or parts of streets where parking on the designated street or part of street is allowed only for such persons who have obtained a permit issued by the city manager. When a street or part of street has been so designated and signs with the legend 'permit parking only' have been erected, it shall be unlawful for any person other than those who have a permit to park a vehicle on said street or part of street. Streets or part of streets may be designated for permit parking only restrictions for a period of no more than 12 months. 
(Ord. No. O-13-04, 2-19-13) 
Secs. 98-22-98-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKING METERS 

Sec. 98-46. - Zones established. 
    Parking meter zones of the city shall be as established by the city commission and, when so established and clearly marked as such, or upon parking meters being installed, such areas shall be the parking meter zones of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 14-103) 
Sec. 98-47. - Installation and function of meters. 
    Parking meters shall be installed under the supervision of the city manager and the chief of police in all parking meter zones. The parking meters shall be placed upon the curb immediately adjacent to the individual parking places. Each parking meter shall be placed or set in such manner as to show or display by a signal that the parking space adjacent to such meter is or is not legally in use. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend the legal parking time established by the city, and, when operated, shall indicate on and by its dial and pointer the duration of the period of legal parking, and on the expiration of such period shall indicate "violation," or over parking. 
(Code 1967, § 14-104) 
Sec. 98-48. - Designation of parking spaces. 
    The city manager and the chief of police shall have lines or markings painted or placed upon the curb or upon the street adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of designating the parking space for which the meter is to be used. Each vehicle parking adjacent or next to any parking meter shall park within the lines or markings so established. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any such line or marking or to park any vehicle in such a position that it shall not be entirely within the area so designated by such lines or markings. 
(Code 1967, § 14-105) 
Sec. 98-49. - Angle parking zones. 
    When a parking space in any parking meter zone is at an angle to the adjacent curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parking in such parking space shall be parked with the front of such vehicle nearest to such meter. 
(Code 1967, § 14-106) 
Sec. 98-50. - Use of zones and operation of meters. 
    Between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday of each week it shall be unlawful for any operator to drive a vehicle into any parking meter space unless he shall, upon entering the parking space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited coins of the United States, as required on the legend on the meter, in such parking meter and put such meter in operation. Upon the deposit of such coin or coins and the placing of such meter in operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period of parking time which has been purchased, as indicated on the meter, for the part of the street in which the parking space is located. If such vehicle shall remain parked in any such parking space beyond the parking time limit fixed for such parking space, the parking meter shall, by its dial and pointer, indicate such illegal parking by displaying the word "expired," and, in that event, such vehicle shall be considered as parked overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time. 
(Code 1967, § 14-107) 
Sec. 98-51. - Overtime parking. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow or permit any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time established for any parking meter zone, as described in this article, or to deposit in any parking meter any coin for the purpose of parking beyond the maximum legal parking time for the particular parking meter zone. 
(Code 1967, § 14-108) 
Sec. 98-52. - Tampering with, breaking or destroying meters. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 14-109) 
Sec. 98-53. - Use of slugs or other coin substitutes. 
    It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or metallic substance, or any other substitute for a coin of the United States. 
(Code 1967, § 14-110) 
Sec. 98-54. - Arrest procedure; prompt payment of fines. 
(a)  In all cases of violations under the provisions of this article, a parking officer or police officer of the city, shall attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof to the effect that such vehicle has been parked in violation of this article and directing such owner or operator to appear at the municipal court at the stated time. 
(b)  However, each such owner or operator may, within the times prescribed in subsection (c) of this section after the time when such notice was attached to such vehicle, pay to the clerk of the municipal court the sums stated in subsection (c) of this section in full satisfaction for each violation. 
(c)  Penalties for violations of the provisions and parking restrictions of this article are hereby fixed as follows: 
(1)  Violation of metered parking restrictions: 
a.  If paid within seven days ..... $ 15.00 
b.  If paid after seven days, but within 20 days ..... 30.00 
(2)  Violation of no parking restriction: 
a.  If paid within seven days ..... 25.00 
b.  If paid after seven days, but within 20 days ..... 50.00 
(3)  Parking overtime: 
a.  If paid within seven days ..... 20.00 
b.  If paid after seven days, but within 20 days ..... 40.00 
(4)  Violation of loading zone, bus stop, fire hydrant or intersection restriction: 
a.  If paid within seven days ..... 40.00 
b.  If paid after seven days, but within 20 days ..... 80.00 
(5)  Violation of fire lane: 
a.  If paid within seven days ..... 50.00 
b.  If paid after seven days, but within 20 days ..... 100.00 
(6)  Violation of handicap parking restrictions: 
a.  First offense ..... 120.00 
b.  Second offense ..... 240.00 
c.  Third offense ..... 500.00 
(d)  Fines in subsections (c)(2)-(c)(4) of this section apply if paid within seven days. If such fines are not paid within seven days, violations of subsections (c)(1)-(c)(4) of this section shall be punished as provided by the provisions of section 1-12. 
(Code 1967, § 14-111; Ord. No. O-94-08, 6-6-94; Ord. No. O-98-18, 10-5-98) 
Sec. 98-55. - Use of coins deposited. 
    The amount of the coins required to be deposited in parking meters is hereby levied and assessed as a fee to provide for the proper regulation, control and inspection of traffic upon the public streets; to cover the cost of supervising, regulating and inspecting the parking of vehicles in the parking meter zones; the cost of placing and maintaining lines or markings, designating parking spaces in parking meter zones; and the cost of the purchase, supervision, inspection, installation, operation, maintenance, control and use of the parking meters installed in accordance with this article and for other purposes. 
(Code 1967, § 14-112) 
Secs. 98-56-98-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE TRESPASS TOWING 

Sec. 98-81. - Licensing and registration. 
(a)  Business license required. It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent or employee, to use or operate upon any of the streets of the city a wrecker or to do any trespass towing without having obtained a business license granted pursuant to chapter 22 of this Code. 
(b)  Removal only in areas properly posted. It shall be unlawful for a person hired by the owner of private property within the city to remove vehicles from any off-street parking facility or to do any trespass towing unless there shall have been previously posted on the property the signs required to be posted as provided by this section and as provided by O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. 
(1)  Signs shall be located at each designated entrance to a parking lot or parking area where parking prohibitions are to be effective. Where there is not a designated entrance, such signs shall be erected so as to be clearly visible from each and every parking space. 
(2)  The wording on such signs shall state that any vehicle parked thereon which is not authorized to be parked in such area may be removed at a maximum cost, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, and stored at a maximum cost, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, per day, to be paid by the owner, shall state the address of the location to which such vehicles are towed, shall state that checks and credit cards shall be accepted in lieu of cash and for no additional fee, shall state that no storage fee may be charged if the vehicle has been held less than 24 hours, shall state that these conditions are required by state law and city ordinances, and shall state that complaints may be made to the police division at 373-6551. The lettering on such signs shall be black on a white, reflective grade background, and shall be illuminated if out of headlight range. 
(Ord. No. O-91-20, § 1(121/2-72), 9-3-91) 
Sec. 98-82. - Vehicle not to be towed upon operator's return prior to wrecker departure. 
    The operator of any wrecker service vehicle summoned to tow away any vehicle, whether on a public street, public property or private property, shall not tow the vehicle away and shall not charge any fee if the operator of the vehicle returns prior to the wrecker vehicle having left the location to which it was summoned. 
(Ord. No. O-91-20, § 1(121/2-73), 9-3-91) 
Sec. 98-83. - Towing and storage fees. 
(a)  Any towing and storage firm engaged in the business of trespass towing shall not charge the owner of any towed vehicle or personal property in excess of an amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for the removal of the vehicle or personal property, or in excess of an amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, per day, for storage fees; provided, however, that no storage fees shall be charged for the first 24-hour period from the time the vehicle or personal property is removed from the property. The fee set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall be all inclusive. No additional fees may be charged for using dollies, trailers, lifts, slim jims, or any other equipment or service. However, the maximum fees in this section shall not apply to the trespass towing of vehicles which weigh in excess of two tons. 
(b)  Any towing and storage firm engaged in the business of trespass towing shall accept payment of fees in each of the following ways: in cash; by check, if proper identification is provided; and by at least one major credit card. 
(c)  Trespass towing and storage fees shall be established annually by the city commission after receiving recommendations from the city manager based on financial information submitted by the trespass towing firms as to their costs for the removal and storage of vehicles and personal property and on other information and shall be set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. Information shall be submitted by licensees by October 31 of each year. 
(Ord. No. O-91-20, § 1(121/2-74), 9-3-91) 
Sec. 98-84. - Use of mechanical locking device or boot for automobiles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except for law enforcement personnel, to affix mechanical locking devices, including those commonly referred to as "boots," to any automobile parked in any off-street parking facility, lot or area located on private property within the city, regardless of whether a charge for parking is assessed, unless the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Signs shall be located at each designated entrance and exit to the parking facility, lot or area where such a device is to be used indicating that parking prohibitions are in effect, such signs being erected so as to be clearly visible upon entering and exiting the lot. Signs shall also be erected within the lot, so that a sign can be clearly visible from each and every parking space. For the purpose of this section, the term "clearly visible" shall mean the sign is posted facing the restricted parking spaces, the sign is positioned so that the bottom edge is at least four feet from the ground and no more than six feet from the ground and at least one sign is posted for every row of parking spaces. Any row of parking spaces in excess of 30 feet shall have one sign posted every 30 feet. 
(2)  Signs shall be a minimum of 30 inches by 30 inches in size and lettering on the sign shall be a minimum of 3/4 inch in height. 
(3)  The wording on such signs shall contain the following information: 
a.  A statement that any vehicle parked thereon which is not authorized to be parked in such area may be subject to use of a mechanical locking device. 
b.  Set forth the maximum fee for removal of the device. 
c.  The name, address and phone number of the company setting the device. 
d.  The name, address and phone number of the owner of the parking facility, lot or area. 
e.  A statement that cash and credit cards are accepted for payment. 
f.  A statement that no additional fee will be charged for use of credit cards. 
g.  Reserved. 
h.  A statement that if you leave the lot you will be booted. 
i.  A statement that lists the names of the businesses served by the parking lot. 
(4)  Phone numbers referenced in subsection (2)c. above must be operable and answered in person during the hours mechanical locking devices are in use. 
(5)  Lettering on such signs shall be black on white. If mechanical locking devices are to be utilized before 7:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m., the signs shall have a reflective grade background, and be illuminated if out of headlight range. 
(6)  The operator of the mechanical locking device shall remain on-site at the parking facility, lot or area at all times when mechanical locking devices are in use and affixed to a vehicle. The attendant shall have immediate access to equipment to remove or release the locking device. The attendant shall have the means to accept and receive payment in cash, or by at least one major credit card. 
(7)  The operator of the mechanical locking device must wear an identification badge listing the name and address of the company employing the operator, the operator's first name, and a passport sized photo of the operator. 
(8)  Equipment used to collect payment for use of the parking facility, lot or area must have been able to accept both cash and credit card payments at all times within the preceding 12 hour period. 
(9)  No fee shall be assessed for the removal of a mechanical locking device in excess of $75.00 per day. 
(b)  Parking facilities, lots or areas that assess a charge for use of the facility, lot or area can use mechanical locking devices only when a paper or electronic receipt for each paid parking charge is provided at the time of payment. The receipt shall include the address of the lot and the time and date of payment. 
(c)  Parking facilities, lots or areas that assess a charge for the use of the facility, lot or area, must provide parking payment options that include both cash and credit card options. 
(Ord. No. O-00-12, 8-7-00; Ord. No. O-10-01, 3-1-10; Ord. No. O-16-08, §§ 1-3, 5-16-16) 
Secs. 98-85-98-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to provide by ordinance for removal and disposal of junked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; when police officers may remove vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-206; removal of improperly parked cars or trespassing personal property, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. 

Sec. 98-111. - Authority to impound certain vehicles. 
    Police officers may cause to be impounded: 
(1)  A motor vehicle unlawfully parked in violation of a provision of this Code or any state law which prohibits the parking of vehicles at the place where or the time when the impounded motor vehicle is found. 
(2)  A motor vehicle, the continued presence of which, because of the physical location or condition of the motor vehicle, poses a danger to the public safety or to the motor vehicle. 
(3)  A motor vehicle from which the driver has been arrested for a violation of traffic laws or any other offense and there is no other alternative driver or custodian for the motor vehicle immediately available. 
(4)  A motor vehicle which is a stolen vehicle or is subject to seizure and forfeiture under the laws of the state or is subject to being held for use as evidence in a criminal trial. 
(Ord. No. O-91-02, § 14-149, 3-4-91) 
Sec. 98-112. - Impoundment after request to leave motor vehicle. 
    In all cases where the owner or operator of a motor vehicle which is on a public street has requested that the motor vehicle be left unattended at that location in lieu of the impoundment of the motor vehicle pursuant to section 98-111(1) and (3), the police officer may, in the police officer's discretion, honor the request for a period of time not exceeding 24 hours, after which time the motor vehicle shall be impounded if not removed by the owner or operator. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of a police officer to impound a vehicle pursuant to section 98-111(2) and (4). 
(Ord. No. O-91-02, § 14-150, 3-4-91) 
Sec. 98-113. - Notice of impoundment. 
(a)  When a police officer intends to impound a motor vehicle and the owner or operator of the motor vehicle is then present, except if the impoundment is being made pursuant to section 98-111(4), the police officer shall, before the motor vehicle is removed, provide the owner or operator with a notice that the motor vehicle is being impounded, that towing and storage charges will be assessed against the impounded motor vehicle, that the owner may claim and regain possession of the impounded motor vehicle at the location to which it is being removed for storage without prepayment of towing and storage charges upon posting with the custodian of the vehicle a cash bond in the amount of the accrued towing and storage charges, and that the owner may request a hearing as to the propriety of the impoundment and as to the amount of and the owner's liability for the towing and storage charges. The notice shall also state the location where the impounded motor vehicle will be stored and the place where the owner may make the request for the hearing. The notice shall also state that failure by the owner to request a hearing within five days of receipt of the notice may act as a waiver of the right to a hearing and that this may result in the placing of a lien against the motor vehicle for the towing and storage charges without further notice to the owner. The owner of the impounded vehicle shall sign the notice as an acknowledgment that a copy has been received, and a copy of the notice shall be provided to the owner. 
(b)  When a police officer impounds and removes a motor vehicle pursuant to section 98-111(1) or (2) and the owner or the person with the right of possession of the motor vehicle is not present at the time of the impoundment, notice containing the same language as required in subsection (a) of this section shall be served, within five days from the date of impoundment, upon the owner by posting such notice in the United States mail with sufficient postage to ensure its delivery to the address shown for the owner in the motor vehicle registration records of the state in which the motor vehicle is registered. 
(c)  If a person required by this section to sign a notice of impoundment willfully fails or refuses to do so, the police officer shall note this fact on the face of the notice which shall constitute prima facie evidence of delivery or service of notice as required by this section. 
(Ord. No. O-91-02, § 14-151, 3-4-91) 
Sec. 98-114. - Release of motor vehicle. 
(a)  Unless the motor vehicle is impounded pursuant to section 98-111(4), the owner of an impounded motor vehicle may secure the release of the motor vehicle from impoundment upon requesting the release and presenting proof of ownership satisfactory to the clerk of the city municipal court. If the clerk of court is satisfied that the person making the request is the owner or authorized agent of the owner, the clerk of court shall provide a release to the owner or authorized agent, and, upon the presenting of this release and the payment of accrued towing and storage charges to the custodian of the motor vehicle, the custodian shall release the motor vehicle. 
(b)  If the owner of the motor vehicle requests a hearing, such request shall be made to the clerk of court of the municipal court and the clerk of court shall schedule the hearing in the municipal court. The clerk of court shall then provide the release, as specified in subsection (a) of this section, and, upon the presenting of this release and the posting of a cash bond in the amount of the accrued towing and storage charges with the custodian of the motor vehicle, the custodian shall release the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. O-91-02, § 14-152, 3-4-91) 
Sec. 98-115. - Hearing. 
(a)  If the owner of an impounded motor vehicle or his agent timely requests a hearing on the impoundment and the charges, such hearing shall be before a judge in the city's municipal court. 
(b)  At the hearing, the owner, the owner's agent or attorney shall be afforded an opportunity to present, by oral testimony or documentary evidence, objections to: 
(1)  The impoundment of the motor vehicle. 
(2)  The amount of the towing and storage charges or the owner's liability for the payment thereof. 
(c)  If the owner or his agent requests the hearing more than five days after the owner received a copy of the notice of impoundment, the owner, the owner's agent or attorney shall be required at the hearing, as a condition precedent to the presentation of any objections by the owner, to show good cause for the delay in making the request. If good cause cannot be shown, the judge shall dismiss the hearing and make the finding stated in subsection (d)(2) of this section; otherwise, the judge shall proceed to hear the owner's objections. 
(d)  At the conclusion of the hearing on the owner's objections, the judge shall render a decision. 
(1)  If the judge finds that the impoundment was improper, the judge shall: 
a.  Find that the owner is not liable for a towing or storage charge occasioned by the impoundment; and 
b.  Determine whether and to what extent the city shall bear the expense of the towing and storage charges. 
(2)  If the judge finds that the impoundment was proper, the judge shall establish: 
a.  The amount of the towing and storage charges to be assessed against the impounded vehicle; and 
b.  The extent of the liability of the owner for payment of the towing and storage charges so established. 
(Ord. No. O-91-02, § 14-153, 3-4-91) 
Sec. 98-116. - Towing and storage charges to constitute lien. 
    The towing and storage charges occasioned by the impoundment of a motor vehicle, exclusive of the amount determined by the judge upon hearing for which the owner is not liable, shall be and constitute a lien upon the impounded motor vehicle, and such lien shall be governed by the statutory procedures established by the general assembly of the state for the collection of unpaid towing and storage charges. 
(Ord. No. O-91-02, § 14-155, 3-4-91) 
Secs. 98-117-98-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SPEED LIMITS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 

Sec. 98-146. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be punished as provided by section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. O-94-11, 7-5-94) 
Sec. 98-147. - Established. 
    The following speed zones are hereby established based on an engineering and traffic investigation as prescribed by law. 
Sec. 98-148. - Enumeration of on-system zones. 
(a)  The following on-system zones are established for the city: 
ON-SYSTEM 
State 
Route Within the City/Town Limits of and/or 
School Name From Mile 
Point To Mile 
Point Length in Miles Speed 
Limit 
[mph] 8 
U.S. 
23/29/78 Decatur 250 feet west of Pinetree Drive 
(W. Decatur City Limits) 2.30 SR 155 
(Clairemont 
Avenue) 3.15 0.85 40 8 
U.S. 
29/78 Decatur SR 155 
(Clairemont Ave.) 3.15 Willow Lane 
(N. Decatur City Limits) 3.76 0.61 40 10 
U.S. 
278 Decatur East Parkwood Road 
(W. Decatur City Limits) 2.28 Sams Street 
(E. Decatur City Limits) 4.64 2.36 35 10 
U.S. 278 
**** 
SCHOOL 
ZONE 
**** Decatur 
Carl E. Renfroe Middle School 
and Oakhurst Elementary 200 feet west of Mead Road 3.13 100 feet east of S. McDonough Street 3.77 0.64 25 155 Decatur Pharr Road 
(S. Decatur City Limits) 11.72 SR 10 12.95 1.23 35 155 
**** 
SCHOOL 
ZONE 
**** Decatur 
Renfroe Middle School 
and 
Winnona Park
Elementary School Green Street 12.44 500 feet North of E. Dougherty Street 12.81 0.42 25 155 Decatur SR 155 runs common with SR 10 from M.P. 12.95 to M.P. 13.25 155 Decatur SR 10 
(College Avenue) 13.25 SR 8 
(Scott Boulevard) 14.68 1.73 35 155 
*** 
School Zone 
*** Decatur 
Clairemont Elementary School 400 feet south of Erie Avenue 14.19 0.10 mi. north of Wilton Drive 14.56 0.37 25 155 
U.S. 23 Decatur SR 8 
(Scott Boulevard) 14.68 200 feet north of Maedaris Drive 
(N. Decatur City Limits) 14.90 0.22 35  
***School Zones*** are effective: 
A.M. from 45 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time - SCHOOL DAYS ONLY. 
P.M. from 15 minutes prior to dismissal time to 45 minutes after dismissal time - SCHOOL DAYS ONLY. 
****School Zones**** are effective: 
A.M. from 45 minutes prior to the earliest commencement time to 15 minutes after the latest commencement time - SCHOOL DAYS ONLY. 
P.M. from 15 minutes prior to the earliest dismissal time to 45 minutes after the latest dismissal time - SCHOOL DAYS ONLY. 
(b)  Signs shall be erected by the state department of transportation. 
(Ord. No. O-94-11, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 0-97-26, 12-1-97; Ord. No. O-98-02, 2-17-98; Ord. No. O-99-10, 9-20-99; Ord. No. O-01-04, 3-2-01; Ord. No. O-09-11, 10-19-09; Ord. No. O-14-06, § 1, 2(Att. A), 5-5-14; Ord. No. O-16-01, §§ 1, 2, 2-16-16; Ord. No. O-16-12, §§ 1, 2, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 98-149. - Enumeration of off-system zones. 
(a)  The following off-system zones are established for the city: 
OFF-SYSTEM 
Road Name Within the City/ 
Town Limits of and/ 
or School Name From To Length in 
Miles Speed 
Limit 
[mph] Adair Street Decatur Emerson Avenue Howard Avenue 0.30 25 Adams Street Decatur Oakview Road Ansley Street 0.40 25 Avery Street Decatur College Avenue Inman Drive 0.70 25 Avery Street 
*** 
School Zone 
*** Decatur 
Winnona Park
Elementary School 124 feet north of Bucher Drive 26 feet south of Winnona Drive 0.21 25 Church Street Decatur Commerce Drive 250 feet north of Forkner Drive 0.80 35 Church Street 
*** 
School Zone 
*** Decatur 
Clairemont Elementary School Geneva Street Willow Lane 0.20 25 Columbia Drive Decatur College Avenue 100 feet south of Kirk Road 0.90 35 Columbia Drive 
**** 
SCHOOL 
ZONE 
**** Decatur 
The Friends of Atlanta School and The Waldorf School of Atlanta Kirk Road Thomas Road 0.20 25 Commerce Drive Decatur West Howard 
Avenue Clairemont 
Avenue 0.80 35 Commerce Drive 
*** 
School Zone 
*** Decatur 
Decatur High School West Trinity Place West Howard 
Avenue 0.30 25 Drexel Avenue Decatur West Ponce De Leon Avenue Howard Avenue 0.40 25 East Lake Drive Decatur Park Place Pharr Road 1.00 30 East Ponce De Leon Avenue Decatur Commerce Drive 250 feet east of Poplar Drive 0.70 30 East Ponce De Leon Avenue 
*** 
School Zone 
*** Decatur 
Glennwood Elementary School 0.02 mi. east of Commerce Drive Glendale Avenue 0.20 25 Erie Avenue 
*** 
School Zone 
*** Decatur 
Clairemont Elementary School 170 feet north of SR 155 / Clairemont 
Avenue 50 feet south of Michigan Avenue 0.17 25 Fifth Avenue 
*** 
School Zone 
*** Decatur 
City Schools of Decatur 4 th and 5 th Grade Academy Oakview Road Gordon Street 0.17 25 Forkner Drive Decatur Sycamore Drive Church Street 0.60 30 Garden Lane Decatur Clairemont Avenue Scott Boulevard 0.40 25 Glendale Avenue Decatur East Ponce De Leon Avenue Glenn Circle (north) 0.50 25 Howard Avenue Decatur North McDonough Street East Lake Road 0.80 35 Huron Street Decatur Superior Avenue Michigan Avenue 0.30 25 Inman Drive Decatur Avery Street South Columbia Drive 0.50 25 Kirk Road Decatur Avery Street South Columbia Drive 0.70 30 Lamont Drive Decatur Clairemont 
Avenue Scott Boulevard 0.60 25 Lockwood Terrace Decatur Grove 
Street End 0.39 25 McDonough Street Decatur Trinity Place Howard Avenue 0.30 25 McDonough Street Decatur College Avenue Pharr Road 1.50 35 McDonough Street 
*** 
School Zone 
*** Decatur 
College Heights Early Childhood Learning
Center Benson Street Pharr Road 0.40 25 Mead Road Decatur East Lake Drive College Avenue 0.40 25 Mead Road 
*** 
School Zone 
*** Decatur 
Oakhurst Elementary School 76 feet north of Leyden Street 371 feet south of SR 10/West 
College Avenue 0.23 25 Michigan Avenue Decatur Superior Avenue Geneva Street 0.30 25 Montgomery Street Decatur Hampton Lane Northern Avenue 0.30 25 North Decatur 
Road Decatur 150 feet west of Superior Avenue 150 feet east of Wendan Drive 0.30 35 Oakland Street Decatur Ponce De Leon Place Dead end 0.30 25 Oakview Road Decatur South McDonough Street West Hill Street 0.40 35 Oakview Road 
*** 
School Zone 
*** Decatur 
City Schools of Decatur 4 th and 5 th Grade Academy Underwood Street Third Avenue 0.32 25 Oakview Road Decatur West Hill Street Second Avenue 0.80 30 Pinetree Drive Decatur West Ponce De Leon Avenue Scott Boulevard 0.40 25 Ponce De Leon Place Decatur West Ponce De Leon Avenue Clairemont 
Avenue 0.50 25 Ridgeland Avenue Decatur Sycamore Drive End 0.31 25 Sams Street Decatur East College 
Avenue Dead end 0.30 25 Second Avenue Decatur #421 Second 
Avenue Bryan Place 0.30 30 Superior Avenue Decatur Clairemont 
Avenue North Decatur Road 0.80 25 Sycamore Drive Decatur East Ponce de Leon Avenue 0.12 mi. north of Forkner Drive 0.82 25 Sycamore Street Decatur Commerce Drive East Ponce De Leon Avenue 0.60 25 West Howard 
Avenue 
*** 
School Zone 
*** Decatur 
Oakhurst Elementary School Lansdowne 
Avenue Greenwood Circle 0.28 25 West Howard 
Avenue 
*** 
School Zone 
*** Decatur 
Decatur High School North McDonough Street Patillo Way 0.23 25 West Ponce De Leon Avenue Decatur Nelson Ferry Road 400 feet west of Upland Road 0.60 30 West Ponce De Leon Avenue 
*** 
School Zone 
*** Decatur 
St. Thomas More School 100 feet west of Nelson Ferry Road Drexel Avenue 0.30 25 West Trinity Place Decatur West Ponce De Leon Avenue North McDonough Street 0.57 35 West Trinity Place 
*** 
School Zone 
*** Decatur 
St. Thomas More School 100 feet east of Water Street West Ponce De Leon Avenue 0.23 25 Westchester Drive Decatur Scott Boulevard Dead end 0.50 25 Wilton Drive Decatur Oakland Street Clairemont 
Avenue 0.30 25  
***School Zones*** are effective: 
A.M. from 45 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time - SCHOOL DAYS ONLY. 
P.M. from 15 minutes prior to dismissal time to 45 minutes after dismissal time - SCHOOL DAYS ONLY. 
****School Zones**** are effective: 
A.M. from 45 minutes prior to the earliest commencement time to 15 minutes after the latest commencement time - SCHOOL DAYS ONLY. 
P.M. from 15 minutes prior to the earliest dismissal time to 45 minutes after the latest dismissal time - SCHOOL DAYS ONLY. 
(b)  Signs shall be erected by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-94-11, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 0-97-26, 12-1-97; Ord. No. O-98-02, 2-17-98; Ord. No. O-99-10, 9-20-99; Ord. No. O-01-04, 3-2-01; Ord. No. O-09-09, 7-20-09; Ord. No. O-09-11, 10-19-09; Ord. No. O-14-06, § 1, 2(Att. A), 5-5-14; Ord. No. O-16-01, §§ 1, 2, 2-16-16; Ord. No. O-16-12, §§ 1, 2, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 98-150. - Enumeration of residential district speed zones. 
(a)  The following Residential District Speed Zones are established for the city: 
Adair Street from West Ponce de Leon Avenue to West Howard Avenue, a distance of 0.40 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Adams Street from West College Avenue to West Hill Street, a distance of 0.30 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Avery Street from East College Avenue to Kirk Road, a distance of 0.70 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Champlain Street from Huron Street to Lucerne Street, a distance of 0.10 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Drexel Avenue from West Ponce de Leon Avenue to West Howard Avenue, a distance of 0.45 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Erie Avenue from Clairemont Avenue to Michigan Avenue, a distance of 0.20 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Forkner Drive from Church Street to Sycamore Drive, a distance of 0.35 miles, to be zoned for 30 MPH. 
Fairview Avenue from West Ponce de Leon Avenue to Oakland Street, a distance of 0.20 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Fairview Street from Lockwood Terrace to end, a distance of 0.22 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Garden Lane from Scott Boulevard to Clairemont Avenue, a distance of 0.40 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Geneva Street from Church Street to Champlain Street, a distance of 0.20 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Glendale Avenue from East Ponce de Leon Avenue to Forkner Drive, a distance of 0.70 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Grove Street from Sycamore Drive to Lockwood Terrace, a distance of 0.07 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Hickory Street from Ridgeland Avenue to end, a distance of 0.07 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Hillcrest Avenue from Sycamore Drive to end, a distance of 0.31 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Huron Street from Superior Avenue to Michigan Avenue, a distance of 0.30 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Inman Drive from Avery Street to South Columbia Drive, a distance of 0.60 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Kirk Road from South Candler Street to South Columbia Drive, a distance of 0.80 miles to be zoned for 30 MPH. 
Lamont Drive from Scott Boulevard to Clairemont Avenue, a distance of 0.60 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Lockwood Terrace from Grove Street to end, a distance of 0.39 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Lucerne Street from Church Street to Champlain Street, a distance of 0.20 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Mead Road from West College Avenue to Oakview Road, a distance of 0.50 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Michigan Avenue from Superior Avenue to Geneva Street, a distance of 0.30 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Montgomery Street from Hampton Lane to Northern Avenue, a distance of 0.40 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Mountain View Street from Sycamore Street to Oak Lane, a distance of 0.18 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Northern Avenue from West Ponce de Leon Avenue to Oakland Street, a distance of 0.20 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Oak Lane from Hillcrest Avenue to end, a distance of 0.11 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Oakland Street from Ponce de Leon Place from West Ponce de Leon Avenue to Clairemont Avenue, a distance of 0.30 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Oakview Road from East Lake Drive to the City Limits, a distance of 0.70 miles, to be zoned for 30 MPH. 
Pinehurst Street from Sycamore Drive to Winn Way, a distance of 0.15 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Pinetree Drive from Scott Boulevard to West Ponce de Leon Avenue, a distance of 0.40 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Ponce de Leon Place from West Ponce de Leon Avenue to Clairemont Avenue, a distance of 0.50 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Poplar Street from East Ponce de Leon Avenue to Grove Street, a distance of 0.10 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Ridgeland Avenue from Sycamore Drive to end, a distance of 0.32 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Seneca Street from Superior Avenue to Champlain Street, a distance of 0.20 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Springdale Street from Sycamore Drive to end, a distance of 0.24 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Superior Avenue from Clairemont Avenue to North Decatur Road, a distance of 0.70 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Sycamore Drive from East Ponce de Leon Avenue to 0.12 miles north of Forkner Drive, a distance of 0.82 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Sycamore Ridge Drive from Pinehurst Street to end, a distance of 0.29 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Sycamore Street from Commerce Drive to East Ponce de Leon Avenue, a distance of 0.50 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Westchester Drive from Scott Boulevard to end, a distance of 0.40, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
Wilton Drive from Oakland Street to Clairemont Avenue, a distance of 0.30 miles, to be zoned for 25 MPH. 
(b)  Signs shall be erected by the city. 
Be it resolved that any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. O-14-06, § 3(Att. B), 5-5-14; Ord. No. O-15-11, § 1, 2(Att. A), 7-20-15; Ord. No. O-16-01, §§ 1, 3, 2-16-16; Ord. No. O-18-03, 4-2-18) 
Sec. 98-151. - Establishes 25 mph zones on designated streets. 
(a)  The following 25 mph Zones are established for the city: 
Fairview Street from Lockwood Terrace to end, a distance of 0.22 miles, to be zoned for 25 mph. 
Grove Street from Sycamore Drive to Lockwood Terrace, a distance of 0.07 miles, to be zoned for 25 mph. 
Hickory Street from Ridgeland Avenue to end, a distance of 0.07 miles, to be zoned for 25 mph. 
Hillcrest Avenue from Sycamore Drive to end, a distance of 0.31 miles, to be zoned for 25 mph. 
Mountain View Street from Sycamore Street to Oak Lane, a distance of 0.18 miles, to be zoned for 25 mph. 
Oak Lane from Hillcrest Avenue to end, a distance of 0.11 miles, to be zoned for 25 mph. 
Pinehurst Street from Sycamore Drive to Winn Way, a distance of 0.15 miles, to be zoned for 25 mph. 
Poplar Street from East Ponce de Leon Avenue to Grove Street, a distance of 0.10 miles, to be zoned for 25 mph. 
Springdale Street from Sycamore Drive to end, a distance of 0.24 miles, to be zoned for 25 mph. 
Sycamore Ridge Drive from Pinehurst Street to end, a distance of 0.29 miles, to be zoned for 25 mph. 
(b)  Signs shall be erected by the city. 
Be it resolved that any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. O-15-11, § 1, 3(Att. B), 7-20-15) 
Secs. 98-152-98-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - AUTOMATED TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 98-177. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    In operation means operating in good working condition. 
    Operator shall mean any individual driving and/or in possession of a vehicle. 
    Owner means the registrant of a motor vehicle, except that such term shall not include a motor vehicle rental company when a motor vehicle registered by such company is being operated by another person under a rental agreement with such company. 
    Recorded images means images recorded by a traffic-control signal monitoring device on: 
(1)  a.  Not less than two photographs; 
b.  Not less than two microphotographs; 
c.  Not less than two electronic images; or, 
d.  Videotape; and, 
(2)  Showing a traffic-control signal displaying a circular red or red arrow signal along with the rear of a motor vehicle apparently operated in disregard or disobedience of such signal and, on at least one image or portion of tape, clearly revealing the number or other identifying designation of the license plate displayed on the motor vehicle. 
    Signature means any manual or facsimile of a person signature. 
    System location is the approach to an intersection toward which a photographic, video, digital or electronic camera is directed and is in operation. 
    Traffic-control signal monitoring device means a device with one or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a traffic-control signal to produce recorded images of motor vehicles being operated in disregard or disobedience of a circular red or red arrow signal. 
(Ord. No. O-01-18, 10-15-01; Ord. No. O-03-08, 7-8-03) 
Sec. 98-178. - Compliance With traffic-control signals. 
(a)  Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or, if the there is no crosswalk, before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown by a steady circular green signal. 
(b)  Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal indication shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or, if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed to shown by a steady green arrow signal indication. 
(c)  The driver of a motor vehicle shall be liable for a civil monetary penalty imposed pursuant to this section if such motor vehicle is found, as evidenced by information obtained from a traffic-control signal monitoring device, to have failed to comply with a traffic light signal as designated in subsections (a) and (b) of this section within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. O-01-18, 10-15-01; Ord. No. O-03-08, 7-8-03) 
Sec. 98-179. - Proof; certificate. 
(a)  Proof that a particular vehicle entered an intersection in violation of section 98-178, (a) or (b) of this Code, as detected by a traffic-control signal monitoring device, together with proof that the particular vehicle is registered with the Georgia Department of Public Safety (or any other state or local vehicle registration office) in the charged person's name, shall raise the evidentiary presumption and constitute prima facie evidence in any prosecution of a violation of that section that the charged person was the person driving the vehicle depicted in the recorded image. 
(b)  A certificate, sworn to or affirmed by a trained law enforcement officer or a technician employed by the city public safety department, or a copy thereof, based on inspection of recorded images produced by a traffic-control signal monitoring device shall be considered prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. 
(c)  Consistent with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(f)(7), recorded images made for the purpose of this subsection shall not be a public record. 
(d)  The provisions of this seection shall not limit law enforcement agencies to the use of traffic-control signal monitoring devices in enforcing O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(a); and, when there is evidence obtained from another source or sources which constitutes a prima-facie case of a violation of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(a), such violation may be prosecuted as otherwise provide by law in lieu of, but not in addition to enforcement under this section. 
(e)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the owner, or lessee of the vehicle files a sworn notarized statement with the clerk of the municipal court prior to the return date established on the citation identifying the name and address of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. 
(f)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the owner, or lessee of the vehicle testifies under oath in open court that he or she was not the operator of the vehicle at the time of alleged violation. 
(g)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if a certified copy of a police report, showing that the vehicle had been reported to the police as stolen prior to the time of the alleged violation, is presented, prior to the return date established on the citation issued pursuant to this section, to the court adjudicating the alleged violation. 
(h)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the recorded image depicts the vehicle passed through the intersection in violation of section 98-178(a) or (b) of this Code as part of a funeral procession. 
(i)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the recorded image depicts the vehicle passed through the intersection in violation of section 98-178(a) or (b) of this Code in order to avoid impeding the efforts of an emergency vehicle to pass through the intersection. 
(Ord. No. O-01-18, 10-15-01; Ord. No. O-03-08, 7-8-03) 
Sec. 98-180. - Penalty. 
(a)  Imposition of a penalty pursuant to this section shall not be deemed a criminal conviction as an operator and shall not be made a part of the operating record of the person upon whom such liability is imposed nor shall it be used for insurance purposes in the provision of motor vehicle insurance coverage. The civil monetary penalty imposed by this section for each violation shall be no more than $70.00. 
(b)  Failure to respond to any notice of violation by the prescribed date shall be a waiver of the right to contest the violation, and the person cited shall be liable for a civil monetary penalty of not more than $70.00, and such penalty shall be considered a judgment and shall carry interest at the legal rate. 
(Ord. No. O-01-18, 10-15-01; Ord. No. O-03-08, 7-8-03) 
Sec. 98-181. - Citation. 
(a)  A citation for a violation of this section may be executed by the city by sending by first-class mail a copy thereof to the address of the owner, or lessee of the vehicle as shown, in the case of vehicle owners, in the records of the Georgia Department of Public Safety (or any other state vehicle registration office) or, in the case of vehicle lessees or renters, in the records of the lessor. Said citation shall be postmarked not later than ten days after the date of the alleged violation. 
(b)  No proceedings for contempt or arrest shall be instituted for failure to appear on the return date of the citation. 
(Ord. No. O-01-18, 10-15-01; Ord. No. O-03-08, 7-8-03) 
Sec. 98-182. - Administration. 
(a)  A private entity may enter into an agreement with the city to be compensated for providing the traffic light signal violation monitoring system or equipment, and all related support services, to include consulting, operations and administration. However, only a trained law enforcement officer or a technician employed by the city public safety department may swear to or affirm the certificate required by section 98-179(b). 
(b)  No portion of any fine collected through the use of a traffic-control signal monitoring devices may be paid to the manufacturer or vendor. Compensation to the manufacturer or vendor shall be based on the value of such equipment and shall not be based on the number of citations issued or the revenue generated by traffic-control signal monitoring devices. 
(Ord. No. O-01-18, 10-15-01; Ord. No. O-03-08, 7-8-03) 
Sec. 98-183. - Signage. 
(a)  The city shall erect signs on every highway, which comprises a part of the state highway system at that point on the highway, which intersects the jurisdictional limits of the city. A sign shall be erected also by the city on each public road on the approach to the next traffic-control signal for such road when a traffic-control device is monitoring such next signal for such road. 
(b)  Such signs shall be at least 30 inches by 30 inches in measurement and shall warn motorists that traffic-control signal monitoring devices are being employed. 
(Ord. No. O-01-18, 10-15-01; Ord. No. O-03-08, 7-8-03) 
Sec. 98-184. - Warning period. 
    Only warning notices and not citations shall be sent during the 30-day period commencing with each installation of a traffic-control signal monitoring device. 
(Ord. No. O-01-18, 10-15-01; Ord. No. O-03-08, 7-8-03) 
Chapter 102 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; taxation, ch. 94; traffic and vehicles, ch. 98. 
State Law reference- Reciprocal agreements as to operation of vehicles registered in other states inapplicable to motor vehicles for hire, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-95; wrecker driver required to remove glass and parts of vehicle being towed, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-276; application of state traffic laws to persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 102-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Doing business means picking up passengers in the incorporated area of the city and accepting or soliciting any consideration, charge or fee which is determined by agreement, by mileage, by the length of time the vehicle is used or by contract for the use of any motor vehicle or other vehicle designed or used for the purpose of transporting passengers. Any person shall also be deemed as doing business if such person has established a business relationship with independent contractors or operates vehicles for hire on such person's own behalf for the purpose of transporting passengers in the city. 
    Taxicabs, limousines and other passenger-carrying vehicles means any motor vehicles or other vehicles for hire designed or used for the purpose of transporting passengers for consideration or charges which are determined by agreement, contract, mileage or by the length of time the vehicle is used. Such term does not include vehicles regulated by the state public service commission. 
    Vehicles for hire means taxicabs, limousines and passenger-carrying vehicles. 
(Ord. No. O-92-09, §§ 22-1, 22-2, 4-6-92) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 102-2. - Compliance with chapter. 
    No person shall conduct the business of operating vehicles for hire in the city without first meeting the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-92-09, § 22-3, 4-6-92) 
Sec. 102-3. - Licensees responsible for violations by drivers. 
    Licensees under this chapter are responsible for violations of this chapter by their vehicle operators whether such operators are direct employees or independent contractors. 
(Ord. No. O-92-09, § 22-4, 4-6-92) 
Sec. 102-4. - Requirement for registered agent; service of notice. 
(a)  All businesses licensed under this chapter must have and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee or owner may be served. This person must be a resident of the county. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent with the city and shall be in such form as prescribed. 
(b)  Service of notice under this chapter shall be as follows: 
(1)  By delivery to the owner or registered agent personally; 
(2)  By registered or certified mail with postage prepaid deposited in the United States mail addressed to the owner's or occupant's last known address; or 
(3)  If service of notice cannot be accomplished by using the methods stated in subsections (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section, by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the premises of the company base of operations in the county. 
(Ord. No. O-92-09, § 22-5, 4-6-92) 
Sec. 102-5. - Appeals from decisions of public safety department and city manager. 
(a)  Decisions of the public safety department that adversely affect or aggrieve any applicant or permittee may be appealed to the city manager or his designated representative. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the city manager's office within 15 days after the public safety department's decision. 
(b)  Decisions of the city manager that adversely affect or aggrieve any applicant or permittee may be appealed to the city commission. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the city manager's office within 15 days after the city manager's decision. 
(Ord. No. O-92-09, § 22-6, 4-6-92) 
Sec. 102-6. - Audits; filing returns. 
    Each company and individual licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to an audit by the public safety department to determine compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter. No licensed business or individual shall fail to comply with the audit requirements of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-92-09, § 22-7, 4-6-92) 
Sec. 102-7. - Appearance and hygiene of drivers; responsibility of licensees for driver dress and conduct. 
    Drivers must practice good personal hygiene and wear proper dress while operating a vehicle for hire. Proper dress shall mean the wearing of shoes, ankle-length pants, a shirt or blouse with sleeves and collar. Clothing must be clean and not visibly soiled. Licensees under this chapter are responsible for driver dress and conduct. 
(Ord. No. O-92-09, § 22-15, 4-6-92) 
Sec. 102-8. - Trip sheets or logs. 
    Drivers must maintain daily trip sheets or logs of all passengers, the time, place of entry, the destination of each passenger, the amount charged and an itemization of any personal property left in the vehicle for hire. Trip sheets must be maintained in the vehicle for 48 hours and, thereafter, transferred to and maintained at the licensed business premises for a period of time to be specified by the public safety department in that department's published rules and regulations for vehicles for hire. 
(Ord. No. O-92-09, § 22-16, 4-6-92) 
Sec. 102-9. - Drivers smoking, playing radios, possessing alcohol or controlled substances. 
(a)  A driver while operating a vehicle for hire is not to smoke or play a radio or tape player if objected to by a passenger. 
(b)  No person operating a vehicle under the provisions of this chapter shall transport or have in his possession any alcoholic beverage or illegal drug or controlled substance. 
(Ord. No. O-92-09, § 22-17, 4-6-92) 
Sec. 102-10. - Cruising and use of vehicle stands. 
    Licensees under this chapter are responsible for ensuring that no driver participates in cruising. Cruising is defined as moving about the streets of the city for the purpose of picking up and transporting passengers who have not previously requested such service by telephone or by personal command. Licensees shall ensure that their drivers use open stands on a nonexclusive, first come, first served basis. 
(Ord. No. O-92-09, § 22-18, 4-6-92) 
Sec. 102-11. - Call jumping. 
    Licensees under this chapter shall not participate in nor allow their drivers to practice call jumping or the act of intercepting a passenger who has requested service from another company. 
(Ord. No. O-92-09, § 22-19, 4-6-92) 
Secs. 102-12-102-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES AND PERMITS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-36. - Transfer and term. 
    All company licenses, individual vehicle stickers and driver permits required by this chapter are nontransferable and shall expire on June 30 of each year. Licensees should contact the public safety department by May 1 of each year for renewal scheduling. 
(Ord. No. O-92-09, § 22-12, 4-6-92) 
Sec. 102-37. - Suspension or revocation. 
    A business license may be suspended or revoked by the city commission, and a driver's permit may be suspended or revoked by the public safety department for the following reasons: 
(1)  The applicant furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information or omits information requested in the application for a license or permit. 
(2)  Failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges. 
(3)  Failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license or driver's permit. 
(4)  For violation of any part of this chapter. 
(5)  Charging a fare in excess of those fares on file with the city manager's office. 
(6)  Having four or more moving traffic violations in any 12-month period. 
(7)  Refusing to accept a passenger solely on the basis of race, color, national origin, religious belief, sex or sexual orientation. Sexual orientation shall mean the state of being heterosexual, homosexual or bisexual. Operators shall not refuse to accept a passenger unless the passenger is obviously intoxicated or dangerous. 
(8)  Allowing the required insurance coverage to lapse or allowing a vehicle to operate in the city without a city inspection sticker. 
(Ord. No. O-92-09, § 22-13, 4-6-92) 
Secs. 102-38-102-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 102-56. - Licensing generally. 
(a)  Required for operation of business; county-based operation. No person shall conduct the business of operating vehicles for hire in the city without first having been issued a city business license. Such business shall have a company base of operations located in the geographical boundaries of the county. Limousine operations having no more than three vehicles for hire shall be exempt from the requirement to maintain a company base of operations located in the geographical boundaries of the county. 
(b)  Posting of license at base of operations. The license must be posted in public view at the company base of operations in the county. 
(c)  Qualifications of applicant; police clearance. Any applicant for a license is required to provide information showing qualifications on a form provided by the public safety department and to submit to a police clearance consisting of a background investigation or fingerprinting. If the applicant is other than a sole proprietor, all partners, officers, managers and stockholders holding a ten percent or more interest in the company shall be subject to the provisions of this section. An applicant must: 
(1)  Be at least 21 years of age. 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
(3)  Have not been convicted, been on probation, parole, or been imprisoned for a period of five years previous to the date of application, or for the violation of any of the following offenses of the state, of any other state, or of the United States: Homicide; rape; aggravated battery; burglary; aggravated assault; kidnapping; robbery; driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol; child molestation; criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses; attempts to commit any of these offenses; any felony where a motor vehicle was used; any crime of violence or theft; any crime of possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs; and moral turpitude. 
(4)  Show on the application a company dispatch location or dispatch terminus located within the geographical boundaries of the county from which business will be conducted. Applicants for limousine operations having no more than three vehicles for hire shall be exempt from having a county-based business location. If located in the corporate limits of the city, the company location must be located in a C-2 general commercial or C-3 heavy commercial zoning district, meet all applicable city zoning or other ordinance requirements, must be staffed by company agents or employees, have a published telephone number and have sufficient parking for accommodating its vehicles for hire when not in use. 
(5)  File applications for the initial licensing and inspections of vehicles along with a list of all drivers who will be scheduled for driver permitting and indicate whether drivers are company employees or contract drivers. A copy of each contract driver's insurance coverage must be included in the application. 
(6)  Provide a copy of the rate schedule and the daily hours of operation. 
(7)  Provide the name, address and telephone number of a responsible individual residing in the county who will be the registered agent for the purpose of serving of process. 
(d)  Application fee. Each application for a business license shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount established by the action of the city commissioners, as set forth in the schedule of rates and charges, a copy of which is on file in the city manager's office. 
(e)  Rate approval. Rates to be charged by vehicles for hire, as set forth in the schedule of rates and charges, shall be approved by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. O-92-09, § 22-8, 4-6-92) 
Sec. 102-57. - Fee. 
    The license fee for the operation of any business regulated by this chapter shall be fixed by the board of commissioners. The license fee for such business is hereby fixed at an amount as set forth in the schedule of rates and charges per vehicle for the first two vehicles operated and for all vehicles over two vehicles operated by any one person the license fee is hereby fixed at an amount as set forth in the schedule of rates and charges per vehicle. 
(Ord. No. O-94-17, § 5, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 102-58. - Insurance. 
(a)  Liability and property damage required. An applicant for a license required by the provisions of this chapter shall provide, with the application, proof of motor vehicle insurance covering public liability and property damage issued by an insurer approved by the state. Such insurance shall insure passengers and third persons against personal injury and property damage in amounts specified by this section or by the state financial responsibility law, whichever is greater. 
(b)  Minimum coverage for taxicabs. Any applicant for a license to operate a taxicab service shall maintain minimum insurance coverage in the following amounts: 
(1)  Fifteen thousand dollars bodily injury per person. 
(2)  Thirty thousand dollars bodily injury per occurrence. 
(3)  Ten thousand dollars property damage. 
(4)  Five thousand dollars personal injury protection, as provided in no fault insurance coverage. 
(c)  Minimum coverage for limousines. Any applicant for a license to operate a limousine service shall maintain minimum insurance coverage in the following amounts: 
(1)  One hundred thousand dollars bodily injury per person. 
(2)  Three hundred thousand dollars bodily injury per occurrence. 
(3)  Fifty thousand dollars property damage. 
(4)  Five thousand dollars personal injury protection, as provided in no fault insurance coverage. 
(d)  Notice of cancellation. Before the policy is cancelled for nonpayment of premium or other cause, notice thereof shall be given in writing to the public safety department at least 30 days before the policy lapses. The policy shall further provide that it shall not be cancelled or rendered unenforceable because the insured failed to notify the insurer of an accident or injury, or any other condition upon which notice of claim is ordinarily required. 
(e)  Proof of insurance. A licensee under this chapter shall provide to the public safety director or his designated representative proof of insurance required under this chapter on or before July 1 each year for all of the vehicles for hire that are in operation on that date. Before any new or substitute vehicle may be operated in the city subsequent to that date, proof of insurance for such vehicle must be provided to the public safety director or his designated representative. 
(Ord. No. O-92-09, § 22-9, 4-6-92) 
Secs. 102-59-102-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT 

Sec. 102-81. - Permitting generally. 
(a)  Required before driver operates vehicle. No person shall drive a vehicle for hire without a driver's permit. No business licensed for operating vehicles for hire shall employ any driver who has not first met the requirements of this chapter and been issued a driver's permit. 
(b)  Issuance to drivers of licensed companies. Drivers' permits shall not be issued to any driver not employed by or representing a licensed company. 
(c)  Posting; inspection sticker. Driver permits must be posted on the dash or sunvisor of the vehicle being driven so that it is visible from the passenger area. Licensees under this chapter are responsible for checking to ensure that each driver has a current driver permit in the driver's possession and posted on the dash or sunvisor of the vehicle being operated along with a visible vehicle inspection sticker. 
(d)  Application; requesting letter from licensed company; police clearance; qualifications. No request for a driver's permit will be processed unless the permit applicant presents a letter on company stationery to the public safety department from a licensed company requesting issuance of a driver's permit to the named individual. The driver's permit applicant will further furnish information requested on a form to be provided by the public safety department and submit to a police clearance consisting of a background investigation or fingerprinting. Driver permit applicants must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Be at least 21 years of age. 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
(3)  Possess a current valid state driver's license. Such license must not be limited as defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-5-58 and O.C.G.A. § 40-5-64. 
(4)  Exhibit a proficiency with the English language so as to be able to comprehend and interpret traffic signs, issue written receipts to passengers and obey lawful orders of police and others in lawful authority. 
(5)  Have not been convicted, been on probation, parole, or been imprisoned for a period of five years previous to the date of application, or for the violation of any of the following offenses of the state, of any other state, or of the United States: Homicide; rape; aggravated battery; burglary; aggravated assault; kidnapping; robbery; driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol; child molestation; criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses; attempts to commit any of these listed offenses; any felony where a motor vehicle was used; any crime of violence or theft; any crime of possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs; and moral turpitude. Discharge without court adjudication of guilt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-8-62 shall not disqualify an applicant. 
(e)  Report of changes. Drivers are responsible for reporting any change in qualifications or other licensing or permitting information previously supplied to the public safety department within ten days of the change. 
(Ord. No. O-92-09, § 22-10, 4-6-92) 
Sec. 102-82. - Card; fee. 
    If the chief of police grants a permit to any applicant pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the city clerk shall issue him a permit card to which a photograph of the driver shall be affixed and which shall be kept in view of the passengers at all times when such person is operating a cab, taxi, or other vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any such vehicle upon the streets of the city unless the driver has posted such permit card in plain view of the passengers of the vehicle he is driving. Upon the issuance of such permit the city clerk shall collect from the applicant a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Ord. No. O-94-17, § 5, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 102-83. - Fees generally. 
    Fees for driver permits shall be established by the city commissioners and set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, are nonrefundable and are not prorated. 
(Ord. No. O-92-09, § 22-11, 4-6-92) 
Secs. 102-84-102-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VEHICLE CONDITIONS AND EQUIPMENT; INSPECTION 

Sec. 102-111. - Responsibility for vehicle maintenance. 
    Drivers and company licensees are responsible for maintaining each vehicle for hire in a clean and mechanically safe condition. The interior and exterior shall meet the requirements set out under inspection requirements outlined in sections 102-112 and 102-113. 
(Ord. No. O-92-09, § 22-14(1), 4-6-92) 
Sec. 102-112. - Operating requirements generally. 
    Drivers are not to drive and company licensees are not to allow drivers to operate a vehicle without the required markings, a taximeter, top light and inspection sticker as outlined in this article. Limousines are excepted from having markings, top lights, two-way radios or taximeters; however, limousines are required to have a plate attached to their front or rear bumper indicating the company business name. 
(Ord. No. O-92-09, § 22-14(2), 4-6-92) 
Sec. 102-113. - Annual inspection; sticker; vehicle requirements. 
    All vehicles for hire to be used by a licensee in the city shall be inspected annually and approved by the public safety department, such inspection to be made prior to the issuance or renewal of a company license. Once a vehicle meets the requirements of the inspection, a sticker will be affixed to the left side of the windshield. The requirements that each vehicle must meet are as follows: 
(1)  Exterior inspection. Exterior inspection shall ensure that headlights, taillights, brake lights, directional signal lights, license plate lights, windshield wipers, all vehicle glass, window cranks or electric windows, doors and door locks, trunk lid, trunk, hood, door handles, exhaust system, bumpers, fenders, body, tires and other vehicle parts are in good condition and functioning properly. There shall be no tears or rust holes in the vehicle body and no loose pieces hanging from the vehicle body. There shall be no unrepaired body damage or any body condition which would create a safety problem or interfere with the operation of the vehicle. 
(2)  Interior inspection. Interior inspection shall include the rearview mirror, steering wheel, foot brakes, parking brakes, air conditioning and heating systems to ensure each item is in good operating condition. The upholstery, floor mats, headlining, door panels and the trunk compartment shall be inspected to ensure there are no tears, that they are clean and have no offensive odors and that the trunk has sufficient space for passenger luggage. Vehicles for hire shall have posted therein in a place plainly visible to passengers hiring such vehicle a schedule of rates, the size, form and substance of which shall be approved by the public safety director. 
(3)  Taximeter and other required features and equipment. The vehicle shall have a spare tire and jack, a functional two-way radio and a taximeter. The taximeter is to be positioned so that it is visible from the passenger compartment. Taximeter accuracy shall be verified according to the public safety department's published rules and regulations for vehicles for hire. Vehicles for hire shall have at least four doors and shall be either a sedan or station wagon. All vehicles for hire operated by a single company or licensee shall be painted a uniform color. Limousines are not required to have a two-way radio and a taximeter. 
(4)  Random inspection; removal; sticker removal; additional requirements. Vehicles shall be subject to random inspections at any time. Vehicles found to be substandard shall be removed from service immediately and shall be subject to immediate vehicle inspection sticker removal by the public safety department. Additional inspection requirements will be outlined in the public safety department's vehicle rules and regulations governing passenger-carrying vehicles. 
(5)  Sticker proof of meeting licensing and insurance and last inspection requirements. The inspection sticker is proof that the company met the licensing and insurance requirements at the time of license issuance and that the vehicle passed the last vehicle inspection. Each vehicle operator must have in the vehicle proof of current insurance coverage. Any company or vehicle letting insurance coverage lapse shall have the inspection sticker removed by the public safety department and be subject to suspension of its business license. Business operations shall not be resumed until proof of insurance is provided to the public safety department, the license reinstated and the vehicle or vehicles reinspected and new inspection stickers issued by the public safety department. 
(6)  Vehicles passing county inspection approved for use. Vehicles passing a county inspection will be considered approved for use in the city. 
(Ord. No. O-92-09, § 22-14(3), 4-6-92) 
Sec. 102-114. - Inspection and sticker required for vehicle use. 
    No business licensed for operating vehicles for hire shall use any vehicle that has not been inspected and had the city inspection sticker affixed. 
(Ord. No. O-92-09, § 22-14(5), 4-6-92) 
Sec. 102-115. - Sticker restrictions. 
    Inspection stickers are not transferable from vehicle to vehicle and are nonrefundable if the vehicle is wrecked or taken out of service for any reason. The public safety department must be notified within ten days of any vehicle being taken out of service. Stickers from vehicles taken out of service must be turned in to the public safety department. Stickers for replacement vehicles or additional vehicles are issued under the same procedures as original inspection stickers. 
(Ord. No. O-92-09, § 22-14(6), 4-6-92) 
Sec. 102-116. - Inspection fees. 
    Fees for vehicle inspections shall be established by the city commission, are set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, are nonrefundable and not prorated. 
(Ord. No. O-92-09, § 22-11, 4-6-92) 
PART IV - Unified Development Ordinance of the City of Decatur, Georgia[1] 
Effective February 1, 2015, as amended 

  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The Unified Development Ordinance of the City of Decatur, Georgia, Ord. No. O-14-Z-26, adopted by the city commission on November 17, 2014, is printed herein. This Ordinance shall become effective February 1, 2015, provided that the following portions of this Ordinance shall have the stated effective dates: Article 10.1.4 Inefficient Plumbing Replacement, effective February 1, 2016; Article 10.1.6 High Performance Building Standards, effective November 1, 2015; and Article 10.1.6.A.1.b High Performance Building Standards Single Family Residential Substantial Improvement, effective February 1, 2016. Due to the size and comprehensive subject matter of this Unified Development Ordinance, it is included herein as Part IV of the Decatur, Georgia Code of Ordinances, rather than an amended appendix to part III, at the discretion of the editor. The original arrangement, section catchlines, etc., of the UDO have been retained. Amendments to the UDO are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. 

Article 1. - General Provisions 
Sec. 1.1. - Legal Status Provisions 

1.1.1. - Short Title 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "the Unified Development Ordinance of the City, Georgia," and is referred to or cited as "this UDO." 
1.1.2. - Intent 
A.  UDO   
1.  This UDO is intended to serve the following purposes: 
a.  To facilitate the implementation of the land use and community plans adopted by the City, Georgia; 
b.  To manage growth while retaining character, to encourage a diverse and engaged community, to serve as good stewards of the environment and community resources; 
c.  To promote the health, safety, morals, order, prosperity and the general welfare of present and future inhabitants of the City, Georgia; 
d.  To secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers, to provide adequate light and air; 
e.  To minimize the impact of land development on the natural environment, to provide safe opportunities for all modes of transportation; and 
f.  To facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements. 
2.  The regulations have also been made with reasonable consideration for : 
a.  The character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to promoting desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods; 
b.  Protecting property against blight and depreciation, securing economy in governmental expenditures; and 
c.  Conserving the value of buildings; and encouraging the most appropriate use of land, buildings and other structures throughout the City. 
B.  Comprehensive Land Use Plan   
The Comprehensive Land Use Plan is intended to serve the following purposes: 
1.  To control, guide and direct development in the City, Georgia; 
2.  To protect, preserve and enhance the City's cultural, environmental, economic and social resources; to identify current land uses in order to assist the City in making decisions regarding budgets, finances, utilities and other resources; 
3.  To enable the City to predict future land uses for planning purposes; 
4.  To stabilize the land uses in the City; 
5.  To assist in fulfilling the purposes of the City's zoning regulations; 
6.  To assist the City in fulfilling its statutory and other legal obligations; and 
7.  To provide a public document which will serve as a means of general information on land use and development for the citizens of Decatur. 
1.1.3. - Application 
A.  Territorial Application   
This UDO applies to all land, uses, buildings and structures within the corporate boundaries of the City. 
B.  General Application   
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this UDO, they shall be considered as the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, morals and general welfare. 
C.  Required Conformance   
1.  All buildings, structures or land, in whole or in part, must be used or occupied, in conformance with this UDO. All buildings or structures, in whole or in part, must be erected, constructed, moved, enlarged or structurally altered in conformance with this UDO. 
2.  Nothing in this UDO shall require any change in the plans, construction or intended use of a building or structure for which a lawful permit has been issued or a lawful permit application has been accepted before the effective date of this UDO, provided that the construction under the terms of such permit is diligently pursued until its completion. 
D.  Conflicting Provisions   
1.  It is not the intent of this UDO to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this UDO imposes a greater restriction upon the use of property or premises or upon the height of buildings, or requires greater space than is imposed or required by other resolutions, rules or regulations, or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this UDO shall govern. 
2.  This is intended to be the Unified Development Ordinance for the entire incorporated area of the City and all other zoning ordinances are hereby repealed, provided that nothing herein shall be construed as repealing or modifying the conditions of operation or conditions of site development accompanying those zoning approvals, variances or use permits issued under previous zoning ordinances; however, modification or repeal of these past conditions of approval may be accomplished through use of the procedures set forth in this UDO. 
3.  Text and Graphics   
Illustrations, photographs and graphics are included in this UDO to illustrate the intent and requirements of the text. In the case of a conflict between the text of this UDO and any Illustrations, photographs and graphics, the text governs. 
1.1.4. - Zoning Compliance Law 
A.  This Chapter consists of a unified development ordinance, crafted as a series of Articles. 
B.  Article 1. through Article 4., Article 5. (Sec. 5.1., Sec. 5.3. and Sec. 5.4. only), and Article 6., Article 7. and Article 11., as well as those definitions set forth in Article 12. that constitute, by reference, text of these Articles, are all intended to constitute a zoning ordinance within the meaning of O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1, et seq. Changes to the text of these Articles, as well as official zoning map amendments and other zoning actions addressed in those Articles, require compliance with the public notice and hearing procedures provided in Article 11., Administration, and in said state statute. 
C.  The remaining articles are not intended to constitute a zoning ordinance and may be amended using the City's general procedures for ordinance amendments. 
1.1.5. - Validity 
Should any article, section or provision of this UDO be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such action shall not affect the validity of the UDO as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid, each article, section and provision hereof being declared severable. 
1.1.6. - Effective Date 
The effective date of this UDO shall be February 1, 2015. 
1.1.7 - Applicability of Part III, Chapter 1. 
Unless otherwise stated or where the context of the provision clearly shows a different intent, the provisions of chapter 1 under part III of this Code shall apply to the articles contained in this part. 
(Ord. No. O-15-Z-19, § 1, 12-21-15) 
1.1.8 - Fee requirements. 
Reasonable fees to offset the costs of administration of this part may be set by the city commission, from time to time. 
(Ord. No. O-15-Z-19, § 1, 12-21-15) 
1.1.9 - Conflicts. 
A.  Where general requirements of a provision under this Code conflict with a specific requirement of a provision under the UDO, including but not limited to building and construction regulations, stormwater management regulations, drainage and flood control, planning and development, and subdivision regulations, then the provision concerning the specific requirement under the UDO shall prevail. 
B.  In the event that a provision or requirement under this Code in any way conflicts with another provision or requirement under the UDO, then the more stringent provision or requirement shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. O-15-Z-19, § 1, 12-21-15) 
Sec. 1.2. - Zoning Districts 

1.2.1. - Establishment of Zoning Districts 
A.  In order to carry out the intent and purpose of this UDO, the City of Decatur, Georgia, is divided into the following zoning and special districts: 
Residential Districts Formerly: R-85 Single-Family Residential District R-85 R-60 Single-Family Residential District R-60 R-50 Single-Family Residential District new RS-17 Single-Family Residential District HDSF RM-18 Multiple-Family Residential District RM-60 RM-22 Multiple-Family Residential District new RM-43 Multiple-Family Residential District RM-H Mixed Use and Commercial Districts PO Professional Office District PO NMU Neighborhood Mixed Use District new C-1 Local Commercial District C-1 C-2 General Commercial District C-2 C-3 Heavy Commercial District C-3 MU Mixed-Use District MU Special and Overlay Districts I Institutional District I H Historic District H - Downtown Decatur Special 
Pedestrian Area - PUD Planned Unit Development District PUD  
B.  Upon adoption of this UDO, land which is presently zoned within an existing zoning classification which has changed names as set forth above shall be reclassified within the applicable new zoning classifications. The boundaries for renamed zoning districts and the conditions of each zoning district remain the same, unless amended in the future in accordance with the provision of Sec. 11.2.2. of this UDO. 
Sec. 1.3. - Zoning District Map 

1.3.1. - Established 
A.  The boundaries of zoning districts are shown upon the map designated as the "Zoning District Map," which map, as amended, shall constitute the Official Zoning Map of the City. 
B.  The Zoning District Map and all the notations, references and other information shown are a part of this UDO and have the same force and effect as if the Zoning District Map and all the notations, references and other information shown were all fully set forth or described herein, which Zoning District Map is properly attested and is on file with the city clerk of the City, Georgia. 
1.3.2. - District Boundaries 
A.  The district boundary lines are intended to follow either streets or alleys or lot lines, and where the districts designated on the Zoning District Map are bounded approximately by a street, alley or lot lines, the centerline of the street or alley or the lot lines shall be the boundary of the district unless such boundary is otherwise indicated on the Zoning District Map. 
B.  In all other cases the district boundary lines shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the Zoning District Map. 
1.3.3. - Annexed Property 
Any territory annexed to the City shall continue to be subject to the county, town or city zoning district classifications and regulations as such territory was subject at the time of annexation, until such territory shall have been zoned by the City. 
Sec. 1.4. - Comprehensive Land Use Plan 

1.4.1. - Establishment of Comprehensive Land Use Plan 
A.  The Comprehensive Land Use Plan is established as the official policy of the City, Georgia, concerning proposed land uses and how land in the City should be used. The City is hereby divided into the following land use categories: 
RL Low Density Residential RM Medium Density Residential I Institutional C Commercial and High-Density Residential  
B.  The Comprehensive Land Use Plan does not alter or affect the existing zoning districts in the City, does not effectuate an amendment to the Zoning District Map, and does not itself permit or prohibit any existing land uses. 
1.4.2. - Land Use Districts 
A.  The boundaries of the various land use districts are shown upon the map designated as the Comprehensive Land Use Plan. 
B.  The Comprehensive Land Use Plan and all notations, references and other information are hereby made a part of this UDO and have the same force and effect as if the Comprehensive Land Use Plan and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon were all fully set forth or described herein, which Comprehensive Land Use Plan is properly attested and is on file with the city clerk of the City, Georgia. 
C.  All other writings concerning the Comprehensive Land Use Plan are for guidance and informational purposes only, and are not a part of this UDO. 
1.4.3. - Interpretation of Land Use District Boundaries 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any of the land use districts shown on the Comprehensive Land Use Plan, the rules set forth in Sec. 1.3.2. apply. 
1.4.4. - Relationship Between Land Use Categories and Zoning Districts 
The land use categories established by the Comprehensive Land Use Plan may be implemented by the establishment of appropriate zoning districts within each category. The zoning districts that are permitted within each land use category are restricted to the following: 
RL-Low Density Residential R-85 Single-Family Residential District R-60 Single-Family Residential District R-50 Single-Family Residential District RM-Medium Density Residential RS-17 Single-Family Residential District RM-18 Multiple-Family Residential District RM-22 Multiple-Family Residential District RM-43 Multiple-Family Residential District I-Institutional I Institutional District C-Commercial and High-Density Residential PO Professional Office District NMU Neighborhood Mixed Use District C-1 Local Commercial District C-2 General Commercial District C-3 Heavy Commercial District MU Mixed-Use District  
Article 2. - Rules of Interpretation 
Sec. 2.1. - Rules Applicable to All Districts 

2.1.1. - Conformity to District Requirements 
A.  Every building erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered shall be located on a lot except as approved by the City Commission under Sec. 5.4. In no case shall more than one principal building be located on a lot except as otherwise provided for in this UDO. 
B.  The minimum yards, parking spaces and open spaces required by this UDO for each building existing at the time of passage of this UDO, or for any building erected or structurally altered after the passage of this UDO, shall not be encroached upon or considered as part of the yard or parking space or open space required for any other structure, nor shall any lot area be reduced below the minimum lot area for the district in which the lot is located. 
C.  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the lot area, floor area, and building height regulations of the district in which the building is located. 
2.1.2. - Density 
A.  Net Site Area   
1.  Net site area is determined by subtracting publicly-dedicated land, from the gross site area. 
2.  Land area set aside for common open space or recreational use is included in net site area for the purpose of determining the maximum number of dwelling units. Poor drainage areas or other areas of rough terrain as to constitute land which is economically unbuildable may be counted as common open space but may not be counted as space for active recreational areas. 
B.  Dwelling Units Allowed   
1.  The maximum number of dwelling units allowed on a site is calculated by multiplying the net site area by the maximum number of units per acre allowed in the district. 
2.  Minimum lot sizes may appear to allow additional units to be developed on a site; however, the district's allowed density serves as the cap on the maximum number of units on a site. 
2.1.3. - Amenity Space 
A.  Amenity space is common area and may not be designated for the use of any specific tenant or group of tenants. The space may be restricted to use by residents, tenants and their visitors only, or made available to the general public, at the applicant's discretion. 
B.  Where required, amenity space must be met in one contiguous open area or in multiple open areas on the site; however, to receive credit, the area must be at least 10 feet in width and length, and at least 50% of the required amenity space must be located in one contiguous open area. 
C.  Amenity space must remain unenclosed on all sides, but up to 50% of the total provided amenity space may be covered. 
D.  Amenity space may be located at or above grade. 
E.  In calculating the required amenity space, the following listed facilities, and any similar facilities, may be included: 
1.  Ground-level facilities such as a swimming pool, playground, sport court, dog park, garden, community, garden, park, green, pavilion, outdoor dining, seating area or plaza. 
2.  Upper-level facilities such as a shared or common balcony, rooftop deck or rooftop garden. 
2.1.4. - Lot Coverage 
A.  Where a lot of record in R-50 or R-60 at the time of the effective date of this UDO had less than the required minimum lot area, the maximum lot coverage is as follows: 
Less than 3,000 SF 69% max 3,000 SF to 3,499 SF 67% max 3,500 SF to 3,999 SF 65% max 4,000 SF to 4,499 SF 63% max 4,500 SF to 4,999 SF 60% max 5,000 to 5,499 SF 58% max 5,500 to 5,999 SF 56% max 6,000 to 6,499 SF 54% max 6,500 to 6,999 SF 52% max 7,000 to 7,499 SF 50% max 7,500 to 7,999 SF 47% max 8,000 to 8,499 SF 45% max 8,500 to 8,999 SF 43% max 9,000 SF or more 40% max  
The lot coverage of properties developed with existing single-family dwellings where the existing lot coverage exceeds the maximum lot coverage permitted may be modified as long as the proposed lot coverage does not exceed the existing lot coverage. 
2.1.5. - Yards 
A.  General Yard Standards   
1.  Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed except for the ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves, chimneys, buttresses and other ornamental and architectural features; provided, however, that such features do not project more than 11/2 feet into any required yard. 
2.  A deck or patio may project into a required side yard to a point not closer than 5 feet from any side lot line. 
3.  Parking is allowed in the side yard or rear yard, except where further restricted by the district regulations of this UDO. 
4.  More than one walk up flat, stacked flat, single-story shopfront, mixed use shopfront, general building or civic building may be located upon a lot or tract. In a residential district, no required yard except the rear yard shall be used for the location of a private swimming pool, and no mechanical appurtenance or pool shall be within 10 feet of any lot line. 
5.  For a property with an existing single-family dwelling which does not meet the present minimum side yard requirement, the Zoning Administrator is authorized to allow the enlargement or extension of the dwelling under the following conditions: 
a.  The enlargement or extension does not encroach in the side yard to any greater degree than the existing dwelling. 
b.  The enlargement or extension does not encroach into any required front or rear yard. 
c.  There is a minimum distance of 10 feet between the dwelling and the principal building on the adjacent property. 
d.  The project is not determined to be a demolition or substantial improvement. Enlargements or extensions of dwellings that are defined as substantial improvements must be extended in conformity with the development standards in the applicable zoning district. 
6.  Where a lot of record in an R-60 zoning district at the time of the effective date of this UDO had less than the required minimum lot width, one of the minimum required side yards may be reduced by 1/2 foot for each foot that the lot width is less than 60 feet, under the following conditions: 
a.  There is a minimum distance of 10 feet between the dwelling and the principal building on the property adjacent to the reduced side yard. 
b.  No side yard may be reduced below a minimum of 5 feet. 
B.  Front Yard Standards   
1.  Average Front Yard   
a.  Where 40% or more of the frontage on the same side of a street between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings that have (with a variation of 5 feet or less) a front yard greater or lesser in depth than required, new buildings shall not be erected closer to the street than the average front yard established by the existing buildings. 

b.  Where 40% or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is developed that do not have a front yard as described above, then: 
i.  Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 feet of existing buildings on both sides, the minimum front yard shall be a line drawn between the two closest front corners of the adjacent buildings; or 
ii.  Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 feet of an existing building on one side only, the building may be erected as close to the street as the existing adjacent building. 

2.  Double Frontage Lots   
Double frontage lots shall provide the required front yard on both streets. 
3.  Signs   
Permitted signs may extend into a front yard or the required yard abutting a side street not to exceed 18 inches. 
C.  Front Yard Reduction   
The Zoning Administrator is authorized to allow a reduction in the minimum front yard requirement for the main dwelling under the following conditions: 
1.  Where there is an existing dwelling with a covered entryway. 
a.  The existing covered entryway does not meet the present minimum front yard requirement. 
b.  The proposed renovation or repair will maintain the existing front yard setback or will result in a reduction of the front yard of 2 feet or less. 
c.  The proposed renovation or repair will not result in a change to the elevation of the front door or the finished floor of the stoop, porch or first floor. 
d.  The project is not determined to be a demolition or substantial improvement. Enlargements or extensions of dwellings that are defined as substantial improvements must be extended in conformity with the development standards in the applicable zoning district. 
2.  Where there is an existing dwelling without a covered entryway. 
a.  The existing dwelling may or may not meet the present minimum front yard requirement. 
b.  The proposed renovation will include new covered entryway that will not extend beyond the existing stoop, deck or stairs. 
c.  The proposed renovation or repair will not result in a change to the elevation of the front door or the finished floor of the stoop, porch or first floor. 
d.  The project is not determined to be a demolition or substantial improvement. Enlargements or extensions of dwellings that are defined as substantial improvements must be extended in conformity with the development standards in the applicable zoning district. 
D.  Rear Yard Standards   
1.  Where a lot abuts upon an alley, 1/2 the alley width may be considered as part of the required rear yard. 
2.  An unenclosed balcony, porch steps or fire escape may project into a rear yard for a distance not exceeding 10 feet. 
3.  Accessory buildings and structures shall be located in a rear yard, and shall not occupy more than 30% of the required rear yard. 
4.  Accessory buildings and structures shall not be nearer than 3 feet to any side or rear lot line, except that when a garage is entered from an alley, it shall not be located closer than 5 feet to the alley line. 
5.  No 2-story accessory building shall be located closer than 10 feet to any side or rear lot line. No 2-story building shall be located closer than 10 feet to an alley. 
6.  On corner lots, accessory buildings shall not be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building or closer to the rear lot line than the side setback requirements for the principal building located on adjoining lots with side yards contiguous to the rear lot line. 
7.  When an accessory building is attached to the principal building by breezeway, passageway or similar means, it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building. 
8.  Satellite dish antennas are permitted as accessory structures in residential districts, provided that they must be installed in a rear yard and not less than 10 feet from any property line, may be at a height no higher than the roof line and may be no greater than 12 feet in diameter. 
2.1.6. - Height 
A.  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered to exceed the height limit established for the district in which the building is located. Height is measured as the vertical distance from the mean finished ground level at the front of the building to the highest point of a roof. 

B.  Special exceptions to height limits are provided below.   
1.  The height limitations of this UDO do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy, monuments, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers, chimneys, smokestacks, elevator or stair towers, parapets under 4 feet in height, flagpoles, radio towers, television towers, masts and aerials. 
2.  The limitation on number of stories shall not apply to buildings used exclusively for storage purposes, provided such buildings do not exceed the height in feet permitted in the district in which located. 
3.  Special exceptions to the height requirements may be approved after consideration of the following standards: 
a.  The uses and heights of adjacent or nearby buildings. 
b.  The impact that the proposed building will have on the light, air, and shading of adjacent and nearby properties. 
c.  The impact that the proposed building will have on the public safety, traffic on the public streets, transportation facilities, utilities, and other public services. 
d.  The impact that the proposed building will have on established property values and on the health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the residents of the City. 
4.  Where a lot of record in an R-60 zoning district at the time of the effective date of this UDO had less than the required minimum lot width, the maximum building height shall be reduced by 1/2 foot for each foot that the lot width is less than 60 feet. 
2.1.7. - First Floor Elevation 
The finished floor elevation of the first floor of detached house, cottage court, duplex and attached house shall be determined as follows: 
A.  Where an existing dwelling is to be demolished and replaced with a new dwelling, the finished floor elevation of the first floor of the proposed dwelling may be no more than 2 feet above the finished floor elevation of the first floor of the dwelling to be demolished. 
B.  The elevation of the mean ground level at the front of the proposed dwelling may be raised no more than 2 feet above the elevation of the existing mean ground level at the front of the building prior to construction. 
C.  Where a new dwelling is to be built on a previously undeveloped lot that is within 100 feet of existing dwellings on both sides, the finished floor elevation of the first floor of the new dwelling shall be no higher than one of the following standards: 
1.  Three feet above the existing elevation of the mean ground level at the front building setback line; or 
2.  The average finished floor elevation of the first floors of the existing dwellings on either side of the undeveloped lot. 
D.  Where a new dwelling is to be built on a previously undeveloped lot that is not within 100 feet of existing dwellings on both sides, the finished floor elevation of the first floor of the new dwelling may be no more than 3 feet above the existing elevation of the mean ground level at the front building setback line. 
E.  Elevations required under this section shall be certified by a land surveyor or professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Georgia. No regrading or filling of vacant lots shall be allowed without certification of required elevations. 
2.1.8. - Transparency 
A.  Transparency is the minimum percentage of windows and doors that must cover a ground or upper story facade. 
B.  Transparency applies to primary and side streetfacing facades only. 
C.  Glass is considered transparent where it has a transparency higher than 80% and external reflectance of less than 15%. 
D.  Ground story transparency is measured between 2 and 12 feet above the abutting sidewalk. 
E.  Upper story transparency is measured from top of the finished floor to the top of the finished floor above. When there is no floor above, upper story transparency is measured from the top of the finished floor to the top of the wall plate. 

2.1.9. - Blank Wall Area 
Blank wall area means a portion of the exterior facade of the building that does not include: windows or doors; columns, pilasters or other articulation greater than 12 inches in depth; or a substantial material change (paint color is not considered a substantial change). 

Blank wall area applies in both a vertical and horizontal direction. Blank wall area applies to ground and upper story primary and side street-facing facades only. 
2.1.10. - Pedestrian Access 
Where pedestrian access is required by this Article for multifamily, commercial and civic uses, it includes an ADA-compliant pedestrian walkway connection with a minimum width of 5 feet connecting the pedestrian access to the public sidewalks and other building entrances. 
Sec. 2.2. - Building Types 
The section provides standards for a variety of building types. Building types provide many key dimensional standards for each zoning district. Building types are applied to help reinforce the existing character and scale of the City. Note that these building types are for zoning purposes only, and not linked to the Building Code. 

2.2.1. - Descriptions 
Each building type is described below. 
A.  Detached House   
A building type designed to accommodate one dwelling unit on an individual lot with yards on all sides. 

B.  Carriage House   
A building type designed to accommodate a small self-contained accessory dwelling unit located on the same lot as a principal structure, but physically separated. 

C.  Cottage Court   
A building type designed to accommodate 5 to 9 detached dwelling units organized around a shared internal courtyard. Units cannot be vertically mixed. 

D.  Duplex   
A building type designed to accommodate two dwelling units that share a common wall on a single individual lot. 

E.  Attached House   
A building type that accommodates two dwelling units that share a common wall along the lot line between two lots. 

F.  Townhouse   
A building type designed to accommodate 3 to 6 dwelling units where each unit is separated by a common side wall. Units cannot be vertically mixed. 

G.  Walk Up Flat (3-6 units)   
A building type designed to accommodate 3 to 6 dwelling units vertically and horizontally integrated. 

H.  Stacked Flat (7+ units)   
A building type designed to accommodate 7 or more dwelling units vertically and horizontally integrated. 

I.  Single-Story Shopfront   
A single-story building type designed to accommodate retail or commercial activity. 

J.  Mixed Use Shopfront   
A multi-story building type designed to accommodate ground floor retail, office or commercial uses with upper-story residential or office uses. 

K.  General Building   
A building type designed to accommodate commercial, office or industrial activity. Not intended for retail sales or personal service uses. 

L.  Civic Building   
A building type designed to accommodate civic, institutional or public uses. 

2.2.2. - Building Types Allowed by District 
R-85 R-60 R-50 RS-17 RM-18 RM-22 RM-43 PO NMU C-1 C-2 C-3 MU I Residential Buildings Detached House - - - - n/a n/a Carriage House - - - - - n/a n/a Cottage Court - - - - - - - - - - n/a n/a Duplex - - - - - - - - n/a n/a Attached House - - - - - - - n/a n/a Townhouse - - - - - n/a n/a Walk Up Flat (3-6 units) - - - - - n/a n/a Stacked Flat (7+ units) - - - - - - n/a n/a Commercial/Mixed Use Buildings Single-story Shopfront - - - - - - - - n/a n/a Mixed Use Shopfront - - - - - - - - n/a n/a General Building - - - - - - - - n/a n/a Public Buildings Civic Building n/a n/a  
Key:    = Building type allowed -- = Building type not allowed 
2.2.3.   Rules Specific to Building Types
A.  Detached House   
A building type designed to accommodate one dwelling unit on an individual lot with yards on all sides. 

Lot Detached house units per lot 1 max Height Ground floor elevation See Sec. 2.1.5. Pedestrian Access Entrance facing primary street Required  
B.  Carriage House   
A building type designed to accommodate a small self-contained accessory dwelling unit located on the same lot as a principal structure, but physically separated. 

Lot Carriage house units per lot 1 max Size Floor area 800 SF max unit; 1,000 SF max with garage Bedrooms 2 max  
C.  Cottage Court   
A building type designed to accommodate 5 to 9 detached dwelling units organized around a shared internal courtyard. Units cannot be vertically mixed. 

Site Site width/depth 150' min Cottage Court units per site 5 min/9 max Size Floor area per unit 1,800 SF max Courtyard Area 3,000 SF min Width 40' min Courtyard cannot be parked or driven upon, except for emergency access and permitted temporary events Height Principal building 1.5 stories/24' max Wall plate 18' max Ground floor elevation See Sec. 2.1.5. Pedestrian Access Entrance facing primary street Required for units facing street  
D.  Duplex   
A building type designed to accommodate two dwelling units that share a common wall on an individual lot. 

Lot Duplex units per lot 2 max Height Ground floor elevation See Sec. 2.1.5. Pedestrian Access Entrance facing primary street Required  
E.  Attached House   
A building type that accommodates two dwelling units that share a common wall along the lot line between two lots. 

Site/Lot Site width 50' min Dwelling units per site 2 min Attached house units per lot 1 max Height Ground floor elevation See Sec. 2.1.5. Pedestrian Access Entrance facing primary street Required for each street-facing unit  
F.  Townhouse   
A building type designed to accommodate 3 to 6 dwelling units where each unit is separated by a common side wall. Units cannot be vertically mixed. 

Site/Lot Site width 50' min Townhouse units per site 3 min Number of units in a row 6 max Height Ground story height 10' min Ground floor elevation 2' min/4' max Transparency Ground story 20% min Upper story 20% min Blank wall area 30' max Pedestrian Access Entrance facing primary street Required for each street-facing unit Parking Location No on-site parking is allowed between the building and the street  
G.  Walk Up Flat (3-6 units)   
A building type designed to accommodate 3 to 6 dwelling units vertically and horizontally integrated. 

Lot Walk Up Flat units per building 3 min/6 max Height Ground story height 10' min Ground floor elevation 2' min/4' max Transparency Ground story 20% min Upper story 20% min Blank wall area 30' max Pedestrian Access Entrance facing primary street Required Parking Location No on-site parking is allowed between the building and the street  
H.  Stacked Flat (7+ units)   
A building type designed to accommodate 7 or more dwelling units vertically and horizontally integrated. 

Lot Stacked Flat units per building 7 min Street-facing facade length 200' max Height Ground story height (floor to ceiling) 9' min Ground floor elevation 2' min/4' max Transparency Ground story 20% min Upper story 20% min Blank wall area 30' max Pedestrian Access Entrance facing primary street Required for each ground floor street-facing unit Parking Location No on-site parking is allowed between the building and the street  
I.  Single-Story Shopfront   
A single-story building type designed to accommodate retail or commercial activity. 

Lot Street-facing facade length 200' max Height Building height 1 story max Ground story height (floor to ceiling) 14' min Ground floor elevation 0' min/2' max Transparency Ground story: primary/side street 60%/30% min Blank wall area: primary/side street 30'/50' max Pedestrian Access Entrance facing primary street Required every 75' Parking Location No on-site parking is allowed between the building and the street  
J.  Mixed Use Shopfront   
A multi-story building type designed to accommodate ground floor retail, office or commercial uses with upper-story residential or office uses. 

Lot Street-facing facade length 200' max Size Floor area per residential unit 550 SF min Height Ground story height (floor to ceiling) 14' min Ground floor elevation 0' min/2' max Transparency Ground story: primary/side street 60%/30% min Upper story 20% min Blank wall area: primary/side street 30'/50' max Pedestrian Access Entrance facing primary street Required every 75' Parking Location No on-site parking is allowed between the building and the street  
K.  General Building   
A building type designed to accommodate commercial, office or industrial activity. Not intended for retail sales or personal service uses. 

Lot Street-facing facade length 200' max Height Ground story height (floor to ceiling) 11' min Ground floor elevation 0' min/2' max Transparency Ground story: primary/side street 40%/20% min Upper story 20% min Blank wall area: primary/side street 40'/60' max Pedestrian Access Entrance facing primary street Required every 125' Parking Location No on-site parking is allowed between the building and the street  
L.  Civic Building   
A building type designed to accommodate civic, institutional or public uses. 

Lot Dwelling units per building n/a Pedestrian Access Entrance facing primary street Required Use Only the following uses are allowed in a civic building type (see Sec. 6.2.): 1. College, university, seminary; 2. Library, museum, public; 3. Office, governmental, civic or charitable organization; 4. Place of worship; 5. Police, fire or EMS station; 6. Post office; and 7. School, private or private (K-12).  
2.2.3. - Rules Specific to Building Types 
A.  Detached House   
A building type designed to accommodate one dwelling unit on an individual lot with yards on all sides. 

Lot Detached house units per lot 1 max Height Ground floor elevation See Sec. 2.1.5. Pedestrian Access Entrance facing primary street Required  
B.  Carriage House   
A building type designed to accommodate a small self-contained accessory dwelling unit located on the same lot as a principal structure, but physically separated. 

Lot Carriage house units per lot 1 max Size Floor area 800 SF max unit; 1,000 SF max with garage Bedrooms 2 max  
C.  Cottage Court   
A building type designed to accommodate 5 to 9 detached dwelling units organized around a shared internal courtyard. Units cannot be vertically mixed. 

Site Site width/depth 150' min Cottage Court units per site 5 min/9 max Size Floor area per unit 1,800 SF max Courtyard Area 3,000 SF min Width 40' min Courtyard cannot be parked or driven upon, except for emergency access and permitted temporary events Height Principal building 1.5 stories/24' max Wall plate 18' max Ground floor elevation See Sec. 2.1.5. Pedestrian Access Entrance facing primary street Required for units facing street  
D.  Duplex   
A building type designed to accommodate two dwelling units that share a common wall on an individual lot. 

Lot Duplex units per lot 2 max Height Ground floor elevation See Sec. 2.1.5. Pedestrian Access Entrance facing primary street Required  
E.  Attached House   
A building type that accommodates two dwelling units that share a common wall along the lot line between two lots. 

Site/Lot Site width 50' min Dwelling units per site 2 min Attached house units per lot 1 max Height Ground floor elevation See Sec. 2.1.5. Pedestrian Access Entrance facing primary street Required for each street-facing unit  
F.  Townhouse   
A building type designed to accommodate 3 to 6 dwelling units where each unit is separated by a common side wall. Units cannot be vertically mixed. 

Site/Lot Site width 50' min Townhouse units per site 3 min Number of units in a row 6 max Height Ground story height 10' min Ground floor elevation 2' min/4' max Transparency Ground story 20% min Upper story 20% min Blank wall area 30' max Pedestrian Access Entrance facing primary street Required for each street-facing unit Parking Location No on-site parking is allowed between the building and the street  
G.  Walk Up Flat (3-6 units)   
A building type designed to accommodate 3 to 6 dwelling units vertically and horizontally integrated. 

Lot Walk Up Flat units per building 3 min/6 max Height Ground story height 10' min Ground floor elevation 2' min/4' max Transparency Ground story 20% min Upper story 20% min Blank wall area 30' max Pedestrian Access Entrance facing primary street Required Parking Location No on-site parking is allowed between the building and the street  
H.  Stacked Flat (7+ units)   
A building type designed to accommodate 7 or more dwelling units vertically and horizontally integrated. 

Lot Stacked Flat units per building 7 min Street-facing facade length 200' max Height Ground story height (floor to ceiling) 9' min Ground floor elevation 2' min/4' max Transparency Ground story 20% min Upper story 20% min Blank wall area 30' max Pedestrian Access Entrance facing primary street Required for each ground floor street-facing unit Parking Location No on-site parking is allowed between the building and the street  
I.  Single-Story Shopfront   
A single-story building type designed to accommodate retail or commercial activity. 

Lot Street-facing facade length 200' max Height Building height 1 story max Ground story height (floor to ceiling) 14' min Ground floor elevation 0' min/2' max Transparency Ground story: primary/side street 60%/30% min Blank wall area: primary/side street 30'/50' max Pedestrian Access Entrance facing primary street Required every 75' Parking Location No on-site parking is allowed between the building and the street  
J.  Mixed Use Shopfront   
A multi-story building type designed to accommodate ground floor retail, office or commercial uses with upper-story residential or office uses. 

Lot Street-facing facade length 200' max Size Floor area per residential unit 550 SF min Height Ground story height (floor to ceiling) 14' min Ground floor elevation 0' min/2' max Transparency Ground story: primary/side street 60%/30% min Upper story 20% min Blank wall area: primary/side street 30'/50' max Pedestrian Access Entrance facing primary street Required every 75' Parking Location No on-site parking is allowed between the building and the street  
K.  General Building   
A building type designed to accommodate commercial, office or industrial activity. Not intended for retail sales or personal service uses. 

Lot Street-facing facade length 200' max Height Ground story height (floor to ceiling) 11' min Ground floor elevation 0' min/2' max Transparency Ground story: primary/side street 40%/20% min Upper story 20% min Blank wall area: primary/side street 40'/60' max Pedestrian Access Entrance facing primary street Required every 125' Parking Location No on-site parking is allowed between the building and the street  
L.  Civic Building   
A building type designed to accommodate civic, institutional or public uses. 

Lot Dwelling units per building n/a Pedestrian Access Entrance facing primary street Required Use Only the following uses are allowed in a civic building type (see Sec. 6.2.): 1. College, university, seminary; 2. Library, museum, public; 3. Office, governmental, civic or charitable organization; 4. Place of worship; 5. Police, fire or EMS station; 6. Post office; and 7. School, private or private (K-12).  
Article 3. - Residential Districts 
Sec. 3.1. - R-85 Single-Family Residential District 

3.1.1. - Purpose 

The purpose of this district is to provide for single-family residential development with a minimum lot size of 15,000 square feet, with such public buildings, schools, places of worship, public recreational facilities and accessory uses as may be necessary or are normally compatible with residential surroundings. The district is located to protect existing developments of this character. 
3.1.2. - Building types allowed 
Detached House see also Sec. 2.2.3.A. Carriage House see also Sec. 2.2.3.B. Civic Building see also Sec. 2.2.3.L.  
3.1.3. - Lot Dimensions 

Lot Area Width Depth Detached house 15,000 SF min 85' min 150' min Carriage house Same as principal structure Civic building 15,000 SF min 85' min 150' min Lot Coverage Detached house lot 40% max Civic building lot 50% max  
3.1.4. - Building Placement 

Principal Building Setbacks Primary street 50' min or Avg. front yard (Sec. 2.1.5.B.1.) Side street 25' min Side interior 15' min Rear 40' min Accessory Structure Setbacks Location Rear yard only Side street 20' min Side interior: 1 story/2 story 3' min/10' min Rear: 1 story/2 story 3' min/10' min Rear yard: coverage 30% max Floor area (including carriage house) 1,000 SF max  
3.1.5. - Bulk and Mass 

Building Height Principal building 2 stories/35' max 1 story accessory structure 16' max 2 story accessory structure 25' max Wall Plate Height (accessory structure only) 1 story: pitched roof 10' max 1 story: flat roof 12' max 2 story: pitched roof 16' max 2 story: flat roof 18' max Building Mass Floor area ratio (FAR) .40 max  
Sec. 3.2. - R-60 Single-Family Residential District 

3.2.1. - Purpose 

The purpose of this district is to provide for single-family residential development with a minimum lot size of 9,000 square feet with such public buildings, schools, places of worship, public recreational facilities and accessory uses as may be necessary or are normally compatible with such surroundings. The district is located to protect existing developments of this character. 
3.2.2. - Building Types Allowed 
Detached House see also Sec. 2.2.3.A. Carriage House see also Sec. 2.2.3.B. Civic Building see also Sec. 2.2.3.L.  
3.2.3. - Lot Dimensions 

Lot Area Width Depth Detached house 9,000 SF min 60' min 120' min Carriage house Same as principal structure Civic building 9,000 SF min 60' min 120' min Lot Coverage Detached house lot: Lot less than 9,000 SF see Sec. 2.1.4. Lot 9,000 SF or more 40% max/lot Civic building lot 50% max/lot  
3.2.4. - Building Placement 

Principal Building Setbacks Primary street 30' min or Avg. front yard (Sec. 2.1.5.B.1.) Side street 10' min Side interior 10' min Lot less than 60' in width see Sec. 2.1.5.A.6. Lot 60' or more in width 10' min Rear 30' min Accessory Structure Setbacks Location Rear yard only Side street match main dwelling Side interior: 1 story/2 story 3' min/10' min Rear: 1 story/2 story 3' min/10' min Rear yard: coverage 30% max Floor area (including carriage house) 1,000 SF max  
3.2.5. - Bulk and Mass 

Building Height Principal building: Lot less than 9,000 SF see Sec. 2.1.6.B.4 Lot 9,000 SF or more 2 stories/35' max 1 story accessory structure 16' max 2 story accessory structure 25' max Wall Plate Height (accessory structure only) 1 story: pitched roof 10' max 1 story: flat roof 12' max 2 story: pitched roof 16' max 2 story: flat roof 18' max Building Mass Floor area ratio (FAR) .40 max  
Sec. 3.3. - R-50 Single Family Residential District 

3.3.1. - Purpose 

The purpose of this district is to provide for newly developed single-family residential development with a minimum lot size of 5,000 square feet with such public buildings, schools, places of worship, public recreational facilities and accessory uses as may be necessary or are normally compatible with such surroundings. The district is located to protect existing developments of this character. 
3.3.2. - Building Types Allowed 
Detached House see also Sec. 2.2.3.A. Carriage House see also Sec. 2.2.3.B. Civic Building see also Sec. 2.2.3.L.  
3.3.3. - Lot Dimensions 

Lot Area Width Depth Detached house 5,000 SF min 50' min 100' min Carriage house Same as principal structure Civic building 5,000 SF min 50' min 100' min Lot Coverage Detached house lot Less than 5,000 SF see Sec. 2.1.4. 5,000 to 5,499 SF 58% max/lot 5,500 to 5,999 SF 56% max/lot 6,000 to 6,499 SF 54% max/lot 6,500 to 6,999 SF 52% max/lot 7,000 to 7,499 SF 50% max/lot 7,500 to 7,999 SF 47% max/lot 8,000 to 8,499 SF 45% max/lot 8,500 to 8,999 SF 43% max/lot 9,000 SF or more 40% max/lot Civic building lot 50% max/lot  
3.3.4. - Building Placement 

Principal Building Setbacks Primary street 20' min or Avg. front yard (Sec. 2.1.5.B.1.) Side street 10' min Side interior 5' min Rear 20' min Rear, abutting R-85, R-60 30' min Accessory Structure Setbacks Location Rear yard only Side street 10' min Side interior 3' min Rear 3' min Rear yard: coverage 30% max Floor area (including carriage house) 1,000 SF max  
3.3.5. - Bulk and Mass 

Building Height Principal building 1.5 stories/30' max Accessory structure 16' max Wall Plate Height (accessory structure only) Pitched roof 10' max Flat roof 12' max Building Mass Floor area ratio (FAR) .40 max  
Sec. 3.4. - RS-17 Single-Family Residential District 

3.4.1. - Purpose 

The purpose of this district is to provide for single-family residential development at a density not to exceed 17 units per acre. 
3.4.2. - Building Types Allowed 
Detached House see also Sec. 2.2.3.A. Cottage Court see also Sec. 2.2.3.C. Attached House see also Sec. 2.2.3.E. Townhouse see also Sec. 2.2.3.F. Civic Building see also Sec. 2.2.3.L.  
3.4.3. - Lot Dimensions 

Site Density, units per acre 17 u/a max Amenity space 5% min Street frontage 100' min Lot Area Width Detached house 5,000 SF min 50' min Cottage court 1,500 SF min 20 min Attached house 2,500 SF min 25' min Townhouse 1,500 SF min 20' min Civic building 5,000 SF 50' min Lot Coverage Developments = 20,000 SF 60% max/lot Developments > 20,000 SF 75% max/lot Cottage court lot 75% max/lot Townhouse 60% max/site Civic building lot 50% max/lot  
3.4.4. - Building Placement 

Principal Building Setbacks Primary street 5' min or Avg. front yard (Sec. 2.1.5.B.1.) Side street 5' min Side interior Interior wall: 0' min 
Exterior wall: 3' min Rear 5' min Rear, abutting R-85, R-60 30' min Accessory Structure Setbacks Location Rear yard only Side street Level with principal bldg Side interior: 1 story 0' or 3' min Side interior: 2 story 0' or 10' min Rear: 1 story 3' min Rear: 2 story 10' min Rear/side: alley 5' or 20' min Rear yard: coverage 30% max Floor area (including carriage house) 1,000 SF max  
3.4.5. - Bulk and Mass 

Building Height Principal building 3 stories/40' max 1 story accessory structure 16' max 2 story accessory structure 25' max  
3.4.6. - Supplementary Regulations 
A.  Transitional Buffer   
Sites shall have a minimum rear yard of no less than 30 feet where the development adjoins an R-85, R-60 zoning district. No less than 15 feet of the required rear yard shall be preserved as a natural buffer. 
B.  Off-Street Parking   
1.  No on-site parking is allowed between the principal building and the street. 
2.  Garage doors must face the side interior or rear lot line and must be accessed by an alley or driveway. 
C.  Garbage and Trash Disposal   
Dumpsters must be provided for garbage and trash removal within at least 200 feet of every dwelling unit (measured from the front door along a pedestrian walkway or sidewalk). Dumpsters must be reviewed and approved by the UDO Administrator. 
D.  Utilities and Maintenance Facilities   
Maintenance facilities, service facilities and public utilities shall be located to prevent visual nuisance within property lines. All utilities (gas, electric, water, sewer, CATV, fuel systems) shall be underground and other facilities shall be screened with plant or fence materials if the equipment is otherwise visible from the public right-of-way. 
E.  Post Office Common Mailbox   
Adequate provision for a location for delivery of US mail must be made on the site, subject to approval by the US Postal Service. 
F.  Building Standards   
1.  Acoustics   
The acceptable standard for acoustics is 50 decibels, dBa, for interior walls between dwelling units. 
2.  Fire Safety   
a.  Attached houses and townhouses must provide two exits as remote from each other as possible. All exits shall provide continuous means of egress to the exterior which is accessible to a street or to a landscaped open space leading to a street. 
b.  Walls separating attached houses or townhouses must be provided in accordance with Sec. 10.1.2.D.2.a. Exterior walls shall be masonry walls if the exterior wall is less than 10 feet from the overall site property lines. 
c.  A separation of any existing building and new construction shall be with a masonry wall or a minimum distance of 10 feet of open space. 
d.  Masonry walls shall be constructed to provide a minimum fire rating of two hours. No opening shall be permitted in masonry walls and such walls shall not be loadbearing, unless constructed of a 12-inch, 75% solid concrete block or the equivalent. 
e.  One fire hydrant shall be located within 500 feet of any dwelling unit inside a development. Hydrants can be located on a public street or on a drive within the development. 
G.  Front and Rear Yard Modifications   
Special exceptions to the front yard and rear yard requirement may be approved subject to such conditions as may be imposed in order to mitigate impacts which may be expected without the imposition of conditions. The following items shall be considered in determining whether the exception shall be approved: 
1.  The uses and rear yard setbacks of adjacent and nearby buildings. 
2.  The front-yard and/or rear-yard setbacks of adjacent and nearby buildings. 
3.  The impact that the proposed development will have on the light and air of adjacent and nearby properties. 
4.  The impact that the proposed development will have on the public safety, traffic on the public streets, transportation facilities, utilities and other public services. 
5.  The impact that the proposed development will have on established property values and on the health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the residents of the City. 
Sec. 3.5. - RM-18 Multiple-Family Residential District 

3.5.1. - Purpose 

The purpose of this district is to maintain medium residential density (not over 18 families per acre) as appropriate for garden-type apartments, and at the same time permit a variety of housing types. 
3.5.2. - Building Types Allowed 
Detached House see also Sec. 2.2.3.A. Carriage House see also Sec. 2.2.3.B. Duplex see also Sec. 2.2.3.D. Attached House see also Sec. 2.2.3.E. Townhouse see also Sec. 2.2.3.F. Walk Up Flat see also Sec. 2.2.3.G. Stacked Flat see also Sec. 2.2.3.H. Civic Building see also Sec. 2.2.3.L.  
3.5.3. - Lot Dimensions 

Site Density, units per acre 18 u/a max Lot Area Width Depth Detached house 7,200 SF min 60' min 120' min Carriage house Same as principal structure Duplex 9,000 SF min 70' min 120' min Attached House 7,200 SF min 60' min 120' min Townhouse 1,500 SF min 20' min 75' min Walk up flat 4,000 SF min 40' min 100' min Stacked flat 4,000 SF min 40' min 100' min Civic building 5,000 SF min 40' min 100' min Lot Coverage Detached house, carriage house, duplex or attached house lot 40% max/lot Townhouse 40% max/site Walk up flat or stacked flat lot 60% max/lot Civic building lot 50% max/lot  
3.5.4. - Building Placement 

Principal Building Setbacks Primary street 30' min Side street 25' min Side interior Attached house, townhouse Interior wall: 0' min 
Exterior wall: 10' min All other building types 10' min Rear 30' min Accessory Structure Setbacks Location Rear yard only Side street Level with principal building Side interior: 1 story/2 story 3' min/10' min Rear: 1 story/2 story 3' min/10' min Rear/side: alley 5' or 20' min Rear yard: coverage 30% max Floor area (not including carriage house) 1,000 SF max  
3.5.5. - Bulk and Mass 

Building Height Principal building 3 stories/35' max (1) 1 story accessory structure 16' max 2 story accessory structure 25' max (1) Special exceptions to the maximum building height may be approved (see Sec. 2.1.6.B.3.) Floor Area Ratio (FAR) Detached house, carriage house, duplex, attached house or townhouse lot .40 max Walk up flat, stacked flat or civic building lot n/a  
Sec. 3.6. - RM-22 Multiple-Family Residential District 

3.6.1. - Purpose 

The purpose of this district is to provide for a variety of residential housing options at density not to exceed 22 units per acre with such public buildings, schools, places of worship, public recreational facilities and accessory uses as may be necessary or are normally compatible with residential surroundings. 
3.6.2. - Building Types Allowed 
Detached House see also Sec. 2.2.3.A. Carriage House see also Sec. 2.2.3.B. Cottage Court see also Sec. 2.2.3.C. Duplex see also Sec. 2.2.3.D. Attached House see also Sec. 2.2.3.E. Townhouse see also Sec. 2.2.3.F. Walk Up Flat see also Sec. 2.2.3.G. Civic Building see also Sec. 2.2.3.L.  
3.6.3. - Lot Dimensions 

Site Density, units per acre 22 u/a max Amenity space 5% min Lot Area Width Detached house 2,500 SF min 25' min Carriage house Same as principal structure Cottage Court 1,200 SF min 20' min Duplex 4,500 SF min 40' min Attached House 2,500 SF min 25' min Townhouse 800 SF min 16' min Walk up flat 4,000 SF min 40' min Civic building 5,000 SF min 50' min Lot Coverage Cottage court lot 75% max/lot Townhouse 60% max/site Civic building lot 50% max/lot All other lots 60% max/lot  
3.6.4. - Building Placement 

Principal Building Setbacks Primary street 5' min Side street 5' min Side interior 0' or 3' min Rear 30' min Accessory Structure Setbacks Location Rear yard only Side street Level with principal building Side interior: 1 story 0' or 3' min Side interior: 2 story 0' or 10' min Rear: 1 story 3' min Rear: 2 story 10' min Rear/side: alley 5' or 20' min Rear yard: coverage 30% max Floor area (not including carriage house) 1,000 SF max  
3.6.5. - Bulk and Mass 

Building Height Principal building 3 stories/40' max 1 story accessory structure 16' max 2 story accessory structure 25' max  
Sec. 3.7. - RM-43 Multiple-Family Residential District 

3.7.1. - Purpose 

The purpose of this district is to provide for high-intensity residential use (maximum of 43 families per acre). The districts are so located as to encourage multistory (elevator) apartment development. 
3.7.2. - Building Types Allowed 
Detached House see also Sec. 2.2.3.A. Carriage House see also Sec. 2.2.3.B. Duplex see also Sec. 2.2.3.D. Attached House see also Sec. 2.2.3.E. Townhouse see also Sec. 2.2.3.F. Walk Up Flat see also Sec. 2.2.3.G. Stacked Flat see also Sec. 2.2.3.H. Civic Building see also Sec. 2.2.3.L.  
3.7.3. - Lot Dimensions 

Site Density, units per acre 43 u/a max Lot Area Width Depth Detached house 7,500 SF min 60' min 120' min Carriage house Same as principal structure Duplex 9,000 SF min 70' min 120' min Attached House 7,500 SF min 60' min 120' min Townhouse 1,300 SF min 18' min 75' min Walk up flat 4,000 SF min 40' min 100' min Stacked flat 4,000 SF min 40' min 100' min Civic building 5,000 SF min 40' min 100' min Lot Coverage Detached house, carriage house, duplex or attached house lot 40% max/lot Townhouse 40% max/site Walk up flat or stacked flat lot 60% max/lot Civic building lot 50% max/lot  
3.7.4. - Building Placement 

Principal Building Setbacks Primary street 30' min Side street 25' min Side interior Attached house, town-house Interior wall: 0' min 
Exterior wall: 10' min + 2' for each story over 2 All other building types 10' min + 2' for each story over 2 Rear 30' min + 2' for each story over 2 Accessory Structure Setbacks Location Rear yard only Side street Level with principal building Side interior: 1 story/2 story 3' min/10' min Rear: 1 story/2 story 3' min/10' min Rear/side: alley 5' or 20' min Rear yard: coverage 30% max Floor area (not including carriage house) 1,000 SF max  
3.7.5. - Bulk and Mass 

Building Height Principal building 45' max (1) 1 story accessory structure 16' max 2 story accessory structure 25' max (1) Special exceptions to the maximum building height may be approved (see Sec. 2.1.6.B.3). Floor Area Ratio (FAR) Detached house, carriage house, duplex, attached house or townhouse lot .40 max Walk up flat, stacked flat or civic building lot n/a  
Sec. 3.8. - Conservation Subdivision (R-85, R-60) 
_____

3.8.1. - Description 
This Section provides for conservation subdivisions in the R-85 and R-60 zoning districts. 
3.8.2. - Purpose 
A.  To provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater runoff and watershed protection measure. 
B.  To provide a residential zoning district that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
C.  To preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. 
D.  To permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. 
E.  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
F.  To promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community. 
G.  To promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions. 
H.  To encourage interaction in the community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood. 
I.  To encourage street designs that reduce traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries. 
J.  To promote construction of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses, and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
K.  To conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of houses with direct access to and views of open space. 
L.  To preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
3.8.3. - General Regulations 
A.  Applicability   
This conservation subdivision option is available in the R-85 and R-60 zoning districts. Applicants shall comply with all other provisions of the Unified Development Ordinance and all other applicable laws. Approval of a conservation subdivision is also subject to the requirements of Sec. 11.2.5. 
B.  Ownership of Development Site   
The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
C.  Housing Density Determination   
The maximum number of lots in the conservation subdivision shall be determined by either of the following two methods, at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator: 
1.  Calculation   
The maximum number of dwelling units allowed on a site is calculated by multiplying the net site area by the maximum number of units per acre allowed in the district. Where a conservation subdivision is proposed, the net site area must be reduced to exclude all of the following areas: 
a.  Slopes over 15% of at least 2,500 square feet contiguous area; 
b.  The 100-year floodplain or regulatory floodplain, whichever is higher; 
c.  Bodies of open water over 2,500 square feet contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition of the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; or, 
e.  Anticipated right-of-way needs for roads and utilities. 
2.  Yield Plan   
The maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible. The proposed plan must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations. 
3.8.4. - Application Requirements 
A.  Site Analysis Map Required   
Concurrent with the submission of a site concept plan, the applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements of this Section. The preliminary site plan shall included the following features: 
1.  Property boundaries; 
2.  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
3.  Topographic contours of no less than 10-foot intervals; 
4.  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in Sec. 3.8.5.; 
5.  General vegetation characteristics; 
6.  General soil types; 
7.  The planned location of protected open space; 
8.  Existing roads and structures; and 
9.  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
B.  Open Space Management Plan 
An open space management plan, as described in Sec. 3.8.5.E., shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
C.  Instrument of Permanent Protection   
An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant and as described in Sec. 3.8.5.F., shall be placed on the open space concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit in a form acceptable to the UDO Administrator. 
3.8.5. - Open Space 
A.  Definition   
Open space is the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
B.  Standards to Determine Open Space   
1.  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least 40% of the gross tract area. 
2.  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this Section: 
a.  The 100-year floodplain or the regulatory floodplain, whichever is higher, in accordance with Sec. 9.5., Floodplain Management/Flood Damage Prevention; 
b.  Buffer zones of at least 75 feet width along all perennial and intermittent streams in accordance with Sec. 9.2., Stream Buffer Protection; 
c.  Slopes above 15% of at least 2,500 square feet contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
e.  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and, 
f.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
3.  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible: 
a.  Important historic sites; 
b.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre contiguous area; 
c.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than 8 inches caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line; 
d.  Other significant natural features and scenic view sheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
e.  Prime agricultural lands of at least 5 acres contiguous area; and 
f.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
4.  Above-ground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the 40% minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and documented existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
5.  At least 75% of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract. The open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
6.  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
C.  Permitted Uses of Open Space   
Uses of open space may include the following: 
1.  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
2.  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
3.  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of pervious materials in accordance with the applicable requirements of Article 9; 
4.  Passive recreation areas; 
5.  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than 10% of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces provided such impervious areas comply with the applicable requirements of Article 9. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; 
6.  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
7.  Nonstructural stormwater management practices; 
8.  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or 
9.  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this article. 
D.  Prohibited Uses of Open Space   
1.  Golf courses; 
2.  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
3.  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; and 
4.  Other compatible activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
E.  Ownership and Management Ownership   
The applicant must identify the owner of the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities located on the open space. If a homeowner's association is the owner, membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowner's of the subdivision and their successors. If a homeowner's association is the owner, the homeowner's association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities shall be borne by the owner. 
1.  Management Plan   
Applicant shall submit a plan for management of open space and common facilities ("plan") that: 
a.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
b.  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
c.  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the City Commission after a public hearing by the Planning Commission; and, 
d.  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
2.  Responsibility   
a.  In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the City may assume temporary responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. 
b.  The costs of maintenance shall be charged to the owner, homeowner's association, or to the individual property owners that make up the homeowner's association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. 
c.  The costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
d.  The exercise by the City of its right to assume temporary maintenance responsibility to take corrective action shall not relieve the property owner of their maintenance responsibility or should it be construed as the City assuming permanent responsibility for such maintenance. 
F.  Legal Instrument for Permanent Protection   
1.  The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
a.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
i.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
ii.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this Section. 
iii.  If the entity accepting the easement is not the City, then a third right of enforcement favoring the City shall be included in the easement. 
b.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of the City or other governmental entity if approved by the UDO Administrator; or 
c.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the UDO Administrator. 
2.  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this Section, as well as any further restrictions compatible with the intent of this article the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
Article 4. - Mixed Use and Commercial Districts 
Sec. 4.1. - PO Professional Office District 

4.1.1. - Purpose 

The purpose of this district is to provide for certain limited commercial developments and uses in transitional locations adjacent to existing commercial zoning districts. Uses and developments are limited to those which can provide a buffer between commercial districts and adjacent residential areas. 
4.1.2. - Building Types Allowed 
Detached House see also Sec. 2.2.3.A. Carriage House see also Sec. 2.2.3.B. Duplex see also Sec. 2.2.3.D. Attached House see also Sec. 2.2.3.E. Townhouse see also Sec. 2.2.3.F. Walk Up Flat see also Sec. 2.2.3.G. Stacked Flat see also Sec. 2.2.3.H. Civic Building see also Sec. 2.2.3.L.  
4.1.3. - Lot Dimensions 

Site Density, units per acre 18 u/a max Lot Area Width Depth Detached house 7,200 SF min 60' min 120' min Carriage house Same as principal structure Duplex 9,000 SF min 70' min 120' min Attached House 7,200 SF min 60' min 120' min Townhouse 1,500 SF min 20' min 75' min Walk up flat 4,000 SF min 40' min 100' min Stacked flat 4,000 SF min 40' min 100' min Civic building 5,000 SF min 40' min 100' min Lot Coverage Detached house, carriage house, duplex, attached house or townhouse lot 40% max/lot Walk up flat or stacked flat lot 60% max/lot Civic building lot 50% max/lot  
4.1.4. - Building Placement 

Principal Building Setbacks Primary street 15' min Side street 15' min Side interior 5' min Attached house, townhouse Interior wall: 0' min Exterior wall: 5' min All other building types 5' min Side interior: abutting residential district 10' min Rear 0' min Rear: abutting residential district 30' min Accessory Structure Setbacks Location Rear yard only Side street Level with principal building Side interior: 1 story/2 story 3' min/10' min Rear: 1 story/2 story 3' min/10' min Rear/side: alley 5' or 20' min Rear yard: coverage 30% max Floor area (not including carriage house) 1,000 SF max  
4.1.5. - Bulk and Mass 

Building Height Principal building 3 stories/35' max 1 story accessory structure 16' max 2 story accessory structure 25' max Floor Area Ratio (FAR) Detached house, carriage house, duplex, attached house or townhouse lot .40 max Walk up flat, stacked flat or civic building lot n/a  
4.1.6. - Supplementary Standards 
A.  Screening   
When a conditional use abuts a lot in a residential district, there shall be provided for the entire distance along the abutting property lines a solid fence of at least 6 feet in height or a landscaped buffer of plant material that will provide a dense, solid screen of at least 6 feet in height within 3 years. 
B.  Enclosure   
Every use shall be operated within the confines of a completely enclosed structure unless it is approved by the Zoning Administrator as an "open use." 
Sec. 4.2. - NMU Neighborhood Mixed Use District 

4.2.1. - Purpose 

The purpose of this district is to provide for protection and control of development or redevelopment of primarily retail shopping and personal services uses, developed either as a unit or as individual parcels, to serve the commercial needs of a relatively small area, usually a residential neighborhood. Residential density in the building types that allow residential uses shall not exceed 9 units per acre. 
(Ord. No. O-15-Z-01, § 1.1, 1-20-15) 
4.2.2. - Building Types Allowed 
Single-Story Shopfront see also Sec. 2.2.3.I. Mixed Use Shopfront see also Sec. 2.2.3.J. General Building see also Sec. 2.2.3.K. Civic Building see also Sec. 2.2.3.L.  
4.2.3. - Lot Dimensions 

Lot Area Width Single-story shopfront 5,000 SF min 50' min Mixed use shopfront 5,000 SF min 50' min General building 5,000 SF min 50' min Civic building 5,000 SF min 50' min Coverage Lot coverage 60% max Site Density, units per acre 9 u/a max  
(Ord. No. O-15-Z-01, § 1.1, 1-20-15) 
4.2.4. - Building Placement 

Principal Building Setbacks Primary street build-to zone 0' min/8' max Side street build-to zone 0' min/6' max Side interior 0' or 3' min Side interior: abutting residential district 10' min Rear 0' or 3' min Rear: abutting residential district 30' min Build-To Building facade in primary street build-to zone (% of lot width) 80% Building facade in side street build-to zone (% of lot width) 40% Accessory Structure Setbacks Location Behind principal building Side street Level with principal building Side interior: 1 story/2 story 3' min/10' min Rear: 1 story/2 story 3' min/10' min  
4.2.5. - Bulk and Mass 

Building Height Principal building 3 stories/35' max 1 story accessory structure 16' max 2 story accessory structure 25' max Building Size Maximum floor area per building 10,000 SF max Maximum floor area per use 2,000 SF max  
Sec. 4.3. - C-1 Local Commercial District 

4.3.1. - Purpose 

The purpose of this district is to provide for protection and control of development or redevelopment of primarily retail shopping and personal services uses, developed either as a unit or as individual parcels to serve the commercial needs of a relatively small area, usually a residential neighborhood. Residential density in the building types that allow residential uses shall not exceed 43 units per acre. 
(Ord. No. O-15-Z-01, § 1.2, 1-20-15) 
4.3.2. - Building Types Allowed 
Townhouse see also Sec. 2.2.3.F. Walk Up Flat see also Sec. 2.2.3.G. Stacked Flat see also Sec. 2.2.3.H. Single-Story Shopfront see also Sec. 2.2.3.I. Mixed Use Shopfront see also Sec. 2.2.3.J. General Building see also Sec. 2.2.3.K. Civic Building see also Sec. 2.2.3.L.  
4.3.3. - Lot Dimensions 

Lot Area Width Townhouse 800 SF min 16' min Walk up flat 4,000 SF min 40' min Stacked flat 4,000 SF min 40' min Single-story shopfront 5,000 SF min 50' min Mixed use shopfront 5,000 SF min 50' min General building 5,000 SF min 50' min Civic building 5,000 SF min 50' min Coverage Townhouse lot, walk up flat lot 70% max Stacked flat, single-story shopfront, mixed use shopfront, general building lot 90% max Civic building lot 60% max Site Density, units per acre 43 u/a max  
(Ord. No. O-15-Z-01, § 1.2, 1-20-15) 
4.3.4. - Building Placement 

Principal Building Setbacks Primary street build-to zone 0' min/8' max Side street build-to zone 0' min/6' max Side interior 0' or 3' min Side interior: abutting residential district 10' min Rear 0' or 3' min Rear: abutting residential district 30' min Build-To Building facade in primary street build-to zone (% of lot width) 80% min Building facade in side street build-to zone (% of lot width) 40% min Accessory Structure Setbacks Location Behind principal building Side street Level with principal building Side interior: 1 story/2 story 3' min/10' min Rear: 1 story/2 story 3' min/10' min  
4.3.5. - Bulk and Mass 

Building Height Principal building 3 stories/40' max (1) Minimum building height 16' min 1 story accessory structure 16' max 2 story accessory structure 25' max (1) Special exceptions to the maximum building height may be approved (see Sec. 2.1.6.B.3.)  
Sec. 4.4. - C-2 General Business District 

4.4.1. - Purpose 

The purpose of this district is to provide sufficient space for a wide variety of retail sales and service activities serving the entire City and embracing the present central business district. This district is currently built up with a general mixture of retail sales and service activities, government and civic uses. Residential density in the building types that allow residential uses shall not exceed 70 units per acre. 
(Ord. No. O-15-Z-01, § 1.3, 1-20-15) 
4.4.2. - Building Types Allowed 
Townhouse see also Sec. 2.2.3.F. Walk Up Flat see also Sec. 2.2.3.G. Stacked Flat see also Sec. 2.2.3.H. Single-Story Shopfront see also Sec. 2.2.3.I. Mixed Up Shopfront see also Sec. 2.2.3.J. General Building see also Sec. 2.2.3.K. Civic Building see also Sec. 2.2.3.L.  
4.4.3. - Lot Dimensions 

Lot Area Width Townhouse 800 SF min 16' min Walk up flat 4,000 SF min 40' min Stacked flat 4,000 SF min 40' min Single-story shopfront 5,000 SF min 50' min Mixed use shopfront 5,000 SF min 50' min General building 5,000 SF min 50' min Civic building 5,000 SF min 50' min Coverage Townhouse lot, walk up flat lot 70% max Stacked flat, single-story shopfront, mixed use shopfront, general building lot 90% max Civic building lot 60% max Site Density, units per acre 70 u/a max  
(Ord. No. O-15-Z-01, § 1.3, 1-20-15) 
4.4.4. - Building Placement 

Principal Building Setbacks Primary street build-to zone 0' min/8' max Side street build-to zone 0' min/6' max Side interior 0' or 3' min Side interior: abutting R-85, R-60, R-50 30' min Rear 0' or 3' min Rear: R-85, R-60, R-50 30' min Build-To Building facade in primary street build-to zone (% of lot width) 80% min Building facade in side street build-to zone (% of lot width) 40% min Accessory Structure Setbacks Location Behind principal building Side street Level with principal building Side interior: 1 story/2 story 3' min/10' min Rear: 1 story/2 story 3' min/10' min  
4.4.5. - Bulk and Mass 

Building Height Principal building Townhouse, walk up flat 40' max (1) All other building types 80' max (1) 1 story accessory structure 16' max 2 story accessory structure 25' max (1) Special exceptions to the maximum building height may be approved (see Sec. 2.1.6.B.3.)  
4.4.6. - Supplemental Standards 
A.  Residential Compatibility   
1.  Buffer   
When C-2 abuts R-85, R-60 or R-50, the yard for the building or use in C-2 cannot be less than 30 feet. When a street separates a building or use in C-2 from an abutting R-85, R-60 or R-50, the street width measured from the R-85, R-60 or R-50 property line shall be considered as part of the required yard. When an alley separates a building or use in C-2 from an abutting R-85, R-60 or R-50 district, the 30 foot yard shall be measured from the commercial property line. The required yard between C-2 and R-85, R-60 or R-50 shall include a minimum 15 foot wide landscaped buffer with a mature, evergreen tree canopy with a 30 foot minimum height if there is no intervening street. 
2.  Height Plane   
Where a property in C-2 abuts a R-85, R-60 or R-50, no portion of any structure shall protrude through a height limiting plane beginning 35 feet above the boundary of any required yard and extending inward over the C-2 District at an angle of 45 degrees. 
3.  Additional Conditions   
The following conditions apply when abutting a R-85, R-60 or R-50 District: 
a.  No continuous building facade facing residential shall exceed 250 feet in width without a plaza, green space or pocket park at the sidewalk measured from the face of the building with a minimum width and depth of 40 feet. 
b.  All buildings shall have vertical expression lines at 40 feet average (change in material or 4 inch depth change) to visually break up solid mass. 
c.  Streetscapes facing R-60, R-85 or R-50 streets shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width including a minimum of a 5 foot sidewalk and a minimum 5 foot planting strip. 
d.  Portions of the building that face residential uses shall be residential uses within the first vertical 35 feet and the first horizontal 25 feet of the building. 
e.  Sufficient, designated visitor parking must be provided on site. 
4.  Adjoining Property Meetings   
When a proposed development, building or use is adjacent to a R-85, R-60 or R-50 Single Family Residential District line, the property owner and development team will be required to meet a minimum of one time with the adjoining property owners directly impacted by the project. The meeting shall occur prior to submitting for a building permit or meeting with the DDA. Conceptual site plans and conceptual elevations must be made public at least 2 weeks before the meeting. The City will provide facilitation services and criteria for the meeting based on the standards in Sec. 6.1.3.C. 
5.  Review by the DDA   
Each application for a high-density residential or mixed-use development within the jurisdiction of the DDA must be presented for review before the DDA. The DDA shall issue a resolution stating whether or not the application has met the standards in Sec. 6.1.3.C. Each application shall include a DDA resolution recommending approval or denial of the project as part of the application package prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
Sec. 4.5. - C-3 Heavy Commercial District 

4.5.1. - Purpose 

The purpose of this district is to provide for the control and development of commercial and light industrial uses. The regulations are also intended to protect nearby residential districts. Residential density in the building types that allow residential uses shall not exceed 43 units per acre. 
(Ord. No. O-15-Z-01, § 1.4, 1-20-15) 
4.5.2. - Building Types Allowed 
Walk Up Flat see also Sec. 2.2.3.G. Stacked Flat see also Sec. 2.2.3.H. Single-Story Shopfront see also Sec. 2.2.3.I. Mixed Use Shopfront see also Sec. 2.2.3.J. General Building see also Sec. 2.2.3.K. Civic Building see also Sec. 2.2.3.L.  
4.5.3. - Lot Dimensions 

Lot Area Width Walk up flat 4,000 SF min 40' min Stacked flat 4,000 SF min 40' min Single-story shopfront 5,000 SF min 50' min Mixed use shopfront 5,000 SF min 50' min General building 5,000 SF min 50' min Civic building 5,000 SF min 50' min Coverage Walk up flat lot 70% max Stacked flat, single-story shopfront, mixed use shopfront, general building lot 90% max Civic building lot 60% max Site Density, units per acre 43 u/a max  
(Ord. No. O-15-Z-01, § 1.4, 1-20-15) 
4.5.4. - Building Placement 

Principal Building Setbacks Primary street 0' min Side street 0' min Side interior 0' or 3' min Side interior: abutting R-85, R-60 or R-50 District 10' min Rear 0' or 3' min Rear: abutting R-85, R-60 or R-50 District 30' min Accessory Structure Setbacks Location Behind principal building Side street Level with principal building Side interior: 1 story/2 story 3' min/10' min Rear: 1 story/2 story 3' min/10' min  
4.5.5. - Bulk and Mass 

Building Height Principal building 45' max (1) 1 story accessory structure 16' max 2 story accessory structure 25' max (1) Special exceptions to the maximum building height may be approved (see Sec. 2.1.6.B.3.)  
4.5.6. - Supplemental Standards 
A.  Landscaping   
All front yards and any side yard abutting or facing a residential district shall be suitably landscaped. 
B.  Residential District Fence or Buffer Strip   
When a use in this district abuts a lot located in a residential district, there shall be provided for the entire distance of the property line or lines a visually solid fence at least 8 feet high or an equivalent buffer strip. The buffer strip shall be planted with plant material of such growth characteristics as will provide a dense obscure planting screen not less than 8 feet in height. Such plant material shall be so maintained as to continue effectiveness as a planting screen. 
C.  Fire Safety Hazards   
There shall be erected in this district only fire resistive buildings as defined in the building code of the City. 
D.  Traffic Congestion and Traffic Noise   
Each use shall take such measures to prevent or lessen traffic congestion and the traffic noise generated by vehicles related to its operation as the Planning Commission may reasonably impose. Conditions imposed shall be designated to control the location, number and concentration of vehicles entering or leaving a specific use at the hours of peak traffic flow. 
Sec. 4.6. - MU Mixed-Use District 

4.6.1. - Purpose and Administration 
A.  Purpose   
The purpose of the mixed-use district is to promote the redevelopment of existing single uses in commercial areas into vibrant and sustainable mixed-use communities combining residential, retail and office uses; to promote diversity in housing and commercial options; to create walkable, pedestrian-scaled environments that accommodate and encourage multiple modes of transportation; to provide opportunities to add a variety of open space amenities; to provide a framework for shared infrastructure; and to improve the quality of life by providing live, work, and play opportunities based on regulating master site plans developed for a specific area. 
B.  Establishing a Mixed-Use District   
1.  No MU mixed-use district shall be established without the concurrent approval of a Regulating Master Site Plan by the City Commission following public review and recommendation by city staff and the Planning Commission. 
2.  The boundaries of each mixed-use district shall be as shown on the Zoning District Map and Comprehensive Land Use Plan and shall correspond with the adopted Regulating Master Site Plan. 
3.  Once adopted, a Regulating Master Site Plan may be modified only after a hearing by the Planning Commission and approval of the City Commission; provided that modifications which do not change the mix or intensity of approved uses, the location or height of buildings, or other significant site features (including, but not limited to, location of streets, drives, parking structures, public spaces) may be approved administratively by the Zoning Administrator. Alterations to the streets and open spaces delineated on a Regulating Plan may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator, upon a finding by the Zoning Administrator that: 
a.  Such streets and open spaces are not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of the governing zoning district and the regulating plan; and 
b.  Such streets and open spaces provide equal or improved circulation and open space opportunities. 
4.  This is the governing ordinance for all mixed-use districts, unless otherwise noted. Any subdivisions, lots consolidations, and replats in a mixed-use district shall conform to the adopted regulating plan for that area. 
5.  The minimum size for a mixed-use district is 5 acres. 
C.  Application   
1.  For the purposes of this Section, where two or more properties, lots or parcels are located within the same block or where two or more properties, lots or parcels have frontage on the same side of the street and are adjoining and such properties, lots or parcels are under common ownership or control and/or are being developed in a single development operation or a series of coordinated development operations, such properties, lots or parcels shall be considered as a single property. 
2.  Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the Zoning Administrator shall certify in writing that the proposed development for which such building permit is sought is consistent with all applicable requirements of the district, including the approved Regulating Master Site plan. 
3.  Prior to the submittal of an application for a building permit, a pre-application conference between the applicant the Zoning Administrator is required to discuss the application and relevant requirements of these regulations. 
4.  Following the pre-application conference, a total of 5 copies of each site plan, landscape plan, and elevation drawing of each exterior building facade shall be submitted, as applicable, and reviewed for compliance by the Zoning Administrator. 
5.  All exterior demolition, new construction (including additions to existing buildings), expansions of outdoor dining or any construction which results in increased lot coverage or modification of the building footprint, shall be subject to said pre-application conference and submittal requirements. Routine repair and maintenance and interior improvements are not subject to the pre-application conference. 
D.  Regulatory Plan   
1.  Summary   
A regulatory plan summarizes the maximum contemplated extent of development and gives a realistic indication of the mass, scale, and infrastructure for the district. It is the documented plan illustrating the location of required streets and open spaces to be provided to meet the minimum street and open space requirements The regulating plan must also identify the village subarea and transit station subarea as applicable. The regulatory plan is critical to ensuring that the intent and purpose of the district is implemented specifically as it relates to the provision of the street and open space network. Those streets and open spaces delineated on the regulatory plan shall not be interpreted as the only allowable streets and open spaces within the district as local streets, alleys and open spaces may also be provided in addition to those delineated on the plan. 
2.  Documentation   
All regulatory plans shall clearly delineate proposed streets and open spaces and corresponding dimensions and written descriptions for each element shall be provided. The regulatory plan shall be required for the pre-application conference and the official submittal of plans to the City. Documentation shall be provided as follows: 
a.  Streets 
Street documentation shall include the corresponding street classification of each street, the dimensions of the street right-of-way, lane widths, curb-to-curb widths, sidewalk clear zone widths, landscape zone widths and block dimensions. 
b.  Open Spaces 
Open space documentation shall include the total open space square footage calculation for each individual open space, the net square footage calculation of all open spaces and written description for each individual open space describing the type of each open space, the function of each open space and a general description of the predominant material or feature intended to be used for each open space (i.e. fountain, brick pavers, grass, shrubs, etc.). 
c.  Front yards 
The front yard for each development site shall be indicated on the regulating plan. 
3.  Applicability 
Streets and open spaces delineated in the regulatory plan may be permitted to be utilized for meeting the requirements of the governing zoning district. In no case shall the regulatory plan be utilized to permit the noncompliance with the regulations of this district, unless a special exception has been approved by the City Commission. 
4.  Density Calculations 
Parcels shall be permitted to calculate all future development calculations utilizing existing pre-construction property lines, provided that property owners seeking to calculate said density in this manner shall provide at the time of submission of the required application a sealed property line survey showing all pre-construction and post-construction property lines so as to enable the City to accurately verify said density calculations. 
4.6.2. - Subareas Established 
To guide the appropriate formation of mixed-use districts, two subareas are hereby established. The intent of each subarea is as follows: 
A.  Village Subarea   
Medium density residential and commercial uses intended to serve several adjacent neighborhoods. 
B.  Transit Station Subarea   
Higher density commercial and residential uses adjacent to major transportation corridors and transit nodes intended to serve larger areas of the city and surrounding communities, and provide larger commercial uses with a significant employment concentration. 
C.  Use Limitations by Subarea   
1.  Village Subarea   
An individual, stand-alone building containing a nonresidential use shall be prohibited from exceeding 8,000 square feet of floor area. An individual, stand-alone building with nonresidential uses that are attached to or include a residential use can exceed 8,000 square feet of floor area. 
2.  Transit Station Subarea   
Individual, stand-alone buildings containing a nonresidential use exceeding 20,000 square feet of floor area shall be separated from each other by a minimum distance of 600 feet as measured from the outside wall closest to the adjacent building. Individual, stand-alone buildings exceeding 20,000 square feet of floor area containing a nonresidential use that are attached to or include a residential use do not require separation from each other. 
4.6.3. - Development Standards 
A.  Front Yards   
Front yards shall have the minimum dimensions as specified in Sec. 4.6.6. The following additional regulations shall apply: 
1.  Automobile parking shall be prohibited from being located within the front yard. Parking spaces for one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and townhouse dwellings shall be on the same lot as the building to be served except as otherwise provided. No parking space shall be permitted in the front yard except on a bona fide paved or graveled driveway leading to a garage, carport, or other permanent parking space located to the rear of the front building line. Circular driveways are prohibited, except for hotels. Except as provided above, paved parking areas will not be permitted between the front building line and the front property line except where a variance permitting such parking has been approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
2.  Front yards shall only be used for driveways, landscaping, terraces, porches, stoops, plazas, parks, and walkways. 
3.  The area within the front yard which meets open space criteria may be counted towards the open space requirements on a square foot to square foot basis. 
B.  Mixed Uses   
1.  Residential Requirement   
a.  No more than 50% of the total number of dwelling units on the site may be single-family attached dwellings. 
b.  On sites with a gross site area greater than 50,000 square feet, at least 20% of the site's total floor area must be residential uses. 
2.  Nonresidential Requirement   
Development with street frontage along a Regional Boulevard/Downtown Core thoroughfare as defined by the City Community Transportation Plan, shall meet the requirements of Sec. 4.6.5.F. Storefront Requirements, in relation to said street type. 
C.  Transitional Heights and Yards   
1.  Within the District   
There are no requirements for transitional buffers, height planes, or step-backs when both properties in question are located within the district. 
2.  Adjacent to the District   
When a parcel within the mixed-use district abuts a parcel that lies outside the boundaries of the district, the following conditions will apply: 
a.  Minimum Yards 
None, except when the MU mixed-use district line abuts a R-85, R-60 or R-50 single-family residential district line, the yard for the building or use in the MU mixed-use district shall not be less than 30 feet. When a street or alley separates a building or use in the MU mixed-use district from an abutting R-85, R-60 or R-50 single-family residential district, half of the street or alley right-of-way width measured from the centerline of the street or alley shall be considered as part of the required yard. 
b.  Height Plane 
In addition to the minimum yards and buffers required by this Section, where a property in the MU mixed-use district abuts a R-85, R-60 or R-50 single-family residential district line, no portion of any structure shall protrude through a height limiting plane beginning 35 feet above the boundary of any required yard and extending inward over the MU district at an angle of 45 degrees. 
c.  Property Outside of Boundary 
If the property outside the boundary is zoned for a nonresidential use, then no transitional buffer, height limiting plane, or step-back applies. 
D.  Space Dimensions   
This district shall have the established dimensions as provided in the following table: 
Village
Subarea Transit Station Subarea Residential based density (max) 43 units/acre 70 units/acre Open space % of lot area 20% 20% Building facade height (min) 18' 2' Building facade height (max) 54' 80' Dwelling unit floor area (min) 550 SF 550 SF  
4.6.4. - Open Space 
A.  Open spaces shall be provided in conformance with the approved regulating master site plan. 
B.  Open space may utilize any of the following elements towards the open space calculation: 
1.  Required yards, planted areas, fountains, community gardens, rooftop gardens, parks, plazas, hardscape elements related to sidewalks and plazas, amenity space, and similar features. 
2.  Balconies for residential units, which are enclosed on three sides or less, may be counted towards open space requirements. 
3.  Required buffer areas may be counted toward open space requirements even if such buffer area is dedicated to the city or other governmental entity for recreation use, conveyed to a conservation group, or is subject to permanent easements for public use. 
4.6.5. - Building Design Standards 
A.  Facade Orientation   
All buildings shall have their primary façade directly fronting and facing a public street. 
B.  Fencing Materials   
No barbed wire, razor wire, chain-link fence, or similar elements shall be visible from any public plaza, ground level, or sidewalk level outdoor dining area or public right-of-way. 
C.  Drive-Through Uses   
Drive-through service windows and drive-in facilities are not allowed 
D.  Vehicular Services   
Gasoline fuel dispenser structures and associated vehicular services such as air pumps and car washes shall not be located between a building and the street. 
E.  Building Step Backs   
Buildings in excess of 50 feet in height shall be required to step back that portion of the building greater than 50 feet in height a minimum linear distance of 10 feet away from the building facade located below the 50-foot height plane. 
F.  Storefront Requirements   
1.  Ground-floor nonresidential and noncivic uses shall provide said uses for a minimum depth of 20 feet from the primary building facade along the public sidewalk. 
2.  The length of facade without intervening transparency shall not exceed 20 feet. 
3.  The ground story shall have a minimum 65% transparency. 
4.  Entrances may be counted where they are transparent. 
G.  Dumpsters and Loading Areas   
Dumpsters and loading areas shall be paved with impervious materials and shall be screened so as not to be visible from any public plaza, sidewalk-level outdoor dining area, public sidewalk or public right-of-way. In addition, dumpsters and loading areas serving residential uses shall be enclosed with opaque walls on three sides not less than 8 feet in height, along with a gate or door. 
H.  Loading Dock Entrances for Nonresidential Uses   
Loading dock entrances for nonresidential uses shall be screened so that loading docks and related activity are not visible from any public right-of-way. 
I.  Building Mechanical and Accessory Features   
1.  Shall be located to the side, rear, or roof of the principal structure and shall be in the location of least visibility from the public right-of-way. Screening with plant or fence materials shall be required if the equipment is otherwise visible from the public right-of-way. 
2.  When located on rooftops shall be incorporated in the design of the building and screened with building materials similar to the building. 
3.  Shall not be permitted between the building and any public street. 
(Ord. No. O-17-09, § 2.1, 6-19-17) 
4.6.6. - Site Design Standards 
A.  Street Requirements   
New streets shall be provided in conformance with the district's approved regulating master site plan. 
B.  Inter-Parcel Connectivity   
Opportunities for inter-parcel pedestrian and vehicle access points between all contiguous commercial, office, or multifamily residential parcels shall be provided. 
C.  Gates and Security Arms   
Gates and security arms shall be prohibited from crossing any public street or sidewalk. 
4.6.7. - Parking Design Standards 
A.  Off-Site Parking   
Required parking spaces shall be permitted to be provided on adjacent or nearby property within a MU district, provided said relocated spaces lie within 300 feet of the main entrance to the principal use for which such parking is provided. 
B.  Driveways and Curb Cuts   
1.  All sidewalk paving materials shall be continued across any intervening driveway at the same prevailing grade and cross slope as on the adjacent sidewalk clear zone. A corresponding interior sign or painted bar on the driveway shall be provided adjacent to the sidewalk paving as it intersects the driveway which shall communicate that vehicles must stop or yield for the intervening sidewalk. 
2.  Driveway curb cuts shall not be permitted on any street that functions as a regional boulevard/downtown core thoroughfare as defined by the City Community Transportation Plan, when comparable access may be provided from a side or rear street located immediately adjacent to a contiguous property, with the exception of hotel patron drop-off drives. 
3.  Except as provided in this Section and for new blocks required by Sec. 8.2.5., no more than one curb cut shall be permitted for each development site, provided that properties with more than one street frontage may have one curb cut located on each street frontage. However, developments on properties with a single street frontage greater than 400 feet shall be permitted two curb cuts along one street frontage. 
4.  A common or joint driveway may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator. 
C.  Parking Decks and Structures   
1.  The ground-floor level of parking decks with primary frontage on a street shall provide only residential, retail, or office uses for a minimum depth of 20 feet from the building facade along the public sidewalk, unless existing topographical considerations render this requirement unreasonable. Entrances to said uses shall be architecturally articulated, and shall face, be visible from, and be directly accessible from the required sidewalk along such street. 
2.  Parking deck facades shall conceal automobiles from visibility from any public right-of-way, any private street and any private drive that is open to the general public, and shall have the appearance of a horizontal storied building. 
3.  All parking decks and parking structures shall have pedestrian walkways a minimum width of 5 feet connecting ground level parking to the public sidewalks and to all building entrances. 
4.  All parking decks and parking structures shall have a landscape strip a minimum width of 6 feet immediately contiguous to the parking facility for the whole of the exterior perimeter of the parking facility, excluding pedestrian and vehicular openings. 
(Ord. No. O-17-09, § 2.2, 6-19-17) 
4.6.8. - Special Exceptions 
Special exceptions to these requirements may be approved after consideration of the following standards: 
A.  The suitability of the proposed exception in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property. 
B.  The effect that the proposed exception will have on the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
C.  The impact that the proposed development will have on the public safety, traffic on the public streets, transportation facilities, utilities and other public services. 
D.  The impact that the proposed development will have on established property values and on the health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the residents of the city. 
E.  The economic or marketing impact that these guidelines may have on the property owner or developer. 
Article 5. - Special and Overlay Districts 
Sec. 5.1. - Institutional District 

5.1.1. - Purpose 
The purpose of this district is to recognize the particular needs of colleges, seminaries and hospitals already existing and to permit the variety of uses necessary to support such institutions without resorting to spot zoning. The designation of this district within the City shall be made by amendment to the zoning map following consideration of a comprehensive site development plan by the Decatur Planning Commission and approval by the City Commission. 
5.1.2. - Development Standards 
A.  Establishment   
Institutional zoning districts shall be established only through regular zoning amendment procedures after consideration by the Planning Commission and approval by the City Commission of a comprehensive site development plan. The comprehensive site development plan will become the regulations governing the development of the institutional zoning district upon establishment of the district, along with the other applicable provisions of this UDO. 
B.  Amendments   
Amendments to the comprehensive site development plan of an institutional zoning district shall be made by following the same procedure required for amending the UDO and map. 
C.  Rezoning   
Properties which are already developed may be considered for rezoning to institutional with the submission of a site plan showing existing conditions. Any changes proposed in the development or use of the property must be clearly indicated on a comprehensive site development plan. 
Sec. 5.2. - Historic Preservation 

5.2.1. - Historic Preservation Commission 
A.  Creation; Title   
There is hereby created a Commission whose title shall be "Decatur Historic Preservation Commission." 
B.  Position within the City   
The Historic Preservation Commission shall be part of the planning functions of the City. It is intended to serve as the City's Historic Preservation Commission pursuant to the Georgia Historic Preservation Act, as amended. 
C.  Membership; Number; Terms; Compensation   
1.  The Historic Preservation Commission shall consist of 7 members appointed by the City Commission. All members shall be residents of the City and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. 
2.  To the extent available in the City, at least 5 members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology, landscape architecture, or related disciplines. 
3.  Members shall serve 3-year terms. Members may not serve more than 2 consecutive 3-year terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: 2 members for 1 year; 2 members for 2 years; and 3 members for 3 years. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
D.  Powers   
The Historic Preservation Commission shall be authorized to: 
1.  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the City having the potential for designation as historic property. 
2.  Recommend to the City Commission specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, or works of art to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts. 
3.  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny such certificates in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
4.  Recommend to the City Commission that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, objects, or work of art as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed. 
5.  Advise the City on the restoration or preservation of any historic properties acquired by the City. 
6.  Promote the acquisition by the City and other entities of facade easements and conservation easements in accordance with the provisions of the "Georgia Uniform Conservation Act," as amended. "Facade and Conservation Easements Act of 1976," O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq. 
7.  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the City and on general historic preservation activities. 
8.  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation including consultation with historic preservation experts, as the City Commission or the Historic Preservation Commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources. 
9.  Seek out local, state, federal and private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the City Commission concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired. 
10.  Submit to the Historic Preservation Section of the State Department of Natural Resources a list of historic properties or historic districts designated. 
11.  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the City Historic Preservation Program. 
12.  Where such action is authorized by a specific resolution adopted by the City Commission and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, the Historic Preservation Commission may enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by the City by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise of the property or any interest therein. 
13.  Review and make comments to the Historic Preservation Section of the State Department of Natural Resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places. 
14.  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the City Commission enter into agreements to do the same. 
15.  The Historic Preservation Commission shall review and comment on any variances, subdivisions, aggregations or other actions under review by the Planning Commission when said action involves a designated historic property or district. 
E.  Limitation on Powers   
The Historic Preservation Commission shall not have the power to obligate the City in any way without prior consent of the City Commission. 
F.  Adoption of Rules and Standards; Meetings; Officers; Quorum   
The Historic Preservation Commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of applications for designations and certificates of appropriateness, such as bylaws and design guidelines and criteria. The Historic Preservation Commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this Section. The Historic Preservation Commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The Historic Preservation Commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the 4 members. 
G.  Conflicts of Interest   
At any time the Historic Preservation Commission reviews a project in which a member of the Historic Preservation Commission has ownership or other vested interest, that member will be prohibited from presenting, voting or discussing the project. 
H.  Authority to Receive Funding   
The Historic Preservation Commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
I.  Records of Meetings   
A public record shall be kept of the Historic Preservation Commission's resolutions, proceedings and actions. 
5.2.2. - Establishment of Historic Districts and Properties 
A.  Preliminary Research by Historic Preservation Commission   
1.  Mandate to conduct a survey of local historic resources. The Historic Preservation Commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the City. 
2.  Power to recommend districts and buildings to City Commission for designation. The Historic Preservation Commission shall present to the City Commission recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
3.  Documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the Historic Preservation Commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the City Commission for designation, the Historic Preservation Commission shall prepare a report consisting of: 
a.  A physical description; 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e. historic, nonhistoric, intrusive) of individual properties therein as historic (contributing) or nonhistoric (noncontributing), (i.e. contributing or noncontributing) or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; 
d.  A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and 
e.  Representative photographs. 
B.  Designation of a Historic District   
1.  Criteria for Selection   
A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, landscape features and works of art or a combination thereof, which: 
a.  Have special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
b.  Represent one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more areas in the history of Decatur, DeKalb County, the State of Georgia, or the region; and 
c.  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality, City or county. 
2.  Boundaries   
Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the official zoning map. 
3.  Evaluation of Properties within Historic Districts   
Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
a.  Historic (Contributing)   
A property is determined to be contributing to a historic district where it adds to the associations, qualities or characteristics for which the historic district is significant and was present during the period of significance of the district or possesses historic integrity reflecting its character at that time. 
b.  Nonhistoric (Noncontributing)   
A property is determined to be noncontributing to a historic district where it does not add to the associations, qualities or characteristics for which the historic district is significant, was not present during the period of significance of the district, or no longer possesses historic integrity reflecting its character due to alterations, disturbances, additions or other changes. 
C.  Designation of a Historic Property   
1.  Criteria for Selection   
A historic property is a building, structure, site, object, or work of art, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the City, the county, the state or the local region for one of the following reasons: 
a.  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era. 
b.  It is one of the few remaining examples of past architectural style. 
c.  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the City, the county, the state or the local region. 
d.  It is a site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the City, county, state or region. 
2.  Boundary Description   
Boundaries shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such properties and shall be shown on the official zoning map. 
D.  Requirements for Adopting a Designation Ordinance   
1.  Application for Designation   
a.  Authority to Apply   
Designations may be proposed by the City Commission, the Historic Preservation Commission, or: 
b.  For Historic Districts   
In historic districts a historical organization, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the Historic Preservation Commission for designation. 
c.  For Historic Properties   
For historic properties a historical organization, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the Historic Preservation Commission for designation. 
2.  Components of an Application   
Historic designation applications shall be submitted on forms available from the Commission. Such applications must include all materials and documents required by the Commission, including the following: 
a.  Cover letter from person or organization proposing the designation; 
b.  A map identifying the geographic area of the City that is to be included in the proposed designation; 
c.  Names and addresses of the owners of the property affected by the proposed designation; 
d.  Designation report of the property or district to be designated; and 
e.  Regulations that will govern the property or district to be designated. 
3.  Receipt of Completed Application   
Once a completed application for designation has been received, the Historic Preservation Commission, shall: 
a.  Prepare a schedule of the designation process which shall be limited to 60 days, with an extension of an additional 30 days, if necessary. 
b.  Establish a moratorium on all permits for the property or properties proposed for designation as provided in Sec. 5.2.2.D.6. The time period begins on the date the completed application for designation is received by the Commission. 
c.  Schedule the hearings and notices required by Sec. 5.2.2.D.5.. 
4.  Designation Process Timeframe   
The timeframe for the designation process is 60 days with a 30 day extension, if necessary. This timeframe includes, mailing of notices to property owners and occupants, legal ads in a paper of general circulation, the public hearing before the Historic Preservation Commission and consideration by the City Commission at 2 consecutive regularly scheduled meetings. During this 60 day period, with a possible 30 day extension, a moratorium will be placed on all properties being considered for designation as provided in Sec. 5.2.2.D.6. 
5.  Required Public Hearings   
The Historic Preservation Commission and the City Commission shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least 3 consecutive issues in the principal newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the Historic Preservation Commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than 10 nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the City tax roll and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this Section. 
6.  Moratorium   
a.  The purpose of this moratorium is to protect the proposed historic property from material changes during the period of time it is under consideration for designation. During the period that an ordinance for designation is under consideration by the Historic Preservation Commission and the City Commission, applications for any permit which would allow a material change in appearance of the proposed historic property, including permits for land disturbance, demolition, tree removal and other changes to landscape features, and building improvements except those limited to a building's interior, shall not be accepted and no permits for such work shall be approved. An ordinance for designation shall be deemed to be under consideration beginning on the date that the Historic Preservation Commission has accepted, by official vote, a complete application for designation. An application shall be complete when it meets all the criteria established by the Historic Preservation Commission for completion of an application for historic district or property designation as set forth in Sec. 5.2.2.D.2. Required components of a designation ordinance. Such moratorium shall expire when final action is taken by the City Commission on the ordinance for designation, or after 90 days from the date the completed designation application was received by the Historic Preservation Commission, whichever is sooner. 
b.  Exceptions to Moratorium. Owners of properties affected by a moratorium interim control under this Section may receive approval to make a material change to such properties by applying for and receiving a certificate of appropriateness as described in Sec. 5.2.3. Review of such application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be made using the U.S. Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Historic Preservation Projects and/or other design guidelines adopted by the Historic Preservation Commission for this purpose. 
7.  Required Components of a Designation Ordinance   
Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
a.  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; 
b.  Set forth the names of the owners of the designated properties; the map of the district to be codified; 
c.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the Historic Preservation Commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
d.  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map. 
8.  Recommendations by the Historic Preservation Commission   
A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the Historic Preservation Commission within 15 days following the Historic Preservation Commission's public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the City Commission. 
9.  City Commission Action on Proposed Designation   
Following receipt of the Historic Preservation Commission's recommendation, the City Commission may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the ordinance within 2 of its consecutive regularly scheduled meetings. 
10.  Notification to Historic Preservation Division   
Not less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic the Historic Preservation Commission must submit the report, required in Sec. 5.2.2.A.3., to the Historic Preservation Division of the State Department of Natural Resources. 
11.  Notification of Adoption Designation Ordinance   
Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the City Commission, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the City Commission, which notice shall apprise the owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the City tax roll and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this chapter. 
12.  Notification of Other Agencies   
The Historic Preservation Commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the City of the ordinance for designation, including the local historical organization. 
13.  Authority to Amend or Rescind Designation   
The City Commission has the authority to amend or rescind the designation of a historic property or district. 
14.  Designation Process Timeframe   
The designation process shall be limited to 60 days once a completed designation application has been submitted to the Historic Preservation Commission Staff with a possible extension of 30 days. During said 60 days, the Preservation Commission shall hold a public hearing. 
5.2.3. - Regulation of Historic Districts and Properties 
A.  Certificate of Appropriateness   
1.  Approval of Alterations or New Construction in Historic Districts or Involving Historic Properties   
a.  After designation by ordinance of a historic property or of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a structure, site, object or work of art within such historic district shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until an application for a certificate of exemption or certificate of appropriateness has been approved. A certificate of exemption must be approved by the Preservation Commission or its authorized designee. A certificate of appropriateness must be approved by the Historic Preservation Commission. 
b.  Owners of properties affected by a moratorium on building or demolition permits as described in Sec. 5.2.2.D.6. may receive approval of such permits only by applying for and receiving approval of a certificate of appropriateness as described in this article. 
B.  Certificate of Exemption   
1.  When authorized by design criteria approved by the Historic Preservation Commission, a certificate of exemption may be approved by the Historic Preservation Commission or its authorized designee of an application to make a change other than a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
2.  An application for a certificate of exemption may be made by the owner of a property located within a designated historic district or the owner's authorized representative. Such application shall be considered by the Historic Preservation Commission or its authorized designee within 5 business days of the date of the application. Denial of an application for a certificate of exemption may be appealed to the Historic Preservation Commission according to the provisions of Sec. 58-96 of the Code of Ordinances. 
C.  Issuance upon Conformance of Certificates of Appropriateness   
The Historic Preservation Commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness for new structures constructed within designated historic districts if these structures conform in design, scale, building materials, setback hardscape, and landscaping to the character of the district specified in the design criteria approved by the Historic Preservation Commission. 
D.  Guidelines and Criteria   
When considering applications for certificates of appropriateness to existing buildings, the U.S. Secretary of the Interior's "Standards for Historic Preservation Projects," including the Secretary's "Standards for Rehabilitation" shall be used as a guideline along with any other criteria adopted by the Historic Preservation Commission. 
E.  Submission of Plans   
An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, plans or other documentation as may be required by the Historic Preservation Commission. Applications involving demolition or relocation shall be accompanied by post demolition or relocation plans for the site. 
F.  Response to Applications   
1.  Approval   
The Historic Preservation Commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material changes in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the Historic Preservation Commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural value and significance, architectural style, general design arrangement, texture and material of the architectural features involved, and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style, and pertinent features of the other structures in the immediate neighborhood. 
2.  Denial   
The Historic Preservation Commission shall deny a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material changes in appearance would have substantial adverse effects on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. 
G.  Public Hearings on Applications; Notices; Right to be Heard   
At least 7 days prior to review of a certificate of appropriateness, the Historic Preservation Commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owner of any property likely to be affected by reason of the application, and shall give the applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. In cases where the Historic Preservation Commission deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the application. 
H.  Interior Alterations   
In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the Historic Preservation Commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
I.  Technical Advice   
The Historic Preservation Commission may seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
J.  Deadline for Approval or Denial   
1.  The Historic Preservation Commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a structure, site, object, or work of art located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the Historic Preservation Commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the Historic Preservation Commission. 
2.  An applicant may request a deferral in writing on a form approved by the Historic Preservation Commission. 
3.  Failure of the Historic Preservation Commission to act within 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed; however the applicant is still required to obtain a building permit. 
K.  Necessary Actions   
1.  If the Historic Preservation Commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The Historic Preservation Commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
2.  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the Historic Preservation Commission shall be binding upon the building official or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
L.  Variances   
Where, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the Historic Preservation Commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to such provisions, or to interpret the meaning of such provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided, however, that such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of such provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity or character of the property shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the Historic Preservation Commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this chapter. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
M.  Conformance with Certificate   
1.  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. If work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the Historic Preservation Commission, shall issue a cease and desist stop work order and all work shall cease. 
2.  The City Commission or the Historic Preservation Commission shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
N.  Period of Validity; Renewal   
A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within 6 months/1 year of the date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable. The Historic Preservation Commission's designee shall be authorized to renew a certificate of appropriateness if there are no material changes to the plans as originally approved. 
O.  Recording of Applications   
The Historic Preservation Commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, certificates of exemption and of all the Historic Preservation Commission's proceedings in connection with the application. 
P.  Acquisition of Property   
The Historic Preservation Commission may, where such action is authorized by the City Commission and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein. 
Q.  Appeals   
1.  Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the Historic Preservation Commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the City Commission. Any such appeal must be filed with the City Commission within 15 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to Sec. 58-94(a) of the Code of Ordinances or, in the case of a failure of the Commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for Commission action, pursuant to Sec. 58-94(a) of the Code of Ordinances. The City Commission may approve the determination made by the Historic Preservation Commission, or, if the City Commission finds that the Historic Preservation Commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision, it may modify or reject the determination made by the Historic Preservation Commission. 
2.  Appeals from decision of the City Commission may be taken to the county superior court in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for City ordinance violations. 
R.  Demolition or Relocation   
1.  Applications for Certificates of Appropriateness   
The Preservation Commission shall have the authority to deny certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. 
Applications for certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation shall include: 
a.  A report from an independent licensed engineer or architect with experience in rehabilitation regarding the structural soundness of the historic property; 
b.  A summary of all efforts made to reuse, rehabilitate or sell the historic property; 
c.  A cost estimate of the proposed demolition or relocation of the historic property; 
d.  Evidence that the applicant has the financial ability to carry out the proposed project; and 
e.  Post demolition or post relocation plans for the site. 
2.  Authority to Deny   
The Historic Preservation Commission shall have the authority to deny certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation of historic properties. 
3.  Public Hearing   
A public hearing shall be scheduled for each application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation of historic properties. 
4.  Post-Demolition or Post-Relocation Plans   
The Historic Preservation Commission shall not grant certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation without reviewing at the same time the post-demolition or post-relocation plans for the site. 
5.  Criteria   
Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation, the Historic Preservation Commission shall use the criteria described in Sec. 5.2.3.F. to determine whether to grant or deny the application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. 
5.2.4. - General Provisions for Historic Districts and Properties 
A.  Design Guidelines Standards   
The recommendations contained in the Design Supplement to the Decatur Historic Preservation Resource Manual will be the primary basis for evaluating and reviewing all proposed work in a historic district. Property owners planning to make changes to their properties are encouraged to obtain a copy of this publication or consult copies available at on the City website. 
B.  Designated Properties Listed in Appendix   
Designated Historic District properties are listed in Appendix 1. to this UDO. 
C.  Conflict with Other Provisions   
When a specific Historic District requirement conflicts with another requirement of this UDO, the Historic District provisions shall prevail. 
D.  Zoning Map   
The designated property shall be shown on the official zoning map of the City. 
5.2.5. - Old DeKalb County Courthouse 
A.  The property known as the Old DeKalb County Courthouse, 101 Courthouse Square, Decatur, Georgia, Tax Map Number 15-246D-07-007, including the courthouse building, all appurtenances, auxiliary structures, and exterior environmental features is designated as a historic property under the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The name of the owner of the property is DeKalb County, Georgia. 
C.  A certificate of appropriateness shall be obtained from the Historic Preservation Commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property. However, so long as the county is the owner of the designated property it shall be exempt from the requirement of obtaining certificates of appropriateness, provided that the county commission shall notify the Historic Preservation Commission 45 days prior to beginning an undertaking that would otherwise require a certificate of appropriateness and allow the Historic Preservation Commission an opportunity to comment. 
D.  The designated property shall be shown on the official zoning map of the City. 
5.2.6. - Scottish Rite Hospital for Crippled Children 
A.  The property known as the Scottish Rite Hospital for Crippled Children, 321 West Hill Street, Decatur, Georgia, Tax Map Number 15-213A07-001, including the principal buildings, all appurtenances, auxiliary structures, and exterior environmental features is designated as a historic property under the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The name of the owner of the designated property is the City. 
C.  A certificate of appropriateness shall be obtained from the Historic Preservation Commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property. However, so long as the City is the owner of the designated property it shall be exempt from the requirement of obtaining certificates of appropriateness, provided that the City, any lessee or occupant shall notify the Historic Preservation Commission 45 days prior to beginning an undertaking that would otherwise require a certificate of appropriateness and allow the Historic Preservation Commission an opportunity to comment. In the alternative, the City may opt to follow the procedures for obtaining a certificate of appropriateness. 
D.  The designated property shall be shown on the official zoning map of the City. 
5.2.7. - McDonough-Adams-Kings Highway District 
A.  The district known as the McDonough-Adams-Kings Highway District is designated as a historic district under the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The McDonough-Adams-Kings Highway District includes the properties listed in Appendix 1. to this UDO. 
C.  A certificate of appropriateness shall be obtained from the Historic Preservation Commission prior to any material change in appearance of a property located in the designated district. Exterior paint colors are not subject to review. Consideration of applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be based on design criteria for the McDonough-Adams-Kings Highway District. Repairs that are not defined as a material change, as defined in Article 12. are not subject to these guidelines or any type of review process. 
D.  The material changes that require review in this district are listed in the definition for material changes, found in Sec. 12.1. 
E.  Repairs that are not defined as a material change are not subject to full review and can be approved as a Certificate of Exemption per Sec. 5.2.3.B. of these district guidelines. 
F.  The recommendations contained in the Design Supplement to the Decatur Historic Preservation Resource Manual will be the primary basis for evaluating and reviewing all proposed work in the McDonough-Adams-Kings Highway Historic District. Property owners planning to make changes to their properties are encouraged to obtain a copy of this publication or consult copies available at on the City website. 
G.  Design criteria for the McDonough-Adams-Kings Highway District. The following guidelines standards shall be used to determine whether a certificate of appropriateness shall be approved: 
1.  New Construction   
Any project that calls for the construction of a new structure(s) on vacant property located within the district boundaries. 
a.  New Principal Structures   
New structures should respect the existing setback, massing and building materials of historic properties in adjacent blocks and be compatible in design with surrounding historic properties. On new principal structures, no slab on grade construction will be allowed. 
b.  Outbuildings Accessory Structures   
Any new building over 100 square feet, including garages, visible from the public right-of-way must be reviewed and receive a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
2.  Additions   
Any additions that change the footprint or roof line of existing structures within the historic district will require full review and a certificate of appropriateness. No slab on grade construction will be allowed. 
3.  Demolition or Relocation   
Any plans for the demolition or relocation of a structure over 100 square feet of gross floor area within the historic district requires the full review of the Historic Preservation Commission and a certificate of appropriateness. A request for demolition or relocation must include a post-project plan for the property. 
4.  Alterations to Existing Properties   
a.  Doorways   
Change in opening size or location only. Replacing an exterior door will not require review. However, property owners are strongly encouraged to repair and retain original doors. If replacement is necessary, the new door should be as close in design to the original door as possible. 
b.  Windows   
Any change in window openings to include the addition of window openings, the removal of window openings or a change in the size of existing openings will require full review. Windows visible from the street should be consistent in design with original windows. 
c.  Roofs   
Any change in the roof shape visible from the street requires full review. Replacement or repair of roof materials would require an administrative review. For all secondary roofs with a pitch of 3/12 and under where a metal roof is desired to be used; the following criteria shall be me: 
i.  Flat seam metal roofs shall be used on the front and side elevations; 
ii.  Standing seam metal roofs with a 1" profile (or less) can be used on rear elevations not visible from the public right-of-way (acceptable standing seam profiles include overlap, single lock and double lock); and 
iii.  Sheet metal is acceptable. Painted metal with a baked on finish should be a flat finish and the color should match the primary roof color. 
iv.  Bare galvanized metal and unpainted aluminum is not acceptable. 
d.  Exterior Cladding   
Any proposed change in existing exterior cladding requires the full review of the Commission. The application of EIFS, vinyl or aluminum siding is prohibited. If there is a property at the time of adopting of a district that uses EIFS, vinyl, or aluminum siding the owner will be allowed to repair or replace what currently exists, but cannot increase the total amount of cladding with prohibited materials. 
e.  Porches   
The addition of any new porch structure visible from the street requires full review. Any proposed changes to historic design elements on existing porches (e.g., replacement of columns or glassing in) visible from the street will require a full review. Changing an open porch to a screened porch would be excluded from review as long as existing design elements are not damaged, removed or covered. 
5.  Certificate of Exemption   
In an effort to expedite the review process for the McDonough-Adams-Kings Highway Historic District, it has been determined that certain changes to properties will be eligible for a certificate of change exemption as defined in these guidelines standards. The Historic Preservation Commission or its designee designated City staff member shall be authorized to provide for this administrative level of review and the issuance of the certificate of exemption for projects requiring a building permit. The following types of projects will qualify for administrative review and certificates of exemption subject to the stated qualifications and limitations. A certificate of exemption shall be obtained from the Historic Preservation Commission for the following projects: 
a.  Windows   
Replacement of windows in kind. 
b.  Hardscape/Landscape   
Changes in landscape and landscape features can have an impact on the character of a property. The following projects landscape changes apply to all properties within a the district including historic, nonhistoric and intrusions: 
i.  Vegetation   
Removal of overstory canopy trees such as Hickory, Maple, Pecan, Sycamore, Oaks or Sweet Gum, that are 12" in diameter or greater unless the tree is dead or a certified arborist has stated in writing that the tree is diseased or hazardous and recommends removal. Tree removal is also subject to Sec. 9.1. Tree Protection. 
ii.  Fences and Walls   
Installation of a fence or wall in front of the building line requires full review by the Historic Preservation Commission. Fences and walls over 4 feet high in the front yard are prohibited. Fences and walls behind the building line are subject to this UDO and are not subject to review by the Historic Preservation Commission for a Certificate of Exemption. 
iii.  Driveways   
It is recommended that the width of driveways be restricted to 10 feet to the face of the house. The use of asphalt is prohibited. 
c.  Accessory Buildings Structures   
Changes in accessory buildings that are visible from Clairemont Ave. 
Any new building over 100 square feet, including garages, visible from the public right-of-way must be reviewed and receive a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
d.  City-Owned Properties Rights-of-Way   
Projects involving City-owned property and City rights-of-way including sidewalk replacement and tree removal shall not be required to obtain a certificate of appropriateness provided that the City shall notify the Historic Preservation Commission 45 days prior to beginning an undertaking that would otherwise require a certificate of appropriateness and allow the Historic Preservation Commission an opportunity to comment. 
H.  The designated district shall be shown on the official zoning map of the City. 
5.2.8. - Clairemont Avenue Historic District 
A.  The district known as the Clairemont Avenue Historic District is designated as a historic district under the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The Clairemont Avenue Historic District includes the properties listed in Appendix 1. to this UDO. 
C.  The recommendations contained in the Design Supplement to the Decatur Historic Preservation Resource Manual will be the primary basis for evaluating and reviewing all proposed work in the Clairemont Avenue Historic District. Exterior paint colors are not subject to review. Property owners planning to make changes to their properties are encouraged to obtain a copy of this publication or consult copies available at City Hall or on the City website 
D.  In addition to the recommendations contained in the Design Supplement to the Decatur Historic Preservation Resource Manual, the following guidelines standards shall be applied in the administration of the Clairemont Avenue Historic District. 
1.  Review Jurisdiction   
"Review jurisdiction" defines what aspects of the physical appearance of the district are subject to the review of the commission and the limits of that review power. All projects are subject to the full review of the Historic Preservation Commission unless they fall outside of the "review jurisdiction" as defined in this article or they qualify for administrative review and certificate of exemption as defined in Sec. 5.2.8.D.2. of these guidelines standards. 
a.  As described in its district designation, the primary value of the Clairemont Avenue District is in the public experience of the district as a historic residential corridor into the heart of downtown Decatur. The preservation of the historic character, as visible from Clairemont Avenue, is the primary goal of this district. Therefore: 
i.  The review jurisdiction of the Historic Preservation Commission shall extend only to material changes to the front and side facades of principal or accessory structures that would be visible from the Clairemont Avenue public right-of-way. 
ii.  Due to their temporary and non-historic nature, privacy fences and/or vegetation, that might obscure otherwise visible changes, do not remove projects from the review jurisdiction. 
iii.  The Historic Preservation Commission or its designated staff member may only make the determination of what is visible from the Clairemont Avenue public right-of-way. 
b.  Only proposed material changes to the exterior of the front and side facades of properties within the historic district, that would be legally required to obtain a building permit with the exception of tree removals, must be submitted to the Historic Preservation Commission or its designated staff person to determine if the project is subject to review, and if so, the level of review required. 
c.  An application for a building permit for a property within the historic district will commence the review process of the project by the Historic Preservation Commissions' designee designated staff person for a determination of the project's status under these guidelines standards. 
d.  Project types that must be submitted include, but not be limited to the following: 
i.  New construction of principal and accessory structures. 
ii.  Additions to principal and accessory structures. 
iii.  Demolition of existing structures. 
iv.  Relocations of existing structures. 
v.  Alterations to the exterior appearance of existing structures to include changes to the exteriors of existing buildings. For example: 
a.  Changes to sizes and locations of exterior doors and windows. 
b.  Replacement of existing windows. 
c.  Changes to rooflines and configurations. 
d.  Replacement of roofing materials. 
e.  Installation of dormers or skylights. 
f.  Changes in exterior cladding materials. 
g.  Changes to exterior trim materials, profiles or configurations. 
h.  Signage where allowed within the district. 
vi.  Alterations to the existing landscape to include: 
a.  Changes to existing driveway materials. 
b.  Construction of retaining walls. 
c.  Removal of existing trees over 12 inches in diameter. 
d.  Signage where allowed within the district. 
e.  Existing structures identified as noncontributing or as intrusions into the district will be required to obtain certificates of appropriateness only for work involving additions to, demolitions of, or relocations of qualified structures. 
f.  The construction, demolition and relocation of accessory structures less than 100 square feet of gross floor area is not subject to review. 
g.  Replacement of an exterior door within an existing opening is not subject to review. 
h.  Exterior paint colors are not subject to review. (Note: the use of transparent stains as an exterior finish on siding or trim is not recommended.) 
i.  Fences and walls, other than retaining walls, less than 4 feet high are not subject to review. 
j.  The hardwood tree canopy along Clairemont Avenue is considered to be a contributing element to the appearance of the historic district. All over story trees in front yard setbacks on both private property and the public right-of-way in the historic district are to be protected as part of the historic district. The removal of any existing tree measuring 12 inches in diameter or larger located in the front yard setback or within the public right-of-way must be approved either with a certificate of appropriateness from the Historic Preservation Commission or a certificate of exemption as outlined in Sec. 5.2. (See also Sec. 9.1. Tree Protection.) 
k.  Landscape planting materials and configurations are not subject to review. 
2.  Certificates of Exemption   
In an effort to expedite the review process for the Clairemont Avenue Historic District it has been determined that certain changes to properties will be eligible for a certificate of exemption. The certificate of exemption certifies the approval of the Historic Preservation Commission for a change to be made other than a material change as defined in these guidelines standards. The Historic Preservation Commission, its designated City staff member shall be authorized to provide for this administrative level of review and the issuance of the certificate of exemption for projects requiring a building permit. The following types of projects will qualify for administrative review and certificates of exemption subject to the stated qualifications and limitations. 
a.  Alterations and additions to the rear of existing structures may be administratively reviewed and determined to be not visible from the Clairemont Avenue public right-of-way and therefore not within the review jurisdiction of the district. 
b.  As defined in Sec. 5.2.12.A., routine maintenance and repair involving the identical replacement of, and/or typical maintenance of, existing exterior cladding materials or architectural elements that do not change the exterior appearance of a structure. 
c.  Changing an open porch to a screened porch or vice-versa, so long as existing architectural elements are not damaged, removed or covered. (Note: the "glassing-in" of open or screened porches is subject to the typical review process.) 
d.  Replacement of an existing driveway if: 
i.  The width of the new driveway does not exceed 10 feet or the width of the existing driveway, whichever is greater. 
e.  Replacement of existing windows with identical replacement windows. 
f.  Backyard decks and associated railings attached to a principal structure whose surface is at or below the first floor level of the principal structure. 
g.  Replacement of in-kind roofing material or with asphalt shingles. 
h.  Removal of deciduous overstory canopy trees over 12 inches in diameter if the tree is visibly dead or a certified arborist has certified that the tree is diseased or hazardous and recommends its removal, subject to Sec. 9.1., Tree Protection. 
i.  Replacement of an exterior door within an existing opening. 
j.  Fences and wall, other than retaining walls less than 4 feet high. 
3.  Additional District Design Guidelines Standards   
These guidelines standards are intended to address situations or concerns unique to the Clairemont Avenue Historic District. These guidelines standards are meant to supplement or supersede the general recommendations made in the Design Supplement to the Decatur Historic Preservation Resource Manual. 
a.  Should properties be demolished in the district or on vacant lots where demolition has occurred, replacement structures should be designed to reinforce the single-family, residential character of the neighborhood, respect existing setbacks and retain the structural rhythm of the street. 
b.  No slab on grade construction will be permitted for new principal structures. Slab on grade additions to existing principal structures may be permitted only if grade conditions are such that traditional crawlspace construction is determined not to be reasonable in the opinion of the Historic Preservation Commission. 
c.  Front yard walls and/or fences shall not exceed 4 feet in height. 
d.  Every 2 years after the adoption of the ordinance creating the Clairemont Avenue district, the Historic Preservation Commission shall hold a public hearing at a regularly scheduled monthly meeting for the purpose of reviewing these guidelines standards and to consider any modifications or refinements that might be desired by either the property owners within the historic district or by the Historic Preservation Commission. 
5.2.9. - Ponce de Leon Court Historic District 
A.  The district known as Ponce de Leon Court is designated as a historic district under the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The Ponce de Leon Court District includes the properties listed in Appendix 1. to this UDO. 
C.  A certificate of appropriateness shall be obtained from the Historic Preservation Commission prior to any material change in appearance of a property located in the designated district. Exterior paint colors are not subject to review. Consideration of applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be based on design criteria for the Ponce de Leon Court District. Repairs that are not defined as a material change, as defined in Article 12. are not subject to these guidelines or any type of review process. The material changes that require review in this district are listed in the UDO. 
D.  Design criteria for the Ponce de Leon Court District. The recommendations contained in the Design and Administrative Guidelines for the Ponce de Leon Court Historic District will be the primary basis for evaluating and reviewing all material changes in the Ponce de Leon Court Historic District. The following criteria shall be used to determine what material changes are subject to review, require a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of exemption, and whether a certificate of appropriateness shall be approved: 
1.  Review Jurisdiction   
"Review jurisdiction" defines what aspects of the physical appearance of the district are subject to the review of the Historic Preservation Commission and the limits of that review power. All material changes are subject to the full review of the Historic Preservation Commission unless they fall outside of the "review jurisdiction" as defined in this article or they qualify for administrative review and certificate of exemption as defined in Sec. 5.2.9.D.3. of these guidelines standards. 
a.  The review jurisdiction of the Historic Preservation Commission shall extend only to the front and sides of the property and structure. The rear elevation of the structure is not subject to review. Review jurisdiction shall also include any new structure over 100 square feet, including garages, visible from the public right-of-way on Ponce de Leon Court or East Ponce de Leon Avenue. 
b.  Due to their temporary and non-historic nature, privacy fences and/or vegetation, that might obscure otherwise visible changes, do not remove projects from the review jurisdiction. 
c.  Only the Historic Preservation Commission or its designated staff member make the determination of what is the front and side of a building or structure and what is visible from the public right-of-way. 
2.  Low-Density Single-Family Guidelines Standards   
The following projects require full review by the Historic Preservation Commission and a certificate of appropriateness to obtain a building permit. 
a.  New Construction   
Any project that calls for the construction of new structure(s) on vacant property located within the district boundaries. 
i.  New principal structures should respect the existing setback, massing, and building materials, and be compatible in design with historic properties in the Ponce de Leon Court District. 
ii.  Outbuildings. Any accessory structure new structure over 100 square feet, including garages, visible from the public right-of-way, should be compatible in design with historic properties in the Ponce de Leon Court District. 
b.  Additions   
Any additions that change the footprint or roofline of existing structures within the historic district. All additions should respect the existing building height, massing, and building materials, and be compatible in design with historic properties in the Ponce de Leon Court District. 
c.  Demolition or Relocation   
Any plans for demolition or relocation of structure over 100 square feet of gross floor area within the historic district will require the full review of the Historic Preservation Commission and a certificate of appropriateness. A request for demolition or relocation must include a post-project plan for the property. 
d.  Alterations to Existing Properties within the District   
The following alterations to existing properties within review jurisdiction require a certificate of appropriateness. 
i.  Doorways   
Change in opening size or location. 
ii.  Windows   
Any change in window openings to include the addition of window openings, the removal of window openings, change in the size of existing openings, and a change in design. 
iii.  Roofs   
Any change in the roof shape. 
iv.  Exterior Cladding   
Any change in existing cladding material. The application of EIFS, vinyl or aluminum siding is prohibited If there is a property at the time of adoption of this district that uses EIFS, vinyl, or aluminum siding the owner will be allowed to repair or replace what currently exists, but cannot increase the total amount of cladding with prohibited materials. 
v.  Porches   
The addition or removal of any porch structure. Any changes to historic design elements on existing porches. 
vi.  Front Steps   
Any change in material or design of the front steps requires a full review. 
vii.  Garages and Carports   
New garages and carports require full review. Attached garages visible from the public right-of-way are prohibited. 
viii.  Driveways   
Any change in the configuration or width of existing driveways requires a full review. 
ix.  Fences and Walls   
Installation of a fence or wall in front of the building line requires full review. Fences and walls over 4 feet high in the front yard are prohibited. 
Fences and walls behind the building line are subject to existing zoning regulations and are not subject to review by the Historic Preservation Commission. 
3.  Certificate of Exemption   
In an effort to expedite the review process for the Clairemont Avenue Ponce de Leon Court Historic District it has been determined that certain changes to properties will be eligible for a certificate of exemption. The certificate of exemption certifies the approval of the Historic Preservation Commission for a change to be made other than a material change as defined in these guidelines standards. The Historic Preservation Commission, its designated City staff member shall be authorized to provide for this administrative level of review and the issuance of the certificate of exemption for projects requiring a building permit. The following types of projects will qualify for administrative review and certificates of exemption subject to the stated qualifications and limitations. 
The following projects require a certificate of exemption from the Historic Preservation Commission : 
a.  Windows   
Replacing existing windows. 
b.  Doors   
Replacing an exterior door. 
c.  Roof   
Replacement roof materials. 
d.  Exterior Cladding   
Repair and replacement of siding that exceeds 25% of the total facade surface area, but uses wood, smooth cementitious siding, or matching brick with the matching mortar color, and matches the existing siding width and reveal can be approved administratively and receive a certificate of exemption. Repair or replacement of existing siding does not require review as long as the repair does not exceed 25% of the total facade surface area and matches existing cladding material, mortar color, siding width, and reveal. 
e.  Porches   
Repair or replacement of existing porch elements and materials that requires a change from the existing materials can be approved administratively and receive a certificate of exemption. Porch repair of existing porch elements with wood, brick, or cementitious material that match in design with the existing porch do not require review. Changing an open porch to a screened porch would be excluded from review as long as existing design elements are not damaged, removed, or covered. 
f.  Driveways   
Any change in driveway materials. The use of asphalt is prohibited in this district. If there is a property at the time of adoption of this district that uses asphalt the owner will be allowed to repair or replace what currently exists, but cannot increase the total amount of asphalt. 
g.  Landscape   
The removal of any Palm Trees or Long-Needle Pines requires a statement in writing by a certified arborist that the tree is diseased or hazardous and is subject to the Sec. 9.1., Tree Protection. 
h.  Fences and Walls   
Fences and walls behind the building line are subject to existing zoning regulations and are subject to review by the Preservation Commission. 
4.  High Density Single-Family Standards   
The following projects require full review by the Historic Preservation Commission and a certificate of appropriateness to obtain a building permit. 
a.  New Construction   
Any project that calls for the construction of new structure(s) on vacant property located within the high-density sub area district boundaries. 
i.  New Principal Structures   
New structures should respect the existing setback, massing, and building materials, and be compatible in design with properties in this sub area. 
ii.  Outbuildings Accessory Structures   
Any new building over 100 square feet, including garages, visible from the public right-of-way must be reviewed and receive a certificate of appropriateness. 
b.  Additions   
Any additions that change the footprint or roofline of existing structures within the historic district will require full review and a certificate of appropriateness. The height of the addition will not exceed the height of the existing structure. 
c.  Demolition or Relocation   
Any plan for demolition or relocation of a structure over 100 square feet of gross floor area within the historic district requires the full review of the Historic Preservation Commission and a certificate of appropriateness. A request for demolition or relocation must include a post-project plan for the property. 
d.  Alterations to Existing Properties   
All changes to the structure are subject to full review. 
i.  Doorways   
Change in opening size or location. 
ii.  Windows   
Any change in window openings to include the addition of window openings, the removal of window openings, change in the size of existing openings, and a change in design. 
iii.  Roofs   
Any change in the roof shape. 
iv.  Exterior Cladding   
Any change in existing cladding material. The application of EIFS, vinyl or aluminum siding is prohibited. If there is a property at the time of adoption of this district that uses EIFS, vinyl, or aluminum siding the owner will be allowed to repair or replace what currently exists, but cannot increase the total amount of cladding with prohibited materials. 
v.  Porches   
The addition or removal of any porch structure. Any changes to historic design elements on existing porches. 
vi.  Front Steps   
Any change in material or design of the front steps. 
vii.  Driveways   
Any change in the existing configuration or width of a driveway requires a full review. 
viii.  Fences and Walls   
Installation of a fence or wall in front of the building line requires full review. Fences and walls over 4 feet high in the front yard are prohibited. Fences and walls behind the building line are subject to existing zoning regulations and are not subject to review by the Historic Preservation Commission. 
e.  Certificate of Exemption   
The following projects require a certificate of exemption from the Historic Preservation Commission : 
i.  Windows   
Replace existing windows. 
ii.  Doors   
Replace an exterior door. 
iii.  Roof   
Replacement of roof materials. 
iv.  Exterior Cladding   
Repair and replacement of siding that exceeds 50% of the total facade surface area, but uses wood, smooth cementitious siding, or matching brick with the matching mortar color and matches the existing siding width and reveal can be approved administratively and receive a certificate of exemption. Repair or replacement of existing siding does not require review as long as the repair does not exceed 50% of the total facade surface area and matches existing cladding material, mortar color, siding width, and reveal. 
v.  Porches   
Repair or replacement of existing porch elements and materials that requires a change from the existing materials can be approved administratively and receive a certificate of exemption. Porch repair of existing porch elements with wood, brick, or cementitious material that match in design with the existing porch do not require review. Changing an open porch to a screened porch would be excluded from review as long as existing design elements are not damaged, removed, or covered. 
vi.  Driveways   
Any change in driveway materials. The use of asphalt is prohibited in this subarea. If there is a property at the time of adoption of this district that uses asphalt the owner will be allowed to repair or replace what currently exists, but cannot increase the total amount of asphalt. 
vii.  Landscape   
The removal of any Palm Trees or Long-Needle Pines requires a statement in writing by a certified arborist that the tree is diseased or hazardous and is subject to Sec. 9.1., Tree Protection. 
viii.  Fences and Walls   
Fences and walls behind the building line are subject to existing zoning regulations and are subject to review by the Historic Preservation Commission. 
5.  Official Zoning Map   
The designated district shall be shown on the official zoning map of the City. 
5.2.10. - Old Decatur Historic District 
A.  The district known as Old Decatur is designated as a historic district under the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The Old Decatur District includes the properties listed in Appendix 1. to this UDO. 
C.  A certificate of appropriateness shall be obtained from the Historic Preservation Commission prior to any material change in appearance of a property located in the designated district. Exterior paint colors are not subject to review. Consideration of applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be based on the ordinance and design criteria for the Old Decatur District. Repairs that are not defined as a material change, as defined in Article 12. are not subject to these guidelines standards or any type of review process. 
D.  Design criteria for the Old Decatur District. The recommendations contained in the Old Decatur Design Guidelines will be the primary basis for evaluating and reviewing all material changes in the Old Decatur Historic District. The following criteria shall be used to determine what material changes are subject to review, require a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of exemption, and whether a certificate of appropriateness shall be approved: 
1.  Review Jurisdiction   
"Review jurisdiction" defines what aspects of the physical appearance of the district are subject to the review of the Historic Preservation Commission and the limits of that review power. All material changes are subject to the full review of the Historic Preservation Commission unless they fall outside of the review jurisdiction as defined in this article or they qualify for administrative review and certificate of exemption as defined in Sec. 5.2.3. of these guidelines standards. 
a.  The review jurisdiction of the Historic Preservation Commission shall extend only to what is visible from the public right-of-way. Review jurisdiction shall also include any new structure over 100 square feet, including garages, visible from the public right-of-way. 
b.  Due to their temporary and non-historic nature, privacy fences and/or vegetation, that might obscure otherwise visible changes, do not remove projects from the review jurisdiction. 
c.  Only the Historic Preservation Commission or its designated staff member make the determination of what is visible from the public right-of-way. 
2.  Certificate of Appropriateness   
The following projects require full review by the Historic Preservation Commission and a certificate of appropriateness to obtain a building permit. 
a.  New Construction   
Any project that calls for the construction of new structure(s) on vacant property located within the district boundaries. 
i.  New Principal Structures   
New structures should respect the existing setback, massing, building height, scale, building materials, and be compatible in design with contributing historic properties in the Old Decatur District. 
ii.  Outbuildings Accessory Structures   
Any new structure over 100 square feet, including garages, visible from the public right-of-way, should be compatible in scale and design with historic properties in the Old Decatur district. 
b.  Additions   
Any additions that change the footprint or roofline of existing structures within the historic district. All additions should respect the existing building height, massing, and building materials, and be compatible in design with contributing historic properties in the Old Decatur District. 
c.  Demolition or Relocation   
Any plans for demolition or relocation of structure over 100 square feet of gross floor area within the historic district will require the full review of the Historic Preservation Commission and a certificate of appropriateness. A request for demolition or relocation must include a post-project plan for the property. 
d.  Alterations to Existing Properties   
The following alterations to existing properties within review jurisdiction require a certificate of appropriateness. 
i.  Doorways   
Change in opening size or location. 
ii.  Windows   
Any change in window openings to include the addition of window openings, the removal of window openings, change in the size of existing openings, and a change in design. 
iii.  Roofs   
Any change in the roof shape. 
iv.  Exterior Cladding   
Any change in existing cladding material. 
v.  Porches   
The addition or removal of any porch structure. Any changes to historic design elements on existing porches. 
vi.  Front steps   
Any change in material or design of the front steps. 
vii.  Garages and Carports   
New garages and carports require full review. 
viii.  Driveways   
Any change in the configuration or width of existing driveways requires a full review. 
ix.  Fences and Walls   
Installation of a fence or wall in front of the building line requires full review. Fences and walls over 4 feet high in the front yard are prohibited. Fences and walls behind the building line are subject to existing zoning regulations and are not subject to review by the Historic Preservation Commission. 
x.  Trees   
The removal of any healthy tree greater than 12 inches in diameter and subject to Sec. 9.1., Tree Protection. 
3.  Certificate of Exemption   
The following projects require a certificate of exemption from the Historic Preservation Commission : 
a.  Windows   
Replacing existing windows. 
b.  Doors   
Replacing an exterior door. 
c.  Roof   
Replacement roof materials. 
d.  Exterior Cladding   
Repair and replacement of siding that exceeds 25% of the total facade surface area, but uses wood, smooth cementitious siding, or matching brick with the matching mortar color, and matches the existing siding width and reveal can be approved administratively and receive a Certificate of Exemption. Repair or replacement of existing siding does not require review as long as the repair does not exceed 25% of the total facade surface area and matches existing cladding material, mortar color, siding width, and reveal. 
e.  Porches   
Repair or replacement of existing porch elements and materials that requires a change from the existing materials can be approved administratively and receive a certificate of exemption. Porch repair of existing porch elements with wood, brick, or cementitious material that matches in design with the existing porch does not require review is allowed but requires a Certificate of Exemption. Changing an open porch to a screened porch would be excluded from review as long as existing design elements are not damaged, removed, or covered. 
f.  Driveways   
Any change in driveway materials. The use of asphalt is prohibited for residential properties. If there is a property at the time of adoption of this district that uses asphalt the owner will be allowed to repair or replace what currently exists, but cannot increase the total amount of asphalt. 
g.  Front Steps   
Replacement with in-kind materials. 
h.  Trees   
The removal of a tree greater than 12 inches in diameter with a letter from a certified arborist stating that it is diseased and hazardous and subject to Sec. 9.1., Tree Protection. 
i.  Fences and Walls   
Replacement with in-kind materials Fences and wall behind the building are subject to existing zoning regulations and are not subject to review by the Historic Preservation Commission. 
4.  Zoning Map   
The designated district will be shown on the official zoning map of the City. 
5.2.11. - Parkwood Historic District 
A.  The district known as the Parkwood District is designated as a historic district under the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The Parkwood District includes the properties listed in Appendix 1 to this UDO. 
C.  A certificate of appropriateness shall be obtained from the preservation commission prior to any material change in appearance of a property located in the designated district. Exterior paint colors are not subject to review. Consideration of applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be based on the ordinance and the design guidelines for the Parkwood historic district. Repairs that are not defined as a material change, as defined in Article 12, are not subject to these guidelines or any type of review process. 
D.  Design criteria for the Parkwood District. The recommendations contained in the Parkwood Design Guidelines will be the primary basis for evaluating and reviewing all material changes in the Parkwood Historic District. The following criteria shall be used to determine what material changes are subject to review, require a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of exemption, and whether a certificate of appropriateness or exemption shall be approved: 
1.  Review Jurisdiction   
"Review jurisdiction" defines what aspects of the physical appearance of the district are subject to the review of the preservation commission and the limits of that review power. All material changes are subject to the full review of the preservation commission unless they fall outside of the review jurisdiction as defined in this article or they qualify for administrative review and certificate of exemption as defined in Sec. 5.2.3 of these guidelines standards. 
a.  The review jurisdiction of the Historic Preservation Commission shall extend only to the front and side facades or what is visible from the public right-of-way. Review jurisdiction shall also include any new structure over 100 square feet, including garages, visible from the public right-of-way. 
b.  Due to their temporary and non-historic nature, privacy fences and/or vegetation, that might obscure otherwise visible changes, do not remove projects from the review jurisdiction. 
c.  Only the Historic Preservation Commission or its designated staff member makes the determination of what is visible from the public right-of-way. 
2.  Certificate of Appropriateness   
The following projects require full review by the preservation commission and a certificate of appropriateness to obtain a building permit. 
a.  New Construction   
Any project that calls for the construction of new structure(s) on vacant property located within the district boundaries. 
i.  New Principal Structures   
New structures should respect the existing setback, massing, building height, scale, building materials, and be compatible in design with contributing historic properties in the Parkwood District. 
ii.  Outbuildings Accessory Structures   
Any new structure over 100 square feet, including garages that are visible from the public right-of-way, Structures should be compatible in scale and design with historic properties in the Parkwood district. 
b.  Additions   
Any additions that change the footprint or roofline of existing structures within the historic district. All additions should respect the existing roof shape, building height, massing, building materials, and be compatible in design with contributing historic properties in the Parkwood District. 
c.  Demolition or Relocation   
Any plans for demolition or relocation of structure over 100 square feet of gross floor area within the historic district will require the full review of the Historic Preservation Commission and a certificate of appropriateness. A request for demolition or relocation must include a post-project plan for the property. 
d.  Alterations to Existing Properties   
The following alterations to existing properties within review jurisdiction require a certificate of appropriateness. 
i.  Doorways   
Change in opening size or location. 
ii.  Windows   
Any change in window openings to include the addition of window openings, the removal of window openings, change in the size of existing openings, and a change in window design. 
iii.  Roofs   
Any change in the roof shape. 
iv.  Exterior Cladding   
Any change in existing cladding material, including the painting of unpainted masonry. 
v.  Porches/Porticos   
The addition or removal of any porch/portico structure. Any changes to historic design elements on existing porches/porticos. 
vi.  Garages and Carports   
New garages and carports require full review if they are visible from the public right-of-way. 
vii.  Walls   
Removal or construction of new walls in the front or side yards. 
viii.  Fences and Walls   
With the exception of retaining walls, installation of a fence or wall in front of the building line is prohibited. Fences and walls behind the building line are subject to existing zoning regulations and are not subject to review by the Historic Preservation Commission. 
ix.  Trees   
The removal of any healthy tree greater than 12 inches in diameter and subject to Sec. 9.1. Tree Protection. 
x.  Driveways   
Any change in the configuration, material or width of existing driveways. 
3.  Certificate of Exemption   
The following projects require a certificate of exemption from the preservation commission: 
a.  Windows   
Replacing existing windows with the same size and design. 
b.  Doors   
Replacing an exterior door. 
c.  Roof   
Replacement of roof materials. 
d.  Exterior Cladding   
Repair and replacement of siding with matching or similar materials. 
e.  Porches and Porticos   
Repair or replacement of existing porch elements and materials. 
f.  Front Steps   
Repair or replacement of steps and installation of hand rail or temporary accessibility ramp. 
g.  Trees   
The removal of a tree greater than 12 inches in diameter with a letter from a certified arborist stating that it is diseased and hazardous and subject to Sec. 9.1. Tree Protection. 
h.  Walls   
Replacement with in-kind materials. 
4.  Zoning Map   
The designated district will be shown on the official zoning map of the city. 
5.2.12. - Maintenance of Historic Properties 
A.  Ordinary Maintenance or Repair-Generally   
Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a Certificate of Appropriateness, but does require a Certificate of Exemption. 
B.  Demolition by Neglect   
1.  Maintenance and Enforcement   
Property Owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall keep in good repair all exterior and interior portions of their property which, if not so maintained, may cause or tend to cause the exterior or interior portions of such property to decay, or become damaged or otherwise to fall into a state of disrepair. This provision shall be in addition to all other provisions requiring properties be kept in good repair. The Building Official in consultation with the Historic Preservation Commission shall be responsible for the enforcement of this provision. 
2.  Failure to Maintain; Response by Historic Preservation Commission   
The Historic Preservation Commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: 
a.  Monitoring   
The Historic Preservation Commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, the deterioration of exterior architectural features, or the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute deterioration by neglect. 
b.  Notice to Owner to Remedy; Time Limit   
If the Historic Preservation Commission determines that a property fails to meet the good repair provisions of Sec. 5.2.12.B.1., the Historic Preservation Commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which actions that need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 30 days in which to comply with the actions set out in the notice. 
c.  Failure by Owner to Remedy   
If the condition is not remedied in 30 days, the owner shall be punished as provided in Section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances and, at the direction of the City Commission, the Historic Preservation Commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the Historic Preservation Commission. 
Sec. 5.3. - Downtown Decatur Special Pedestrian Area 

5.3.1. - Purpose 
The purpose of these regulations is to improve the downtown Decatur environment in the following ways: 
A.  Encourage, protect and enhance the pedestrian environment. 
B.  Improve the aesthetics of downtown area. 
C.  Provide for parking in a way that does not diminish the pedestrian environment. 
D.  Encourage additional street level activity. 
E.  Promote opportunities for residential and commercial development. 
5.3.2. - Application 
These regulations shall apply to the following properties zoned C-2, PO or I located in the Downtown Decatur Special Pedestrian Area: 
A.  All properties located in the Downtown Decatur Special Pedestrian Area which have frontage on the following streets or street segments: 
1.  North Candler Street: 300-400 block 
2.  Church Street: 100-900 block 
3.  Clairemont Avenue: 100 block-300 block 
4.  Commerce Drive: East/North side 100-700 block 
5.  Commerce Drive: West/South side from West Howard Avenue to East College Avenue 
6.  East Court Square: all 
7.  Electric Avenue: 100 block 
8.  East Howard Avenue: all 
9.  Hillyer Place: 100 block 
10.  West Howard Avenue: 100 block 
11.  North McDonough Street: all 
12.  West Ponce de Leon Avenue: North side 100-400 block 
13.  West Ponce de Leon Avenue: South side 100-500 block 
14.  East Ponce de Leon Avenue: 100-300 block 
15.  Ponce de Leon Place: 100-200 block 
16.  Swanton Way: all 
17.  Sycamore Place: 100 block 
18.  Sycamore Street: all 
19.  East Trinity Place: all 
20.  West Trinity Place: 100-500 block 
21.  Waters Street: on the northeast side from West Ponce de Leon to West Trinity Place 
B.  These properties are shown upon the map designated as the "Downtown Decatur Special Pedestrian Area". This map and all notations, shall be kept on file with the City Clerk. 
C.  For the purposes of this Section, where two or more properties, lots or parcels are located within the same block or where two or more properties, lots or parcels have frontage on the same side of the street between two intersecting streets, and such properties, lots or parcels are under common ownership or control and/or are being developed in a single development operation or a series of coordinated development operations, such properties, lots or parcels shall be considered as a single property. 
5.3.3. - Building Design Standards 
A.  Buildings to Face Street   
The purpose of this requirement is to encourage the development of buildings that complement pedestrian activity in the central business district by providing direct access to the building and business activities from the sidewalk. All properties with frontage on the streets or street segments described in Sec. 5.3.2. shall be developed with buildings facing said streets or street segments and with the primary building entrance facing onto the sidewalk and street. One-story buildings shall be at least 16 feet in height at the facade facing the street. All nonresidential buildings shall have commercial uses on the ground floor level facing the street and shall be directly accessible from the street and sidewalk. When direct pedestrian access from the sidewalk to a business is not presently warranted, the building design shall allow for the addition of such access in the future. For the purposes of this Section, commercial use shall mean any retail use, business or professional service, personal service, repair service, or restaurant. 
B.  Parking Areas and Driveways   
Parking areas or driveways, except for a driveway to reach a side or rear yard or on-site parking facility, are not permitted between the sidewalk and the front of the building. Any permitted driveway shall be perpendicular to any adjacent street. No property shall have more than one curb cut along any of the streets or street segments described in Sec. 5.3.2.; provided, however, that a hotel may have a circular driveway in order to provide for the arrival and departure of guests, but shall not increase the number of curb cuts to more than two. Surface parking areas shall not be located along or within 60 feet of any public street or street segment in the Downtown Decatur Special Pedestrian Area. Buildings shall not be set back more than 30 feet from the edge of the street curb. 
C.  Drive-In or Drive-Through Facilities   
Vehicular access to a drive-in or drive-through use shall not be permitted from a street or street segment in the Downtown Decatur Special Pedestrian Area. 
D.  Multiple-Level Parking Facilities   
Multiple level parking facilities which have street frontage in the special pedestrian area shall have a minimum setback of 3 feet above the first level. The parking facility shall be designed so that no vehicle or vehicle part may extend beyond the setback line or exterior wall of the facility. 
E.  Cornice Lines   
Multiple-story buildings of 3 or more stories shall have a cornice line between the second and third stories. 
F.  Transparency   
Buildings which have street frontage in the special pedestrian area shall have a minimum transparency of 25% of the total area of the first floor elevation. 
5.3.4. - Special Exceptions 
Special exceptions to these requirements may be approved after consideration of the following standards: 
A.  The suitability of the proposed exception in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property. 
B.  The effect that the proposed exception will have on the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
C.  The impact that the proposed development will have on the public safety, traffic on the public streets, transportation facilities, utilities and other public services. 
D.  The impact that the proposed development will have on established property values and on the health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the residents of the City. 
E.  The economic or marketing impact that these guidelines may have on the property owner or development. 
Sec. 5.4. - Planned Unit Development District 

5.4.1. - Purpose 
The purpose of this article of the Decatur Unified Development Ordinance is to: 
A.  Provide for creative approaches to the development of land. 
B.  Provide for the efficient use of land, permitting a more economic arrangement of buildings, circulation systems, land uses and utilities. 
C.  Provide for the development of stable environments that are compatible with surrounding areas of the community. 
5.4.2. - Permitted Uses; Minimum Areas 
Planned unit developments may be allowed in all zoning districts except the RS-17 and R-50 Districts. However, only those uses permitted in the zoning district in which the proposed development is located shall be permitted in the planned unit development. Except in the R-85 and R-60 Zoning Districts, a planned unit development shall have a minimum area of at least one acre. In the R-85 and R-60 Zoning Districts, a planned unit development shall have a minimum area of at least 2 acres. 
5.4.3. - Density Standards 
The number of dwelling units permitted in a planned unit development in any residential zoning district shall be determined by dividing the net development area by the minimum lot area per dwelling for the zoning district in which the proposed planned unit development is located, as described in the table below. Lot sizes permitted in planned unit developments may be smaller than the minimum lot size required in the zoning district in which the planned unit development is located. 
Density Standards Zoning 
District Permitted Use Minimum Lot area per Dwelling 
(sq. ft.) R-85 Single-family dwelling 15,000 R-60 Single-family dwelling 9,000 RM-18 Single-family dwelling 7,200 2-family dwelling 4,500 Multiple-family dwelling 2,500 RM-43 Single-family dwelling 7,200 2-family dwelling 4,500 Multiple-family dwelling 1,000  
5.4.4. - Development Standards 
A.  Site Planning   
Site planning in the proposed planned unit development shall give consideration to topography, the location of structures, screening, setbacks and street design in the evaluation of the relationship of the development to its surrounding areas. 
B.  Service and Emergency Access   
Access and circulation shall adequately provide for firefighting equipment, service deliveries and refuse collection. 
C.  Underground Utilities   
Planned unit developments shall provide for underground installation of all utilities, including telephone, electric power and cable television in both public and private rights-of-way, except when extreme conditions of underlying rock or other conditions make this requirement unreasonable. Provision shall be made for acceptable design and construction of storm sewers and storm water retention facilities, as required under Sec. 9.3. 
D.  Pedestrian Ways   
Walkways shall form a logical, safe and convenient system for pedestrian access to all dwelling units and other buildings and facilities. Walkways to be used by substantial numbers of children shall be so located and safeguarded as to minimize contacts with normal automotive traffic. Walkways that are appropriately located, designed and constructed may be combined with other easements and used by emergency and service vehicles, but shall not be used by other automotive traffic. 
E.  Light, Air and Recreation   
The planned unit development shall be so designed as to provide adequate improvements for the light, air and recreation needs of the project when fully developed. A minimum of 5% of the planned unit development site area must be designated as outdoor amenity space (see Sec. 2.1.3.) 
F.  Covenants   
The planned unit development shall include such covenants and legal provisions as will assure conformity to the achievement of the plan. 
G.  General Standards for Approval   
Planned unit developments may be approved subject to such conditions as may be imposed in order to mitigate impacts which may be expected without the imposition of conditions. The following general standards shall be considered in determining whether the planned unit development shall be approved: 
1.  Is the proposed development suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property? 
2.  Does the proposed development adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property? 
3.  Does the proposed development result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools? 
4.  Are there other existing or changing conditions which, because of their impact on the public health, safety, morality and general welfare of the community, give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the proposed development? 
5.4.5. - Application for Approval 
A.  Ownership   
An application for approval of a planned unit development may be filed by a person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity having an interest in the property, or a contract to purchase or option to purchase an interest in the property to be developed. However, no building permit shall be issued until the applicant provides satisfactory evidence of ownership of an interest in the property. 
B.  Procedure   
An application for approval of a planned unit development shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator at least 30 days prior to the date on which it is to be heard by the Planning Commission. An application for a planned unit development affecting the same property shall not be accepted more than once every 12 months, said interval to begin with the date of a final decision by the City Commission. Each application shall be accompanied by a plat containing the following information: 
1.  North arrow, scale, block and lot numbers, land lot numbers and adjacent streets and structures. 
2.  Proposed street rights-of-way, utility and all other easements. 
3.  Comprehensive site plan showing location of existing and proposed buildings and structures, significant vegetation, parking areas, service, recreational and other special use areas, each clearly marked or titled to indicate specific uses. 
4.  Boundary and topographic survey with 2-front contour interval prepared by a qualified surveyor registered to practice in the State of Georgia. 
5.  All other information necessary to show that the proposed planned unit development shall comply with the development standards of Sec. 5.4.4. 
C.  Subdivision Ordinance   
If the proposed planned unit development is to be subdivided, then the application for approval of the planned unit development shall include all information required for the conditional approval of a subdivision under Sec. 11.2.5. 
D.  Review   
The application for approval of the planned unit development shall be reviewed for compliance with applicable statutes and ordinances by the building official, city engineer, fire marshal and Zoning Administrator prior to action by the Planning Commission. The building official shall prepare a report for the Planning Commission on the status of the plan's compliance with applicable statutes and ordinances, and the adequacy of access for firefighting equipment, service deliveries and refuse collection. 
E.  Hearing by the Planning Commission   
The Zoning Administrator shall publish notice of the time and place of a public hearing in a locally distributed newspaper of general circulation, and shall post notice by placard on the location of the proposed planned unit development. Notices shall be published and posted no later than 2 weeks before the public hearing. 
F.  Action by the Planning Commission   
The Planning Commission shall have 45 days following the date of the public hearing to submit its recommendation to the City Commission. If the Planning Commission fails to submit a recommendation within the 45-day period it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed planned unit development. Applicants may submit to the Zoning Administrator any conditions, alterations, changes, or amendments to an application for approval of a planned unit development up to 7 days prior to the date at which the application is to be considered by the Planning Commission. If such conditions, alterations, changes or amendments have not been submitted as required by this subsection, the Planning Commission may, at its discretion, defer action on the application until its next regular meeting. 
G.  Action by the City Commission   
The City Commission, after receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission, may act at a regular or called meeting. Before approving an application for a planned unit development, the City Commission must find that the facts submitted with the application and presented at the public hearing establish that the proposed planned unit development meets the development standards required in Sec. 5.4.4. If from the facts presented the City Commission is unable to make the necessary findings, the application shall be denied. 
H.  Fee   
Each application submitted shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges to partially cover the cost of advertising, field investigations and other expenses involved in processing such application, and under no condition shall said sum or any part thereof be refunded for failure of such application to be approved. 
Article 6. - Use Provisions 
Sec. 6.1. - Use Classification 

6.1.1. - Classification of Uses 
No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved, structurally altered or used, except for a use permitted in the district in which the building is located. 
A.  Principal Uses   
1.  In order to regulate a variety of similar uses, use categories have been established for principal uses. Use categories provide a systematic basis for assigning uses to appropriate categories with other, similar uses. Use categories classify principal uses and activities based on common functional, product or physical characteristics. 
2.  Where a use category contains a list of included uses, the list is to be considered example uses, and not all-inclusive. The Zoning Administrator is responsible for categorizing uses as set out in Sec. 6.1.2. 
3.  The allowed use table in Sec. 6.2. establishes permitted uses by district. No land shall be used except for a purpose permitted in the district in which it is located. 
4.  Use category definitions are provided in Sec. 6.3. through Sec. 6.7. 
B.  Accessory Uses   
1.  An accessory use is any use that is subordinate in both purpose and size, incidental to and customarily associated with a permitted principal use located on the same lot. 
2.  No accessory use or structure shall be located, constructed or moved upon a lot until the construction of the main building has commenced. No accessory structure shall be used unless the main building is in use. 
3.  Standards for accessory uses are specified in Sec. 6.8. 
C.  Temporary Uses   
1.  A temporary use is a use that is in place for a limited period of time only. 
2.  Requirements for temporary uses are specified in Sec. 6.9. 
6.1.2. - Principal Uses Not Listed 
A principal use not specifically listed is not allowed unless the Zoning Administrator determines the use to be part of a use category as described below. 
A.  The Zoning Administrator is responsible for categorizing all principal uses. If a proposed use is not listed in a use category, but is similar to a listed use, the Zoning Administrator may consider the proposed use part of that use category. When determining whether a proposed use is similar to a listed use, the Zoning Administrator must consider the following criteria: 
1.  The actual or projected characteristics of the proposed use; 
2.  The relative amount of site area or floor area and equipment devoted to the proposed use; 
3.  Relative amounts of sales; 
4.  The customer type; 
5.  The relative number of employees; 
6.  Hours of operation; 
7.  Building and site arrangement; 
8.  Types of vehicles used and their parking requirements; 
9.  The number of vehicle trips generated; 
10.  How the proposed use is advertised; 
11.  The likely impact on surrounding properties; and 
12.  Whether the activity is likely to be found independent of the other activities on the site. 
B.  Where a use not listed is found by the Zoning Administrator not to be similar to any other permitted use, the use is only permitted following a text amendment. 
6.1.3. - Use Table Key 
A.  Permitted Use (P)   
Indicates a use is permitted in the respective district. The use is also subject to all other applicable requirements of the UDO. 
B.  Limited Use (L)   
Indicates a use is permitted in the respective district, subject to a use standard found in the right-hand column of the use table. The use is also subject to all other applicable requirements of the UDO. 
C.  Conditional Use (C)   
Indicates a use may be permitted in the respective district only after a public hearing by the Planning Commission and approval by the City Commission. Conditional uses are subject to all other applicable requirements of this UDO, including any applicable use standards, except where the use standards are expressly modified by the City Commission as part of the approval. 
D.  Use Not Permitted (-)   
Indicates that a use is not permitted in the respective district. 
Sec. 6.2. - Allowed Use Table 
R-85 R-60 R-50 RS-17 RM-18 RM-22 RM-43 PO NMU C-1 C-2 C-3 MU I Def./Stds Residential Uses All household living, as listed below:                                Single-family detached dwelling P P P P P P P P - - - - - C 6.3.1.  Accessory dwelling unit (ADU) L L L - L L L L - - - - - - 6.3.1.  Single-family attached dwelling - - - P P P P P - C C - P - 6.3.1.  Two-family dwelling - - - - P P P P - - - - - C 6.3.1.  Multiple-family dwelling - - - - P P P P L C L C P C 6.3.1.  Downtown multiple dwelling - - - - - - - - - - L - - - 6.3.1.  Home occupation L L L L L L L L L L L L L L 6.8.3.  Live-work - - - - - - - L L L L L L - 6.3.1.  Lifecycle dwelling - - - - - - - - - - C C C - 6.3.1. All group living, as listed below:  Assisted living facility, nursing home - - - - P P P P C C P P P - 6.3.2.  Personal care home (2-4 residents) L L L L L L L L C C C C - C 6.3.2.  Personal care home (5-15 residents) - - - - L L L L C C C C - C 6.3.2.  Personal care home (16-24 residents) - - - - - - C L C C C C - C 6.3.2.  Roominghouse, boardinghouse - - - - L L L L - - - - - - 6.3.2. All social services - - - - - - - - - - - C - - 6.3.3. Public Uses All civic, except as listed below: P P P - P P P P P P P P P - 6.4.1.  College, university, seminary - - - - - - - - - - - - - C 6.4.1.  Office, governmental, civic, charitable organization - - - - - - - C - - - - - C 6.4.1.  Place of worship L L L L L L L P P P P P P P 6.4.1.  Police, fire, EMS station P P P P P P P P P P P P P C 6.4.1.  School, private (K-12) C C C - C C C C - - - - C C 6.4.1.  School, public (K-12) P P P - P P P P - - - - C C 6.4.1. All parks and recreation P P P P P P P P - P P P P P 6.4.2. All public utilities, except as listed below: P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 6.4.3.  Antenna - - - - - - L - - L L L L L 6.4.3.  Telecommunications tower - - - - - - - - - C C L - C 6.4.1. Commercial Uses All day care, except as listed below - - - - L - L - - L L L L C 6.5.2.  Family day care home L L L - - - - - - - - - - - 6.5.2. All indoor recreation, except as listed below: - - - - - - - C L P P P P - 6.5.3.  Adult entertainment - - - - - - - - - - - C - - 6.5.3. All medical, except as listed below: - - - - - - - C L P P P P - 6.5.4.  Hospital, infirmary, sanitarium - - - - - - - - - - - - - C 6.5.4. All office, except as listed below: - - - - - - - C L P P P P - 6.5.5.  Radio, television studio - - - - - - - - - - P P - - 6.5.5. All outdoor recreation - - - - - - - - - - - C - - 6.5.6. All overnight lodging, except as listed below: - - - - - - - - - - P P P - 6.5.7.  Bed and breakfast L L L - L L L L L - - - - - 6.5.7.  Lodginghouse C C C - L L L P P P P - - - 6.5.7. All parking, as listed below: 6.5.8.  Commercial parking - - - - - - - - - - C - C - 6.5.8.  Remote parking - - - - - - - - - C C C C C 6.5.8. All personal services, except as listed below: - - - - - - - - L P P P P - 6.5.9.  Animal care - - - - - - - - - L L L L - 6.5.9.  Cleaning, carpet cleaning, dry-cleaning - - - - - - - - L L L P L - 6.5.9.  Fortunetelling and related practices - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 6.5.9. All eating and drinking, as listed below:  Restaurant without drive-through - - - - - - - - L P P P P - 6.5.10.  Restaurant with drive-through - - - - - - - - - - - P - - 6.5.10. All retail sales, except as listed below: - - - - - - - - L P P P P - 6.5.11.  Pawnshop, payday/title loans, check cashing - - - - - - - - - - - P - - 6.5.11.  Fuel sales, gas station - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 6.5.11. All vehicle service, repair - - - - - - - - - - L L - 6.5.12. All vehicle sales, rental, as listed below: 6.5.13.  Vehicle rental - - - - - - - - P P P P - 6.5.13.  Vehicle sales, leasing - - - - - - - - - - P - - 6.5.13. Industrial Uses All light industrial - - - - - - - - - - C - - 6.6.1. All light manufacturing - - - - - - - - - L L L - 6.6.2. All research and development - - - - - - - - - P P P - 6.6.3. All self-service storage - - - - - - - - - - C - - 6.6.4. All warehouse and distribution - - - - - - - - - - C - - 6.6.5. Open Uses All agricultural uses, as listed below:  Community garden P P P P P P P P P P P P P 6.7.1.  Market garden, small (<5,000 SF) - - - P P P P P P P P P P 6.7.1.  Market garden, medium (5,000 SF - 2 acres) - - - C C C P P P P P P P 6.7.1.  Market garden, large (>2 acres) - - - - - - C - C P P P P 6.7.1. Key: P = Permitted Use L = Limited Use C = Conditional Use - = Not a Permitted Use  
(Ord. No. O-16-Z-09, §§ 1.1, 1.2, 6-20-16) 
Sec. 6.3. - Residential Uses 

6.3.1. - Household Living 
A.  Defined   
Residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a house-hold. Household living includes the following: 
1.  Single-family detached dwelling. 
2.  Accessory dwelling unit (ADU). 
3.  Single-family attached dwelling. 
4.  Two-family dwelling. 
5.  Multiple-family dwelling. 
6.  Home occupation. 
7.  Live-work. 
8.  Lifecycle dwelling. 
B.  Single-Family Attached, Multiple-Family Dwelling   
1.  NMU   
Where a multiple-family dwelling is allowed as a limited use, it is allowed only in the upper stories of a mixed use building. A lobby or other entrance is allowed on the ground floor. 
2.  C-1   
Where a single-family attached or multiple-family dwelling is allowed as a limited or conditional use in C-1, ground floor residential cannot be visible from a public street and must be located behind space constructed for nonresidential occupancy. There are no restrictions on upper floors. 

3.  C-2   
Where a single-family attached or multiple-family dwelling is allowed as a limited or conditional use in C-2, ground floor residential cannot be visible along the following streets and must be located behind space constructed for nonresidential occupancy. 
a.  Ponce de Leon Avenue (entire portion); 
b.  Church Street (from Trinity Place to Commerce Drive); 
c.  East Courthouse Square (entire portion); and 
d.  Sycamore Street (from McDonough Street to Church Street). 
C.  Downtown Multiple Dwelling   
1.  Development Standards   
a.  Minimum lot area: One acre-Exceptions to the minimum lot area may be approved after public hearing by the Planning Commission and approval of the City Commission. 
b.  Minimum lot area per family: 1,000 square feet for buildings of three or less stories; 620 square feet for buildings of four or more stories. 
2.  Supplemental Standards for Approval   
a.  Open space. The proposed development shall provide a minimum of 5% outdoor amenity space for residents and other tenants. 
b.  Parking. Parked vehicles shall be screened from view from the public right-of-way. Vehicular parking for the proposed development shall be: 
i.  Underground; 
ii.  Effectively screened by retail or residential space; 
iii.  Effectively screened by a combination of architectural and landscape features (a minimum of 60% of the parking facility wall area must be screened); or 
iv.  Effectively screened by landscape treatment (a minimum of 60% of the parking facility wall area must be screened). 
c.  Ingress and egress. The proposed points of vehicular ingress and egress must maintain or improve existing traffic patterns and provide safe and convenient access for bicyclists and pedestrians. 
d.  Site utilities. All utilities for the proposed development shall be underground. 
D.  Live-Work   
1.  Defined   
Nonresidential activity conducted wholly within a residential dwelling that allows employees, customers, clients or patrons to visit. 
2.  Standards   
Where a live-work is allowed as a limited use, it is subject to the following: 
a.  Live-work is only permitted in units with street level access. 
b.  A minimum of one person must occupy the live-work unit as their primary place of residence. 
c.  The live-work unit may employ no more than two persons not living on the premises at any one time. 
d.  No business storage or warehousing of material, supplies or equipment is permitted outside of the live-work unit. 
e.  The nonresidential use of the unit is limited to the use allowed in the zoning district. 
f.  No equipment or process may be used in connection with the live-work unit that creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses, off the premises. 
g.  No more than 5 customers are permitted on the premises at any one time. 
E.  Residential Conditional Use Permit   
When a residential use is allowed as a conditional use, the following items shall be considered in determining whether the residential use shall be approved: 
1.  The suitability of the proposed residential use in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby properties. 
2.  The impact that the proposed residential use will have on the public safety, traffic on the public streets, transportation facilities, utilities, and other public services. 
3.  The impact that the proposed residential use will have on established property values and on the health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the residents of the City. 
4.  The use standards of Sec. 6.3.1.C. apply. 
F.  Lifecycle Dwelling   
Where a lifecycle dwelling requires a conditional use permit, it is subject to the following: 
1.  The maximum number of dwellings permitted may be increased by up to 20% if dwellings in the development are designated as lifecycle dwellings. 
2.  A minimum of 75% of the additional dwellings permitted under this Section shall be designated as lifecycle dwellings. The following standards shall be considered in determining whether the density increase shall be approved: 
a.  The suitability of the proposed increase in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby properties. 
b.  The impact that the proposed increase will have on the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby properties. 
c.  The impact that the proposed increase will have on the public safety, traffic on the public streets, transportation facilities, utilities and other public services. 
d.  The impact that the proposed increase will have on established property values and on the health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the residents of the City. 
e.  The impact that the proposed increase will have in providing housing opportunities for persons and families of moderate income, the elderly, employees of public agencies and local business and similar classes. 
6.3.2. - Group Living 
A.  Defined   
Residential occupancy of a structure by a group of people that does not meet the definition of house-hold living. Generally, group living facilities have a common eating area for residents, and residents may receive care or training. Group living includes the following: 
1.  Assisted living facility, nursing home. 
2.  Personal care home. 
3.  Roominghouse, boardinghouse. 
B.  Personal Care Home, Assisted Living Facility, Nursing Homes   
1.  All Facilities   
Where a personal care home, assisted living facility or nursing home is allowed as a limited use or requires a conditional use permit, it is subject to the following: 
a.  Persons seeking to operate such a facility must file a permit application with the City along with any fees established by the City Commission. 
b.  Each permit application shall include an affidavit that the applicant either has applied for or will immediately apply for the corresponding permit or authorization for the operation of the facility from the State of Georgia Department of Community Health in accordance with its rules and regulations and the affidavit shall also certify that the proposed facility will meet and be operated in conformance with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations and with all codes and regulations of the City. 
c.  All application forms and information submitted to the State of Georgia Department of Community Health shall be submitted with the City permit application. 
d.  The Zoning Administrator may require clarification or additional information from the applicant that is deemed necessary to determine whether operation of the proposed home will meet applicable laws, regulations and development standards. 
e.  If the Zoning Administrator determines that an application to operate the facility is in compliance with the applicable requirements, the Zoning Administrator shall approve the application for a permit, but the permit for operation shall not be issued until the applicant has obtained the corresponding permit or authorization for operation of the facility from the State of Georgia Department of Community Health. 
f.  No permit for the operation of the facility shall be transferable. 
g.  No facility shall be operated without both a valid permit from the City and a valid license from the State of Georgia Department of Community Health. 
h.  No such facility shall be located within 1,000 feet of any other such facility, said distance to be measured in a straight line from the closest property lines upon which each facility is located. 
i.  All such facilities must provide at least 80 square feet of personal living space per resident or that amount required by the State of Georgia for the licensing of such facilities, whichever is greater. 
j.  No signs shall be permitted other than those permitted by the regulations of the zoning district within which such facility is located. 
2.  Personal Care Home, Assisted Living, Nursing Home Requiring a Public Hearing   
When a personal care home, assisted living facility or nursing home requires a conditional use permit, the following items shall be considered in determining whether the facility shall be approved: 
a.  The suitability of the facility in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby properties. 
b.  The impact that the proposed facility will have on the public safety, traffic on the public streets, transportation facilities, utilities, and other public services. 
c.  The impact that the proposed facility will have on established property values and on the health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the residents of the City. 
C.  Roominghouse, Boardinghouse   
Where a roominghouse or boardinghouse is allowed as a limited use, the minimum floor area of each bedroom must be 80 square feet of usable floor area per occupant. Usable floor area is defined as floor area under a ceiling at least eight 8 feet in height. 
6.3.3. - Social Services 
A.  Defined   
A facility that provides treatment for persons who present a direct threat to the persons or property of others. Includes persons convicted for illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance, sex offenders, and juvenile offenders. Also includes facilities that provide transient housing related to post-incarceration and social service programs. 
Sec. 6.4. - Public Uses 

6.4.1. - Civic 
A.  Defined   
Places of public assembly that provide ongoing governmental, life safety, educational and cultural services to the general public, as well as meeting areas for religious practice. Civic includes the following: 
1.  Art gallery, public. 
2.  College, university, seminary. 
3.  Library, museum, public. 
4.  Office, governmental, civic or charitable organization. 
5.  Place of worship, including church, mosque, synagogue, temple. 
6.  Police, fire or EMS station. 
7.  Post office. 
8.  School, private (K-12). 
9.  School, public (K-12). 
B.  Place of Worship   
Where a place of worship is allowed as a limited use, it is subject to the following: 
1.  Shall comply with the minimum front and rear yard requirements for the zoning district in which they are located and shall have a 25-foot side yard. 
2.  No required front yard shall be used for the purpose of parking or loading. 
3.  Coverage of property shall be limited to 50%. In addition to coverage by buildings, coverage by parking areas, drives, walkways and other paved or graveled surfaces shall be included in determining the percentage of coverage. 
C.  School, Private (K-12)   
Where a private school (K-12) requires a conditional use permit, it is subject to the following: 
1.  Development Standards   
a.  Minimum Lot Area   
i.  Elementary schools: 4 acres. 
ii.  Middle or junior high schools: 8 acres. 
iii.  High schools: 15 acres. 
b.  Minimum Frontage   
100 feet. 
c.  Minimum Building Setbacks   
i.  From property lines from adjoining residential uses: 50 feet. 
ii.  From property lines for parking areas and driveways: 25 feet. 
d.  Special Exceptions   
A special exception to any of these development standards may be approved as part of the school's comprehensive site development plan after consideration of the standards for approval described in Sec. 11.2.8. 
2.  Supplemental Standards for Approval   
In addition to the standards described in Sec. 11.2.8., the following standards shall be considered in determining whether the proposed development shall be approved: 
a.  Adequacy of Site   
Is the site adequate for the proposed development and use? 
b.  Buildings   
Are the scale and size of the proposed buildings appropriate in relation to the site and the adjacent and nearby properties? 
c.  Vehicular Access, Circulation and Off-Street Parking and Loading   
i.  Is the public street on which the proposed development is to be located adequate to allow estimated traffic? 
ii.  Is ingress and egress to the proposed development adequate so as to minimize traffic congestion? 
iii.  Is parking located to the rear of the proposed development and effectively screened? 
iv.  Is there adequate access for fire and other emergency vehicles? 
d.  Buffers   
Are buffers and other screening measures adequate to protect adjacent residential uses from noise, lighting and other impacts? 
e.  Garbage Disposal   
i.  Are garbage disposal and refuse collection areas adequate? 
ii.  Are they located and screened to minimize impacts on adjacent residential properties? 
3.  Standards for Approval; Conditional Zoning   
The standards described in Sec. 11.2.8. shall be considered in determining whether the proposed use shall be approved. Such use may be approved subject to such conditions as may be imposed in order to mitigate impacts which may be expected without the imposition of conditions and may be regulated in the same manner as provided in Sec. 11.2.8. 
4.  Supplemental Application Requirements   
Each application shall be accompanied by plans which shall include the following: 
a.  Written Description of the Proposed Development   
At a minimum, such description shall provide a summary of the scope and main features of the proposed development, including hours and manner of operation, and shall address standards for approval described in Sec. 6.4.1.C.2. and Sec. 6.4.1.C.3. above. 
b.  Comprehensive Site Development Plan   
At a minimum, such plan shall include all existing and proposed buildings and structures and their location on the property, heights of proposed buildings, proposed use of each building, all driveways, parking areas and loading areas, location of garbage disposal facilities and proposed buffers. 
6.4.2. - Parks and Recreation 
A.  Defined   
Uses focusing on natural areas consisting mostly of vegetation, passive or active outdoor recreation areas, and having few structures. Parks and recreation includes the following: 
1.  Cemetery. 
2.  Open space. 
3.  Park, playground, recreation field. 
4.  Public land. 
6.4.3. - Public Utilities 
A.  Defined   
Public or private infrastructure, including but not limited to water, sewer, gas, electric, telephone, Internet, cable and other similar services serving the community. Public utilities includes the following: 
1.  Antennas. 
2.  Communications tower. Neighborhood-serving cable, telephone, gas, or electric facility. 
3.  On-site stormwater retention or detention facility. 
4.  Water or wastewater pump or lift station. 
B.  Antennas and Telecommunication Towers   
Telecommunication towers and antennas may be erected and operated as permitted in the district regulations and in accordance with the policies and procedures described in this Section. Except in RM-43, and unless otherwise exempt, no communication tower or antenna shall be erected in a residential zoning district. 
1.  Development Standards   
a.  All Districts (Where Allowed)   
i.  Co-Located Antennas   
Antennas that are attached or affixed to lawful existing telecommunications support structures in a manner that negates the need to construct a new freestanding wireless support structure and that comply with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-66B-4 as amended shall be authorized as: a limited use in those districts within which such towers are authorized if such co-location application is subject to the streamlined process of said state statute, subject to compliance with the provisions of this Section, or; a conditional use if so required in the district within which such towers is requested, subject to compliance with the provisions of this Section. Fees for co-location applications shall not exceed $500.00. Decisions on co-located antennas shall be made according to the applicable procedure within 90 calendar days of the date a completed application was filed and shall be in writing. The Zoning Administrator shall have 30 days from the date of application to determine if an application is complete and shall notify the applicant in writing of any additional materials required. If so notified, the time within which such information is being provided by the applicant shall not count against the 90 day decision period herein. Where authorized, building-mounted antennas must be visually screened from view from all abutting properties. 
ii.  Federal and State Law   
The regulations of this Section must be applied within the procedural and regulatory constraints of applicable federal and state telecommunications statutes. 
iii.  Application Materials   
Applications shall be made on forms prepared by the Zoning Administrator and shall contain all required documents and information required to analyze the application in accordance with the required criteria. 
iv.  Decisions on New Towers   
Final decisions on applications for new telecommunication support structures shall be in writing and be supported by a written record documenting the reasons for the denial and the evidence in support of the decision. Such decisions shall be made within 150 calendar days of the date of complete application, unless another date is agreed to by the applicant and the Administrator in writing. The Zoning Administrator shall have 30 days from the date of application to determine if an application is complete and shall notify the applicant in writing of any additional materials required. If so notified, the time within which such information is being provided by the applicant shall not count against the 150-day decision period herein. 
b.  Antennas in RM-43, C-1, C-2, C-3, MU and I   
Antennas may be located on existing structures, including but not limited to buildings, light poles, water towers, communications towers or other freestanding structures, provided that the existing structure is at least 50 feet in height and the antenna is no more than 10 feet higher than the highest point of the existing structure and is screened as provided in this Section. 
c.  Telecommunication Towers   
i.  Telecommunication towers must be set back at least 200 feet or the height of the tower, whichever is greater, from any property line, unless a greater setback is expressly required as part of conditional use permit approval. 
ii.  Telecommunication towers must be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. These color and design requirements do not apply to alternative tower structures. 
iii.  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures must, to the maximum extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
iv.  Towers may not be artificially lighted, unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communications Commission or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, it must be done in a way that minimizes the disturbance to surrounding views. 
v.  Telecommunications towers must be entirely enclosed by a security fence of at least six feet in height. Towers must be equipped with an anti-climbing device. This requirement does not apply to alternative tower structures, provided equivalent alternative security measures are installed. 
vi.  In addition to any other landscaping or buffer requirements that may apply, telecommunications towers must be landscaped with plant material that effectively screens the tower site from adjacent uses. Existing tree growth and natural land forms on-site must be preserved to the maximum extent possible. At a minimum, a landscaped strip ten feet in width must be provided around the perimeter of the tower site. 
vii.  Telecommunication towers must be constructed to the minimum height necessary to accomplish their required telecommunications purpose. 
viii.  The environmental effects of radio frequency emissions may not serve as a basis to approve, deny or otherwise regulate a telecommunications tower to the extent that emissions comply with Federal Communications Commission regulations. 
ix.  Each applicant requesting approval of a telecommunications tower must provide to the zoning administrator as a part of the application an inventory of its existing towers that are either within the city or within one-quarter mile of the city boundaries, including information regarding the location, height and design of each tower. 
x.  No new telecommunication tower may be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence must be submitted at the time of application demonstrating that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna and may consist of one or more of the following: 
(a)  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements; 
(b)  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements; 
(c)  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment; 
(d)  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna; 
(e)  The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable; or 
(f)  There are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
xi.  The placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment necessarily required in connection with an otherwise authorized telecommunication tower or antenna is authorized. 
xii.  Any telecommunications antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of six months will be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower must remove the antenna or tower within 90 days of receipt of notice from the city. 
2.  Conditional Land Use Permit Approval Criteria   
In reviewing and acting on conditional land use permit applications for telecommunication towers, the Planning Commission and City Commission must consider the following factors in addition to the generally applicable conditional land use permit approval criteria: 
a.  Height of the proposed tower; 
b.  Proximity of the tower to residential structures; 
c.  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
d.  Surrounding topography; 
e.  Surrounding tree cover and foliage; 
f.  Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; and 
g.  Compliance with telecommunication tower regulations of this Section. 
h.  Exemptions   
These regulations shall not apply to the following: 
i.  Towers and/or antennas less than 70 feet in height and owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio operator. 
ii.  Receive-only antennas. 
iii.  Satellite dish antennas. 
iv.  Towers and antennas operated by local, state or federal government for a necessary governmental function. 
Sec. 6.5. - Commercial Uses 

6.5.1. - Alcohol Sales 
A.  Defined   
The sales of any kind of alcoholic beverage regulated by the state of Georgia. This definition includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
B.  Standards   
Standards for Alcohol Sales are found in Chapter 6 of the Code of Ordinances. 
6.5.2. - Day Care 
A.  Defined   
A facility providing care, protection and supervision of children or adults on a regular basis away from their primary residence. Care is provided to a given individual for less than 24 hours a day. Day care includes the following: 
1.  Adult day care center. 
2.  Day care center. 
3.  Family day care home. 
4.  Nursery school. 
5.  After-school program. 
B.  Use Standards   
1.  In General   
a.  Where a day care is allowed as a limited use or requires a conditional use permit, an outdoor play area must be provided and must meet the size, location, and fence requirements for playgrounds set forth in the Rules for Child Care Learning Centers as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Early Care and Learning pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 20-1A-1. 
b.  Where a day care requires a conditional use permit, the following items shall be considered in determining whether the day care shall be approved 
i.  The suitability of the proposed facility in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby properties. 
ii.  The impact that the proposed facility will have on the public safety, traffic on the public streets, transportation facilities, utilities, and other public services. 
iii.  The impact that the proposed facility will have on established property values and on the health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the residents of the City. 
2.  Family Day Care Home   
Family Day Care Homes may be established and operated in the City in accordance with the following policies and procedures: 
a.  Family day care homes shall be operated only in zoning districts in which such homes are allowed as permitted use. 
b.  Persons seeking to operate a family day care home in the City must file an application with the City along with any fees established by the City Commission. Each family day care home application shall include a description of the program, an affidavit that the applicant has applied for the required approval from the Georgia Department of Early Care and Learning and the affidavit shall also certify that the proposed family day care home will meet and be operated in conformance with all state, federal and local laws and regulations. The Zoning Administrator may require clarification or additional information from the applicant that is deemed necessary to determine whether operation of the proposed day care will meet applicable laws, regulations and development standards. 
c.  After the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is complete, the subject property shall be posted by placard for 15 days in a conspicuous location notifying the public that an application to establish a family home day care center has been filed with the city. The placard shall include information on where and when the pending application can be viewed. The Zoning Administrator shall keep a record of any comments submitted about the application during the 15 day advertisement period. No application shall be approved without the 15 day advertisement period. 
d.  If the Zoning Administrator determines an application to operate a family day care home is in compliance with the applicable requirements, the Zoning Administrator shall approve the application for permit, but the Certificate of Occupancy or approval for operation shall not be issued until the applicant has submitted proof of registration or authorization from the Georgia Department of Early Care and Learning to operate the day care. 
e.  Family day care homes must have a business license with the City. 
f.  No permit for the operation of a family day care home shall be transferable. 
(Ord. No. O-16-Z-13, § 1.1, 8-15-16) 
6.5.3. - Indoor Recreation 
A.  Defined   
A commercial facility, varying in size, providing daily or regularly scheduled recreation-oriented activities in an indoor setting. Indoor recreation includes the following: 
1.  Adult entertainment. 
2.  Amusement center, game/video arcade. 
3.  Art, music, dance, and photographic studio. 
4.  Assembly hall, auditorium, meeting hall. 
5.  Billiard parlor. 
6.  Bowling alley, Club, lodge. 
7.  Gym, health spa, yoga studio. 
8.  Ice, roller skating rink. 
9.  Indoor sports facility. 
10.  Inflatable playground, trampoline park. 
11.  Miniature golf facility. 
12.  Movie theater, playhouse, live performance venue. 
B.  Standards   
1.  Adult Entertainment   
No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within 200 yards of the property line of any place of worship, public park, public library, public housing development, hospital, public or private school, college or seminary, recreation center or private residence, unless such private residence is located in the C-3 zoning district. This distance requirement shall be measured in a straight line from the closest portion of the property line upon which the adult entertainment establishment is located to the closest portion of the property line of said listed uses. 
2.  NMU Use Standards   
Where indoor recreation is allowed as a limited use, it is subject to the following: 
a.  No building can exceed a total floor area of 10,000 square feet. 
b.  No use or establishment can exceed a floor area of 2,000 square feet. 
c.  All allowed indoor recreation uses must be located on the ground floor. 
d.  Hours of operation can begin no earlier than 6 AM and end no later than 11 PM, including all deliveries. 
6.5.4. - Medical 
A.  Defined   
A facility providing medical or surgical care to patients. Some facilities may offer overnight care. Medical includes the following: 
1.  Ambulatory surgical center, outpatient surgery center. 
2.  Hospital, infirmary, sanitarium. 
3.  Medical, dental, chiropractic clinic. 
4.  Medical, dental laboratory. 
5.  Urgent care, emergency medical office. 
B.  Standards   
1.  Hospital, Infirmary, Sanitarium   
a.  Where a hospital, infirmary or sanitarium requires a conditional use permit, the following items shall be considered in determining whether the use shall be approved: 
i.  Shall not include facilities for long-term custodial care of the mentally ill. 
ii.  Shall have prior approval of the county health department. 
iii.  Shall provide a visually solid fence or dense planted buffer on any side abutting residential use. 
b.  The following conditions apply to hospitals, infirmaries or sanitariums in all districts permitting such uses: 
i.  Shall not include facilities for long-term custodial care of the mentally ill. 
ii.  Shall have prior approval of the county health department. 
iii.  Shall provide a visually solid fence or dense planted buffer on any side abutting residential use. 
2.  NMU Use Standards   
Where medical is allowed as a limited use, it is subject to the following: 
a.  No building can exceed a total floor area of 10,000 square feet. 
b.  No use or establishment can exceed a floor area of 2,000 square feet. 
c.  All allowed medical uses must be located on the ground floor. 
d.  Hours of operation can begin no earlier than 6 AM and end no later than 11 PM, including all deliveries. 
6.5.5. - Office 
A.  Defined   
A facility used for activities conducted in an office setting and generally focusing on business, professional or financial services. Office includes the following: 
1.  Business or professional office including, but not limited to, lawyer, accountant, auditor, bookkeeper, engineer, architect, sales office, travel agency, interior decorator or security system services. 
2.  Call center. 
3.  Counseling in an office setting. 
4.  Financial services including but not limited to, lender, investment or brokerage house, bank, credit union, bail bonds, insurance adjuster, real estate or insurance agent, mortgage agent, or collection agency. 
5.  Radio, television studio. 
6.  Trade, vocation, business school. 
B.  NMU Use Standards   
Where office is allowed as a limited use, it is subject to the following: 
1.  No building can exceed a total floor area of 10,000 square feet. 
2.  No use or establishment can exceed a floor area of 2,000 square feet. 
3.  All allowed office uses must be located on the ground floor. 
4.  Hours of operation can begin no earlier than 6 AM and end no later than 11 PM, including all deliveries. 
5.  Drive-through or drive up service is not permitted. 
6.5.6. - Outdoor Recreation 
A.  Defined   
A commercial facility, varying in size, providing daily or regularly scheduled recreation-oriented activities. Activities take place predominately outdoors or within outdoor structures. Outdoor recreation includes the following. 
1.  Drive-in theater. 
2.  Golf driving range, 
3.  Miniature golf facility. 
4.  Outdoor sports field/court. 
5.  Outdoor theater. 
6.5.7. - Overnight Lodging 
A.  Defined   
Accommodations arranged for short term stays. Overnight lodging includes the following: 
1.  Bed and breakfast. 
2.  Hotel, motel, lodginghouse. 
B.  Standards   
1.  In General   
Where overnight lodging, is allowed as a limited use, it is subject to the following: 
a.  Persons seeking to operate overnight lodging must file an application with the city along with any fees established by the city commission. Each overnight lodging application shall include a description of the establishment, an affidavit that the applicant has applied for the required approval from the appropriate state departments and the affidavit shall also certify that the proposed overnight lodging will meet and be operated in conformance with all state, federal and local laws and regulations. The Zoning Administrator may require clarification or additional information from the applicant that is deemed necessary to determine whether operation of the overnight lodging will meet applicable laws, regulations and development standards. Information could include the number of guest rooms, a guest parking plan, operating hours and other information pertaining to the impact of the operation on adjoining properties. 
b.  After the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is complete, the subject property shall be posted by placard for 15 days in a conspicuous location notifying the public that an application to establish overnight lodging has been filed with the city. The placard shall include information on where and when the pending application can be viewed. The Zoning Administrator shall keep a record of any comments submitted about the application during the 15 day advertisement period. No application shall be approved without the 15 day advertisement period. 
2.  Lodginghouse   
Where lodginghouse is allowed as a limited use or requires a conditional use permit, it is subject to the following: 
a.  The minimum floor area of a lodginghouse shall not be less than 3,500 square feet. 
b.  Legally established, but non-conforming lots are eligible for a lodginghouse use. 
c.  The lodginghouse shall be managed by a full-time resident of the property who shall be present and residing in the home when guests are present. Present and residing in the home means the full-time resident shall not be staying overnight outside of the home for reasons such as vacation, visiting with friends or family, or travelling out of town for business or personal reasons. Temporary absences related to normal residential activity such as shopping, working, attending class, etc., are permitted. A minimum of two documents establishing proof of residency shall be supplied from an approved list of documents. 
d.  Activities and functions at the lodginghouse shall be provided for overnight guests only. Meal service shall be limited to breakfast and an afternoon and/or evening refreshment. No commercial activities other than providing lodging for registered guests shall be permitted. 
e.  No displays of goods, products, services, or other advertising shall be visible from outside of the building. 
f.  The maximum number of guest rooms provided by the lodginghouse in a residential district shall be eight. 
g.  The length of stay of guests shall not exceed 30 days. 
h.  Accessory structures and outdoor activities. Accessory structures may be utilized for guest accommodation purposes as part of a lodginghouse use. The number of guest bedrooms in the accessory structure(s) cannot exceed the number of guest bedrooms in the principal structure. Accessory structures used to accommodate the guests of lodginghouse uses are subject to the floor area limitations for accessory structures and shall comply with the setback requirements for accessory structures. 
(Ord. No. O-16-Z-09, §§ 1.3-1.5, 6-20-16) 
6.5.8. - Parking 
A.  Defined   
A facility that provides parking as a principal use. Parking includes the following: 
1.  Commercial parking. 
2.  Remote parking. 
6.5.9. - Personal Services 
A.  Defined   
A facility involved in providing personal or repair services to the general public. Personal service includes the following: 
1.  Animal care including veterinary hospital, clinic, kennel, animal boarding, animal grooming and doggy day care. 
2.  Beauty, hair, or nail salon. 
3.  Catering establishment. 
4.  Cleaning establishment, carpet cleaning service, dry-cleaning or laundry drop-off facility, laundromat, washeteria. 
5.  Copy center, printing, binding, photocopying, blueprinting, mailing service. 
6.  Fortunetelling and related practices. 
7.  Locksmith. 
8.  Optometrist. 
9.  Repair of appliances, bicycles, canvas product clocks, computers, jewelry, musical instruments, office equipment, radios, shoes, televisions, watch, or similar items. 
10.  Tailor, milliner, or upholsterer. 
11.  Tattoo parlor or body piercing. 
12.  Taxidermist. 
13.  Tutoring. 
14.  Undertaking establishment, funeral home, mortuary. 
15.  Wedding chapel. 
B.  Standards   
1.  Animal Care   
Where a animal care is allowed as a limited use, it is subject to the following: 
a.  The uses shall be operated so as to prevent objectionable odors. 
b.  Any boarding or kennel space shall be contained within the building and is limited to no more than 25% of the total building area of the facility. In no case shall the boarding portion of an animal care facility exceed 500 square feet. 
c.  No pens, cages or other animal confinement devices shall be permitted outside. 
d.  Any areas used for boarding shall be adequately soundproofed and located at least 50 feet from any off-site residence. 
2.  Cleaning, Carpet Cleaning, Dry-Cleaning   
a.  NMU   
Where cleaning, carpet cleaning, dry-cleaning is allowed as a limited use, it is subject to the following: 
i.  No building can exceed a total floor area of 10,000 square feet. 
ii.  No use or establishment can exceed a floor area of 2,000 square feet. 
iii.  The use must be located on the ground floor. 
iv.  Hours of operation can begin no earlier than 6 AM and end no later than 11 PM, including all deliveries. 
v.  Drive-through or drive up service is not permitted. 
b.  C-1, C-2, MU   
Where a cleaning, carpet cleaning, dry-cleaning is allowed as a limited use, the establishment must be less that 2,000 total square feet per individual use. 
3.  NMU Use Standards   
Where personal service is allowed as a limited use, it is subject to the following: 
a.  No building can exceed a total floor area of 10,000 square feet. 
b.  No use or establishment can exceed a floor area of 2,000 square feet. 
c.  All allowed personal service uses must be located on the ground floor. 
d.  Hours of operation can begin no earlier than 6 AM and end no later than 11 PM, including all deliveries. 
6.5.10. - Eating and Drinking 
A.  Defined   
A facility that prepares and sells food and drink for on- or off-premise consumption (see also Sec. 6.5.1., Alcohol Sales). Eating and drinking includes the following: 
1.  Restaurant including brewpub, grille, coffee shop, yogurt or ice cream shop (without drive-through or drive up facilities). 
2.  Restaurant including grille, coffee shop, yogurt or ice cream shop (with drive-through or drive up facilities). 
Restaurant without Drive-Through 
Where a restaurant without drive-through is allowed as a limited use, it is subject to the following: 
3.  No building can exceed a total floor area of 10,000 square feet. 
4.  No use or establishment can exceed a floor area of 2,000 square feet. 
5.  The use must be located on the ground floor. 
6.  Hours of operation can begin no earlier than 6 AM and end no later than 11 PM, including all deliveries. 
7.  Drive-through or drive up service is not permitted. 
8.  Any outdoor dining area is limited to 500 square feet in size. 
6.5.11. - Retail Sales 
A.  Defined   
A facility involved in the sale, lease or rental of new or used products. Retail sales includes the sale, lease or rental of the following: 
1.  Antiques, appliances, art supplies, baked goods, bicycles, books, building supplies, cameras, carpet and floor coverings, crafts, clothing, computers, convenience goods, dry goods, electronics, fabric, flowers, furniture, garden supplies, groceries, hardware, home improvement, household products, jewelry, medical supplies, music, musical instruments, office supplies, pets, pet supplies, pharmaceuticals, phones, photo finishing, picture frames, plants, pottery, produce, scooters, seafood, shoes, souvenirs, sporting goods, stationery, tobacco, toys, vehicle parts and accessories and related products. 
2.  Pawnshop. 
3.  Payday/title loans or check cashing. 
B.  NMU Use Standards   
Where retail sales is allowed as a limited use, it is subject to the following: 
1.  No building can exceed a total floor area of 10,000 square feet. 
2.  No use or establishment can exceed a floor area of 2,000 square feet. 
3.  All allowed retail sales uses must be located on the ground floor. 
4.  Hours of operation can begin no earlier than 6 AM and end no later than 11 PM, including all deliveries. 
5.  Drive-through or drive up service is not permitted. 
6.5.12. - Vehicle Service, Repair 
A.  Defined   
Repair and service to passenger vehicles, light and medium trucks, and other consumer motor vehicles such as motorcycles, boats and recreational vehicles, includes a car wash. 
B.  Use Standards   
Where vehicle service, repair is allowed as a limited use, it is subject to the following: 
1.  Enclosed Building   
a.  It shall be unlawful for a business engaged in the repair of automobiles, trucks, buses, trailers, boats, engines, motors, recreational vehicles, farm tractors and machines, and all other motorized and towed vehicles and parts to park, store, or repair such vehicles and parts anywhere within the Corporate limits of the City except in an enclosed building whose doors shall be kept tightly shut during painting and storage of vehicles and parts, or in an area which is screened by an opaque fence, wall or landscaped buffer at least 6 feet in height. Such fence, wall or buffer shall be maintained in good condition at all times. 
b.  Building shall have no opening other than a stationary window along a side adjoining a residential district line. 
c.  No parts or waste materials shall be stored outside the building. 
2.  Towing and Storage   
It shall be unlawful for a business engaged in the towing and storage of automobiles, trucks, buses, trailers, boats, engines, motors, recreational vehicles, farm tractors and machines, and all other motorized and towed vehicles and parts thereof to park or store such vehicles and parts anywhere within the corporate limits of the City except in an enclosed building whose doors shall be kept tightly shut during storage of vehicles and parts, or in an area which is screened by an opaque fence, wall or landscaped buffer at least eight 8 feet in height. Such fence, wall or buffer shall be maintained in good condition at all times. 
3.  Areas Adjacent to Residential   
It shall be unlawful for a business engaged in the minor repair of automobiles, trucks, buses, trailers, boats, motors, recreational vehicles, farm tractors and machines, and all other motorized and towed vehicles and parts thereof to repair such vehicles and parts in an area adjacent to or within 150 feet of a residential zoning district unless such area is screened from the residential zoning district by an opaque fence, wall or landscaped buffer at least six 6 feet in height. Such fence, wall or buffer shall be maintained in good condition at all times. 
6.5.13. - Vehicle Sales/Rental 
A.  Defined   
A facility that sells, rents or leases passenger vehicles, light and medium trucks, and other consumer motor vehicles such as motorcycles, boats and recreational vehicles. Vehicle sales/rental includes the following. 
1.  Vehicle rental. 
2.  Vehicle sales or leasing. 
Sec. 6.6. - Industrial Uses 

6.6.1. - Light Industrial 
A.  Defined   
A facility that involves a heavy or intensive use that may cause excessive smoke, odor, noise, glare, fumes or vibration, and may include uses that are unsightly, noisy, noxious or offensive. Light industrial includes the following. 
1.  Bottling plant. 
2.  Building materials sales, contractor's storage yard, contractor's office and shop. 
3.  Commercial, industrial storage (not including vehicle wrecker service storage yard, vehicle junkyard or similar use). 
4.  Dairy product processing. 
5.  Electrical motor and armature winding shop, machine shop. 
6.  Heating fuel, ice storage sales yard, ice plant. 
7.  Laundry, dry-cleaning, and carpet cleaning plant. 
8.  Sale or rental of machinery, heavy equipment or special trade tool. 
9.  Sheet metal, welding, machine shop, tool repair. 
10.  Stone, clay, glass or concrete products. 
11.  Taxi cab, limousine service. 
B.  Use Standards   
Where light industrial is allowed as a limited use, it is subject to the following: 
1.  Limitations   
a.  Building footprints shall not exceed 50,000 square feet. 
b.  Lot widths shall not exceed 250 feet in width. 
c.  No loading space, loading zone or loading dock shall be located in the front yard. 
2.  Performance Standards   
a.  Control of Air Pollution from Emission and Particulate Matter   
Every use shall be so operated as to prevent any outdoor burning, incineration, or other emissions of particulate matter from any source to exceed allowable rates specified in the Georgia Air Quality Act, O.C.G.A. 12-9-1, et seq., incorporated herein by reference. 
b.  Decomposition of Materials   
The manufacture or storage of compounds or products which decompose by detonation shall not be permitted, except that chlorates, nitrates, perchlorates, phosphorus and similar substances and compounds in small quantities for use by industry, school laboratories, druggists or wholesalers may be permitted when approved by the fire marshal as not presenting a fire or explosion hazard. 
c.  Storage of Flammable Materials   
The storage and use of all flammable liquids and materials such as pyroxylin plastics, nitrocellulose film, solvents and petroleum products shall be permitted only when such storage or use conforms to the fire prevention and fire safety standards and regulations of the City. 
d.  Volatile Organic Compounds   
Volatile organic compound loading facilities and fuel dispensers must be in compliance with applicable state regulations, incorporated herein by reference. 
e.  Open Storage   
No open storage of materials or commodities shall be permitted as an accessory use to a main use of light manufacturing that is located in a building. No open storage operation shall be located in the front yard. No open storage of wrecked, junked or salvaged vehicles shall be permitted. 
6.6.2. - Light Manufacturing 
A.  Defined   
A facility conducting light manufacturing operations within a fully-enclosed building. Light manufacturing includes the following. 
1.  Clothing, textile or apparel manufacturing. 
2.  Facilities engaged in the assembly or manufacturing of scientific measuring instruments; semiconductor and related devices, including but not limited to clocks, integrated circuits, jewelry, medical, musical instruments, photographic or optical instruments or timing instruments. 
3.  Pharmaceutical or medical supply manufacturing. 
4.  Brewery, microbrewery, distillery, craft distillery. 
5.  Cabinet, woodworking, metal working, upholstery shop, furniture manufacturing. 
B.  Use Standards   
Where light manufacturing, is allowed as a limited use, it is subject to the following: Limitations 
a.  Building footprints shall not exceed 50,000 square feet. 
b.  Lot widths shall not exceed 250 feet in width. 
c.  No loading space, loading zone or loading dock shall be located in the front yard. 
1.  Performance Standards   
a.  Control of Air Pollution from Emission and Particulate Matter   
Every use shall be so operated as to prevent any outdoor burning, incineration, or other emissions of particulate matter from any source to exceed allowable rates specified in the Georgia Air Quality Act, O.C.G.A. 12-9-1, et seq., incorporated herein by reference. 
b.  Decomposition of Materials   
The manufacture or storage of compounds or products which decompose by detonation shall not be permitted, except that chlorates, nitrates, perchlorates, phosphorus and similar substances and compounds in small quantities for use by industry, school laboratories, druggists or wholesalers may be permitted when approved by the fire marshal as not presenting a fire or explosion hazard. 
c.  Storage of Flammable Materials   
The storage and use of all flammable liquids and materials such as pyroxylin plastics, nitrocellulose film, solvents and petroleum products shall be permitted only when such storage or use conforms to the fire prevention and fire safety standards and regulations of the City. 
d.  Volatile Organic Compounds   
Volatile organic compound loading facilities and fuel dispensers must be in compliance with applicable state regulations, incorporated herein by reference. 
e.  Open Storage   
No open storage of materials or commodities shall be permitted as an accessory use to a main use of light manufacturing that is located in a building. No open storage operation shall be located in the front yard. No open storage of wrecked, junked or salvaged vehicles shall be permitted. 
6.6.3. - Research and Development 
A.  Defined   
A facility focused primarily on the research and development of new products. Research and development includes the following. 
1.  Laboratories, offices and other facilities used for research and development by or for any individual, organization or concern, whether public or private. 
2.  Prototype production facilities that manufacture a limited amount of a product in order to fully investigate the merits of such a product. 
3.  Pilot plants used to test manufacturing processes planned for use in production elsewhere. 
6.6.4. - Self-Service Storage 
A.  Defined   
A facility providing separate storage areas for personal or business use designed to allow private access by the tenant for storing or removing personal property. Self-service storage includes the following. 
1.  Indoor multi-story storage. 
2.  Mini-store, warehouse. 
3.  Warehouse, self-service. 
6.6.5. - Warehouse and Distribution 
A.  Defined   
A facility involved in the storage or movement of goods for themselves or other firms. Goods are generally delivered to other firms or the final consumer with little on-site sales activity to customers. Warehouse and distribution includes the following. 
1.  Bulk storage, including nonflammable liquids, cold storage plants, frozen food lockers, household moving and general freight storage. 
2.  Distribution of products and merchandise. 
3.  Parcel services. 
4.  Transfer and storage business where there are no individual storage areas or where employees are the primary movers of the goods to be stored or transferred. 
Sec. 6.7. - Open Uses 

6.7.1. - Agricultural 
A.  Defined   
The production of crops, livestock or poultry. Agriculture includes the following: 
1.  Community garden. 
2.  Market garden, small ( less than 5,000 square feet). 
3.  Market garden, medium (5,000 square feet to 2 acres). 
4.  Market garden, large (more than 2 acres). 
Sec. 6.8. - Accessory Uses 

6.8.1. - In General 
A.  Accessory uses are permitted in conjunction with an allowed principal use. Allowed accessory uses include those listed in this Section and additional accessory uses as interpreted by the Zoning Administrator. 
B.  Accessory buildings must share utility services and meters with the main building. 
C.  Accessory buildings may have a 1/2 bath or a kitchen, but cannot contain both a full bathroom and a kitchen. Habitation is not permitted in an accessory building unless it is identified as an accessory dwelling unit (see Sec. 6.8.3.A.). 
D.  Dimensional standards for accessory buildings and structures are included with the principal structure standards for each district (Article 3. Residential Districts and Article 4. Mixed Use and Commercial Districts). No more than two accessory buildings are allowed per lot, excluding structures less than 100 square feet. 
E.  Accessory buildings shall not exceed 1,000 square feet of total floor area, including garages and other enclosed storage areas. Such buildings shall not exceed 25 feet in height and two stories. 
F.  Allowed accessory uses and structures include the following: 
1.  Accessory dwellings units (ADU). 
2.  Accessory uses administered by a place of worship that are related directly to the place of worship. 
3.  Accessory uses administered by an institution that are related directly to the campus or institution, including parks, athletic fields, stadiums, playgrounds, bookstores, soda shops, art galleries, restaurants, cafeterias, card and souvenir shops, clinics, medical and dental offices, boarding and rooming houses, clubs, sororities, fraternities, and temporary lodging facilities. 
4.  Garden sheds. 
5.  Greenhouses. 
6.  Home occupations. 
7.  Home offices and studios. 
8.  Multilevel parking facilities. 
9.  Parking facilities, structured or hard-surfaced as accessory to a building. 
10.  Private garages. 
11.  Swimming pools and tennis courts. 
6.8.2. - Accessory Uses Not Listed 
An accessory use not specifically listed is not allowed unless the Zoning Administrator determines the accessory use: 
A.  Is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with an allowed principal use; 
B.  Is subordinate to and serving an allowed principal use; 
C.  Is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal use served; 
D.  Contributes to the comfort, convenience or needs of occupants, business or industry in the principal use served; and 
E.  Is located on the same lot as the principal use served. 
6.8.3. - Standards for Specific Accessory Uses 
A.  Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU)   
1.  The design and size of the ADU shall conform to all codes which are required for any new construction. 
2.  Only one ADU may be created per principal dwelling unit. 
3.  The property owner must occupy either the principal dwelling unit or the ADU as their permanent residence for at least 8 months out of each year, and at no time receive rent for the owner-occupied unit. 
4.  An ADU may be developed in or adjacent to either an existing or new principal dwelling. 
5.  In no case can an ADU be more than 800 square feet of floor area, or less than 300 square feet, excluding any related garage area or other ancillary storage, or shall it exceed 40% of the floor area of the principal dwelling; nor have more than 2 bedrooms or 2 occupants. 
6.  ADUs are subject to the parking requirements of Sec. 7.1. 
7.  Application for a building permit for an ADU must be made to the Zoning Administrator and must include a sworn, notarized statement from the property owner stating that the owner will occupy one of the dwelling units on the premises, except for bona fide temporary absences, for 8 months out of each year and shall receive no rent on such unit. 
8.  The equipment of an accessory building or equipment of part of a principal building with one or more of the following or similar items, systems or equipment shall be considered prima facie evidence that such accessory building or such part of the principal building is a separate and distinct dwelling unit and is subject to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located: utility services; utility meters; mailboxes; kitchen equipment such as sink, stove, oven, and/or cabinets. 
B.  Home Occupation   
1.  No stock in trade can be kept or commodities sold on the premises; 
2.  No mechanical equipment can be used, except equipment that is normally used for family, domestic, or household purposes; 
3.  Other than a nameplate not more than 24 square inches in area, no exterior indication that the building or property is being used for any purpose other than the dwelling can be attached to the dwelling unit. No other signs, free standing or attached, related to the home occupation are permitted on the property; 
4.  Each person carrying on a home occupation must obtain a business license; 
5.  Except members of the family residing on the premises, no more than one employee can be employed and that employee cannot work more than 20 hours per week at the premises; 
6.  No sales displays can be visible from outside the dwelling; 
7.  Contact with the public is limited to no more than 2 visitors in the dwelling at one time; 
8.  Operations and client visits to the premises are prohibited between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.; 
9.  Artists and other studio type operations may host "studio tour" type functions once per month where members of the general public may visit the dwelling for the purpose of learning about the artist's work; 
10.  Commercial deliveries are limited to no more than 20 deliveries to the premises per week; 
11.  No more than 25% of the total floor area of the main dwelling can be used for a home occupation; 
12.  No outdoor open storage related to the home occupation is allowed on the premises; 
13.  No vehicle exceeding a one ton capacity is allowed to park on the premises 
14.  The term "home occupation" includes but is not limited to the following: 
a.  Art studio. 
b.  Design services. 
c.  Professional office of a learned profession, real estate agent, insurance agent, or other similar occupation. 
d.  Teaching. 
e.  Beauty parlor, barbershop. 
f.  Web based services. 
15.  The term "home occupation" does not include: 
a.  Restaurants. 
b.  Veterinarian offices. 
c.  Medical, dental, or chiropractic offices, or offices of similar health-related professions. 
Sec. 6.9. - Temporary Uses 

6.9.1. - Construction Buildings 
Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work only are permitted in any district but must be removed immediately upon completion of the construction work. 
6.9.2. - Open Air Seasonal Sales 
A.  Defined   
The outside sales of seasonal products such as Christmas trees and pumpkins. 
B.  Standards   
1.  All sales must be conducted on commercially-zoned land. 
2.  It is unlawful for any person to place, use or employ open air sales on private property without first obtaining a special event permit. 
3.  A set of operating rules addressing hours of operation, maintenance and security must be prepared and submitted with a permit application. 
4.  A site plan must be provided that depicts the proposed location of the sales area including any tents, fencing, temporary buildings, generators and lights. 
5.  The on-site presence of a manager during hours of operation is required. 
6.  Activities cannot obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation, including vehicular sight distances. 
7.  Any temporary structures used in association with the use must be removed within 48 hours after the final day of sales. 
6.9.3. - Portable Storage Container 
A.  Defined   
A container designed and rented or leased for the temporary storage of commercial, industrial or residential household goods that does not contain a foundation or wheels for movement. 
B.  Standards   
The Zoning Administrator may allow the placement of a portable storage container for a period not to exceed 7 days. 
6.9.4. - Mobile Food Facility 
A.  Defined   
A non-motorized, non-self-propelled vehicle that is readily movable or towable and that is commercially-designed to handle food preparation and service from which food or beverage is sold or offered for sale directly to a consumer. 
B.  Standards   
1.  Mobile food facilities may only be operated in mixed use and commercial districts. 
2.  Mobile food facilities may not be operated within 100 feet of any residentially zoned land except pursuant to a special event permit. 
3.  Mobile food facilities are subject to the requirements of Section 86-24. 
(Ord. No. O-17-04, § 2, 5-15-17) 
Article 7. - Site Development 
Sec. 7.1. - Parking and Access 

7.1.1. - Application 
No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the off-street parking and loading regulations. 
Dimensions 
A.  As a minimum, an off-street parking space shall consist of 180 square feet (9 feet by 20 feet) of storage space for one automobile, plus adequate space for maneuvering and parking one automobile. 

B.  For hotels and associated conference and meeting facilities, and for multistory office buildings, an offstreet parking space shall consist of 153 square feet (8 feet, 6 inches by 18 feet) of storage space for one automobile, plus adequate space for maneuvering and parking one automobile. 
C.  For compact vehicles only, as a minimum, an "offstreet parking space" shall consist of 127.5 square feet (8 feet, 6 inches by 15 feet) of storage space for 1 automobile, plus adequate space for maneuvering and parking 1 automobile. 
D.  Adequate space for maneuvering and parking 1 automobile shall mean the following: 
1.  Two-way aisles between parking spaces shall be at least 24 feet in width. 
2.  One-way aisles between parking spaces shall be at least 14 feet in width for 45-degree angle parking, at least 18 feet, 6 inches in width for 60-degree parking, and at least 24 feet in width for 90-degree angle parking. 

7.1.2. - Development Standards 
A.  One-, Two-Family Dwellings and Townhouses   
Parking spaces for one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and townhouse dwellings shall be on the same lot as the building to be served except as otherwise provided in this Section. No parking space shall be permitted between the front building line and the front property line except on a bona fide paved or graveled driveway leading to a garage, carport or other permanent parking space located to the rear of the front building line. Circular driveways are prohibited. Paved parking areas will not be permitted between the front building line and the front property line except where a variance permitting such parking has been approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals according to the requirements of the UDO. 

B.  Multiple-Family Parking   
Parking spaces for multiple-family dwelling shall be located on the same lot as the building to be served. No required yard for multiple-family dwellings in RM-18, RM-43, PO, C-1, C-2 and C-3 districts shall be used for the purpose of parking or loading. 
C.  Nonresidential Parking   
Parking spaces for nonresidential buildings shall be located on the same lot as the building to be served except where additional spaces are required by enlargement of use or, where facilities are provided and maintained collectively, the required spaces may be located no more than 300 feet from each building served. No more than 50% of the parking requirements for uses in commercial and industrial zoning districts may be provided in off-site public or private parking facilities located not more than 300 feet from principal entrances to buildings where uses are located. 
D.  Joint Parking   
No more than 50% of the parking requirements for theaters, auditoriums, nightclubs, restaurants or similar uses may be provided and used jointly by office and retail uses not normally open for business during the same hours. Up to 100% of the parking requirements for places of worship may be provided and used jointly by office and retail uses not normally open for business during the hours of church and similar services. 
E.  Common Parking   
Parking requirements for uses in institutional districts may be provided in common parking areas which shall be approved as part of the institution's comprehensive site development plan. 
F.  Multi-Use Parking   
Parking requirements for developments with more than 1 use shall be determined by adding the parking requirements for the different uses within the development. 
G.  Compact Vehicle Parking   
No more than 25% of the parking spaces required for multiple-family residential, institutional, commercial, and industrial uses may be designed for the use of compact vehicles. Parking spaces for compact vehicles shall be clearly designated by signs or other special markings for the exclusive use of such vehicles. 
H.  Enclosed Parking Requirements   
In a RS-17 development, one of the required parking spaces per unit must be enclosed within a structure attached to, adjacent to or enclosed within the structure of each dwelling unit. The other required spaces may be provided in driveways, carports or turning courts, but may not be provided on streets or common drives. 
I.  Accessible Parking   
Parking spaces for use by handicapped persons shall be provided as required by the state. Accessible required parking for personal storage facilities, "mini-warehouse" and similar temporary storage facilities shall not be permitted in aisles and driveways between storage buildings and facilities, but shall be located in a separate parking area on the same property as the facility to be served. Use of aisles and driveways shall be limited to driving, standing, loading and unloading. 
J.  Commercial Vehicle Restriction   
The parking of any bus, truck or other commercial or freight-carrying vehicle in excess of 1-ton capacity (10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight maximum) on a property located in any residential zoning district is prohibited. This regulation shall not prohibit commercial vehicles from loading or unloading in such districts, or from parking while servicing uses therein. 
K.  Bicycle Parking   
Bicycle parking shall be provided in all commercial zoning districts and installed according to the City Bicycle Parking Guidelines (2008), which are incorporated by reference herein. The UDO Administrator may grant a reduction or waiver from the required bicycle parking after considering the following factors: availability of public bicycle parking in the immediate area of the site, existing or potential shared parking arrangements, lack of on-site vehicle parking, and characteristics of the use of the site and/or building. 
L.  Change of Use   
No additional parking shall be required for a change in use, as allowed within the zoning district, for an existing building or the use of previously unused space within an existing building in the NMU, C-1, C-2, C-3, and MU zoning districts. 
M.  Additions   
No additional parking shall be required for structural additions that are 10% or less of the original gross floor area of the building in the NMU, C-1, C-2, C-3, and MU zoning districts. Additional parking shall be provided in accordance with Sec. 7.1.3. for any structure addition that exceeds 10% of the original gross floor area. 
7.1.3. - Off-Street Parking Requirements 
Use Parking Space Ratio Single-Family Dwellings, detached 1 per dwelling unit Single-Family Dwellings, attached 1 per dwelling unit Two-Family Dwellings 1 per dwelling unit Multiple-Family Dwellings, in General 1 per dwelling unit Multiple-Family Dwellings, (RM-43 Districts) 1 per dwelling unit, max. 2 per dwelling unit All dwellings in C-2 1 per dwelling unit* Rooming, Lodging and Boarding Houses 1 per each 2 bedrooms Personal Care Homes 1 per each 2 beds Places of Worship 1 per each 8 seats in the sanctuary or meeting room where seating is fixed or 1 per 50 square feet of gross floor area of sanctuary or meeting room where seating is not fixed Schools, Public or Private, Elementary and Middle 2 per classroom, plus 1 space per each 8 seats in auditorium or assembly area where seating is fixed or 1 per 50 square feet of gross floor area of auditorium or assembly area where seating is not fixed Hotels, Motels, Tourist Homes 0.75 space per guestroom Conference and Meeting Facilities, Place of Lodging 1 space per 40 square feet of floor area of largest assembly room where seating is not fixed Fraternity and Sorority Houses 1 per bed Homes for the Elderly 1 per 21/4 dwelling units Clubs, Social Organizations and Fraternal Lodges 1 per 100 square feet of gross floor area Government, Office, Retail, Service Establishment, Restaurant, Nightclubs and Similar Commercial Uses Min. 1 per 500 square feet of gross floor and max. 1 per 200 square feet of gross floor area Theaters, Auditoriums, Funeral Homes, Community Centers and Other Places of Assembly 1 per each 4 seats where seating is fixed; 1 per 25 square feet of gross floor area of assembly area where seating is not fixed Nursery Schools, Kindergartens, Day Care Centers 2 per classroom Hospitals, Sanitariums, Nursing Homes, Convalescent Homes, and Similar Uses 1 per 2 beds Bowling Alleys 5 per alley Manufacturing, Warehousing, and Storage Facilities, Distribution Centers; Wholesale Facilities 1 per 600 square feet of gross floor area Vehicle Repair Garages, Paint and Body Shops, Welding Shops, and Similar Establishments 1 per 200 square feet of gross floor area Vehicle Service Stations 3 per service bay All Commercial Zoning Districts (NMU, MU, C-1, C-2, and C-3) 1 bicycle parking space shall be provided for every 20 automobile parking spaces, min. 2 bicycle parking spaces per site max. 30 bicycle parking spaces per site  * Special exceptions to the minimum off-street parking requirements may be approved.  
(Ord. No. O-17-09, § 3, 6-19-17) 
7.1.4. - Loading Requirements 
Where required, one or more off-street loading berths or spaces shall be provided on the same or adjoining lot with the facility it serves, either inside or outside a building. A loading berth shall have minimum dimensions of 12 feet by 35 feet by 14 feet overhead clearance. A loading space need not be a full berth but shall be sufficient to allow normal loading operations appropriate to the property served. The UDO Administrator shall determine the sufficiency of the space, but in no case shall this space or its use hinder the free movement of vehicles and pedestrians over a street or sidewalk. 

A.  Retail Operations, Including Restaurants Within Hotels and Office Buildings, With a Total Gross Floor Area of 20,000 Square Feet Devoted to These Purposes   
One loading space for every 20,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof; one loading berth for every 40,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof. 
B.  Retail Operations and All First Floor Nonresidential Uses With a Gross Floor Area of Less Than 20,000 Square Feet; All Wholesale and Light Industrial Operations With a Gross Floor Area Less Than 10,000 Square Feet   
One loading space. 
C.  Office Buildings and Hotels   
One loading berth for every 100,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. 
D.  Industrial and Wholesale Operations With a Gross Floor Area of 10,000 Square Feet or More   
Loading Requirements Facility Size (gross floor area) Required loading 10,000-40,000 sq. ft. 1 space 40,000-100,000 sq. ft. 2 spaces 100,000-160,000 sq. ft. 3 spaces 160,000 sq. ft.-240,000 sq. ft. 4 spaces 240,000 sq. ft.-320,000 sq. ft. 5 spaces 320,000-400,000 sq. ft. 6 spaces Each 100,000 sq. ft. over 400,000 1 additional space  
7.1.5. - Downtown Decatur Parking District 
A.  Purpose   
The purpose of these regulations is to improve the downtown Decatur environment in the following ways: 
1.  Encourage, protect and enhance the pedestrian environment. 
2.  Improve the aesthetics of the downtown area. 
3.  Provide for parking in a way that does not diminish the pedestrian environment. 
4.  Encourage additional street level activity. 
5.  Better utilize existing, underused parking facilities. 
6.  Promote opportunities for environmentally sustainable residential and commercial development. 
7.  Promote opportunities for affordable residential development. 
B.  Application   
The provisions of Sec. 7.1., except as they conflict with this Section, apply to development in the Downtown Decatur Parking District (DDPD). 
C.  Boundaries   
The boundaries of the DDPD are shown upon the map designated as the "Downtown Decatur Parking District." The Downtown Decatur Parking District map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon, which shall be kept on file with the City clerk, are incorporated by reference as a part of this UDO and have the same force and effect as if it were fully set forth or described herein. 
D.  Additional Provisions   
1.  Change of Use   
No additional parking shall be required for a change in use, as allowed within the zoning district, for an existing building or the use of previously unused space within an existing building within the DDPD. 
2.  Additions   
No additional parking shall be required for structural additions that are 10% or less of the original gross floor area of the building within the DDPD. Additional parking shall be provided in accordance with Sec. 7.1.3. for any structure addition that exceeds 10% of the original gross floor area. 
3.  Parking Management   
a.  The DDPD allows shared and unbundled parking, and it includes both parking minimums and parking maximums. 
b.  Nothing in this Section shall mean that the minimum required parking spaces must be assigned to individual users or tenants on a site. 
E.  Parking Location   
Buildable density on a parcel within the DDPD shall be determined by the sum of the parking provided in the following locations: 
1.  Within the parcel 
2.  Off-site through Shared Parking pursuant to Sec. 7.1.5.G. below. 
a.  Residential uses may provide up to 50% of their required parking off-site. 
b.  Nonresidential uses may provide up to 80% of their required parking off-site. 
F.  Parking Ratios   
1.  All new buildings or additions in the DDPD shall provide parking at a flat rate of not less than one parking space for every 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area of building and not more than one parking space for every 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area of building. If it is a mixed use building or residential building, the portions of the building used exclusively for residential uses shall provide one parking space per dwelling unit and shall not exceed 2 spaces per dwelling unit. 
2.  All existing and new uses, as allowed within the zoning applicable to DDPD, in existing buildings within the DDPD are considered to comply with the parking requirements set forth in this Section. 
G.  Shared Parking   
1.  General Provisions   
a.  Shared parking is allowed within the DDPD. 
b.  Shared parking may be allowed between 2 or more uses to satisfy a portion of the minimum parking requirement. 
c.  Sites with shared parking must contain non-residential uses and may also contain a mix of nonresidential and residential uses. Sites containing only residential uses may not use shared parking. A use for which an application is being made for shared parking shall be located within 300 feet of the parking facility for residential uses or within 1,320 feet of the parking facility for nonresidential uses. Such distances shall be measured by the most direct route of pedestrian travel on the ground. 
2.  Shared Parking Privileges   
Shared parking privileges are conditioned upon and shall continue in effect only as long as the use for which shared parking is utilized has legally enforceable access to the required amount of shared parking. 
3.  Calculations   
a.  Where a shared parking arrangement is proposed, the UDO Administrator shall determine the number of parking spaces that may be shared based on a shared parking application prepared by the applicant. The UDO Administrator shall provide the Decatur parking occupancy rates spreadsheet to the applicant. 
b.  The shared parking application shall: 
i.  Identify the properties and uses for the application; 
ii.  Determine the number of parking spaces that would be required by applying the standard for the uses for all of the properties; and 
iii.  Determine the peak parking demand for the combined demand of all of the uses for all of the properties in the application using the Decatur parking occupancy rates spreadsheet. 
c.  Shared parking is only available for complementary uses with disparate parking demands. 
d.  The UDO Administrator may use the lesser of the 2 parking demands calculated in Sec. 7.1.5.G.3.b. above as the minimum number of parking spaces to be provided for all the properties and uses addressed in the application. 
e.  The Decatur parking occupancy rate spread-sheet is not an exhaustive list of land uses. If shared parking ratios in the Decatur parking occupancy rate spreadsheet are not available for the type of use the applicant is applying for the applicant may provide data collected at similar sites to establish local parking demand rates. 
Uses M-F M-F M-F Sat. & Sun. Sat. & Sun. Sat. & Sun. Peak Hour 8 am-
5 pm 6 pm-
12 am 12 am-
6 am 8 am-
5 pm 6 pm-
12 am 12 am-
6 am Max. spaces required Residential 60% 80% 80% 80% 100% 100% 150 Office/Warehouse 100% 20% 5% 5% 5% 5% 20 Commercial 90% 80% 5% 100% 70% 5% Hotel 70% 100% 100% 70% 100% 100% Restaurant 70% 100% 10% 70% 100% 20% 40 Movie Theater 40% 80% 10% 80% 100% 10% Entertainment 40% 100% 10% 80% 100% 50% Conference/Convention 100% 100% 5% 100% 100% 5% Institutional (non-church) 100% 20% 5% 10% 10% 5% Institutions (church) 25% 5% 5% 100% 50% 5% Raw Max. 138 164 125 149 191 159 210 Shared Max. 191 Savings 19  
4.  Shared Parking Agreement   
a.  Where a shared parking application includes 2 or more separately owned properties, a copy of a written, legally binding agreement providing for the shared use of parking (guaranteeing access to, use of, and management of shared parking spaces), shall be filed with the UDO Administrator. A copy of any amended, renewed, replacement or successor agreement shall be filed with the UDO Administrator within a reasonable amount of time following execution. Where a shared parking application includes 2 or more properties owned by the same person or entity, a sworn, notarized statement shall be submitted to the UDO Administrator, representing that, in the event of any change in ownership of any of the participating properties, a written, legally binding agreement providing for the continued shared use of parking (guaranteeing access to, use of, and management of designated parking spaces), will be entered into with subsequent owners and a copy provided to the UDO Administrator, with copies of all amended, renewed, replacement or successor agreements filed with the UDO Administrator within a reasonable amount of time following execution. 
b.  On a periodic basis, not less than biennially, the UDO Administrator shall review all allowed shared parking arrangements to ensure compliance with the guaranteed access to shared parking requirements set forth above. 
5.  Shared Parking Plan   
a.  The UDO Administrator may require an applicant for shared parking to submit a shared parking plan. A shared parking plan includes one or more of the following: 
i.  A site plan showing parking spaces intended for shared parking and their proximity to the uses they will serve. 
b.  The shared parking plan shall satisfy the following standards, as applicable: 
i.  Shared spaces for residential units must be located within 300 feet of dwelling unit entrances they serve. 
ii.  Shared spaces for nonresidential uses must be located within 1,320 feet of the principal building entrances of all sharing uses. 
H.  Parking District Maps   
The Downtown Decatur Parking District map, is adopted and incorporated in this Section. 
7.1.6. - Manufactured Homes and Trailers 
A.  Parking and Storage   
1.  Generally   
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store any trailer or mobile home, travel trailer, pickup coach, motorized home, boat, boat trailer (with boat on or off) or utility trailer on any street, alley, highway, or other public place, or on any tract of land owned by any person, occupied or unoccupied, within the City, except as provided in this article. 
2.  On Private Residential Property   
Any trailer or mobile home, travel trailer, pickup coach, motorized home, boat, boat trailer (with boat on or off) or utility trailer having a body width not exceeding 8 feet, provided its gross weight does not exceed 4,500 pounds or its body length exceed 30 feet, may be parked or stored on private residential property, subject to the conditions which are set out in this Section. At no time shall any trailer or mobile home, travel trailer, pickup coach, motorized home, boat, boat trailer (with boat on or off) or utility trailer exceeding the dimensions described in this Section be permitted to park or stand in any area within the corporate limits of the City except as provided in Sec. 7.1.6.A.3. below: 

a.  At no time shall such parked or stored trailer or mobile home, travel trailer, pickup coach, motorized home, boat, boat trailer (with boat on or off) or utility trailer be occupied or used for living, sleeping, or house-keeping purposes. 
b.  If the trailer or mobile home, travel trailer, pickup coach, motorized home, boat, boat trailer (with boat on or off) or utility trailer is parked or stored outside of a completely enclosed garage, it shall be parked or stored to the rear of the front line of the main building and not less than 20 feet from any rear lot line. Where a lot abuts 2 streets, it must be parked or stored within the building restriction lines of both streets. 

c.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Sec. 7.1.6.A.2.b. above, a trailer or mobile home, travel trailer, pickup coach, motorized home, boat, boat trailer (with boat on or off) or utility trailer may be parked anywhere on the premises for loading or unloading purposes, provided the loading or unloading is completed within 8 hours. 
d.  Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any street, alley or highway for not longer than one hour, except when actually loading or unloading, subject to any other and further prohibitions, regulations or limitations imposed by the traffic and parking regulations or ordinances for that street, alley or highway. 
e.  Pickup coaches may be parked on any street, alley or highway for a maximum of 6 hours, provided such parking is not in conflict with any other prohibitions, regulations or limitations imposed by the traffic and parking regulations or ordinances for that street or alley or highway. 
3.  In Commercial Districts; Office-Type Trailers   
a.  Any trailer or mobile home, travel trailer, pickup coach, motorized home, boat, boat trailer (with boat on or off) or utility trailer may be parked in districts zoned commercial subject to the restrictions and regulations of the City UDO. Such trailer or mobile home, travel trailer, pickup coach, motorized home, boat, boat trailer (with boat on or off), or utility trailer may be used only as accessory structure on the property on which it is located, and must be parked or stored in compliance with Sec. 7.1.6.A.2. 
b.  Office-type trailers used by any person actually engaged in the construction or reconstruction of any structure are permitted, provided that they are parked on the site of the construction or reconstruction, and a permit for such parking of office-type trailers is granted by the City Manager and for such period of time as he shall approve. 
Sec. 7.2. - Landscaping 

7.2.1. - Walls, Fences and Planting 
Walls and fences and ornamental trees and shrubs may be located within the yards except as provided herein: 
A.  No wall or fence in a front yard shall exceed height of 4 feet. 
B.  No wall or fence in a rear or side yard shall exceed a height of 8 feet. Where 8' fencing is allowed, it must be reduced in height to 4' on any lot line abutting a required front yard. 

C.  In all use districts, except the general business district, no fence, wall, shrubbery, sign, marquee, or other obstruction to vision between the heights of 3 feet and 15 feet shall be permitted within 20 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of 2 streets or of a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way line. 

7.2.2. - Required Buffer Areas 
Buffer areas shall be established and maintained by the property owner under the following provisions: 
A.  A buffer area which provides visual screening and a screening fence or wall shall be established and maintained by the owner as provided below in any required side or rear yard when a development in a RM-18, RM-22, RM-43, PO, C-1, C-2 or C-3 district adjoins a R-85, R-60, R-50 or RS-17 zoning district, or when a development in a C-1, C-2, or C-3 district adjoins a RM-18, RM-22 or RM-43 district. 
B.  Minimum fence or wall height shall be 8 feet for developments in C-1, C-2 and C-3 districts. Minimum fence or wall height shall be 6 feet for developments in RM-18, RM-22, RM-43 and PO districts. 
C.  The requirements for a fence or wall may be waived by the UDO Administrator upon presentation of field survey data by the property owner or developer which shows that construction of the fence or wall would destroy existing vegetation which, in itself, provides visual screening between the development and the adjoining residential district. 
D.  Required buffer areas shall be maintained as a planted area, using existing vegetation or, when required, additional plantings as provided in this Section. 
E.  Required buffer areas shall be appropriately landscaped with trees, shrubs, flowers, grass, stone, rocks and other landscaping materials. 
F.  Required buffer areas shall not be used for parking or a structure other than a fence or drainage improvements required by the City. However, a buffer area may be used for vehicular access and utility easements if these uses are provided approximately perpendicular to the greater distance of the buffer area and for drainage improvements required by the City based upon competent engineering studies which show these improvements to be necessary, upon approval of the UDO Administrator. 
G.  Except as otherwise provided, the natural topography of the land shall be preserved and natural growth shall not be disturbed beyond that which is necessary to prevent a nuisance, to thin natural growth where too dense for normal growth, or to remove diseased, misshapen or dangerous and decayed timbers. However, a slope easement may be cleared and graded where required to prevent soil erosion upon approval of the UDO Administrator; this easement may cover no more than 20% of the required buffer area, and shall be immediately replanted upon completion of easement improvements. 
H.  Where the conditions described in Sec. 7.2.2.G. above cannot be met by reason of the topography of the land or of the prior removal of or lack of vegetation and foliage, the owner of the buffer area may install a permanent screen of evergreen plantings, so designed and developed to provide visual screening between the property described herein. These plantings shall consist of evergreen trees or shrubs not less than 6 feet in height, or trees or shrubs which will, in normal growth, attain a height of 6 feet within 3 years. The following plants shall be approved for this purpose but shall not be exclusive of other plants which may be suitable, provided that they can form a hardy screen, dense enough and high enough both to interrupt vision and to diffuse the transmission of sound: 

1.  Viburnum awabuki 'Chindo' (Chindo Viburnum) 
2.  Cryptomeria japonica (Japanese Cryptomeria) 
3.  Cupressus × leylandii (Leyland Cypress) 
4.  Ilex burfordi (Burford Holly). 
5.  Ilex 'Nellie R. Stevens' (Nellie Stevens Holly) 
6.  Ilex opaca (American Holly). 
7.  Ilex × attenuata 'Fosteri' (Foster Holly) 
8.  Ilex × 'Emily Bruner' ('Emily Bruner Holly) 
9.  Juniperus virginiana (Eastern Red Cedar) 
10.  Magnolia grandiflora (Southern Magnolia). 
11.  Magnolia grandiflora 'Little Gem' (Little Gem Magnolia) 
12.  Magnolia grandiflora 'DD Blanchard' (DD Blanchard Magnolia) 
13.  Osmanthus fragrans (Tea Olive) 
14.  Pinus strobus (White Pine) 
15.  Pinus virginiana (Virginia Pine) 
16.  Thuja 'Emerald Green' (Emerald Green Arborvitae) 
17.  Thuja 'Green Giant' (Green Giant Arborvitae) 
I.  Any grading, improvements or construction adjacent thereto shall be conducted far enough from the buffer area so as not to disturb or encroach upon the buffer area. 
J.  Required buffer areas shall be designated on each plat and recorded as a permanent easement. 
7.2.3. - Outdoor Landscape Watering 
A.  Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
1.  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
2.  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable local ordinances and state guidelines; 
3.  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
4.  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
5.  Watering personal food gardens; 
6.  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
7.  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
8.  Hand-watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
9.  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
10.  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
11.  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
12.  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
13.  Hydroseeding. 
B.  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this Section. 
C.  Sworn officers of the public safety department, the building official or codes enforcement officer or a designated representative of the above shall have authority to enforce the requirements of this Section. 
7.2.4. - Applicability; Barrier Curb and Landscaping Requirements 
All surface parking lots in any commercial or mixed use zoning districts, with a total of 30 or more parking spaces, whether primary or accessory in use and whether commercial or noncommercial, shall have minimum barrier curb and landscaping requirements as follows: 
A.  Curbing or barrier blocks must be installed around the perimeter of parking lots and required landscaped areas to prevent vehicle encroachment onto adjacent property, rights-of-way and landscaped areas, except abutting a building or structure and at points of ingress and egress into the facility. Curbing may have openings to allow drainage to enter and percolate through landscaped areas. 
B.  Curbing or barrier blocks must be a minimum of 6 inches in height and a minimum of 8 inches in width. Curbing must be concrete or stone, securely installed, and maintained in good condition. 
C.  Where the end of a parking space abuts a landscaped area, curbing or barrier blocks may be placed in the parking space at a maximum of 2 feet from the end of the parking space. This 2-foot-wide area may have the pavement removed and be developed as part of the required landscaped area. 

D.  Surface parking lots shall have a minimum landscaped area equal to at least 10% of the paved area within such lot. In no case shall a parking lot owner be required to provide landscaped areas that exceed 10% of the paved area. 
E.  A minimum of one tree per 8 parking spaces shall be included in the required landscaped areas. For the purpose of satisfying this requirement, existing trees that are 21/2 inches or more in caliper as measured at a height of 36 inches above ground level shall be considered to be equivalent to one or more newly planted trees on the basis of one tree for each 21/2 inches of caliper. 
F.  In addition to trees, ground cover must be provided to protect tree roots, prevent erosion, and reduce water evaporation. Ground cover may consist of shrubs, liriope muscari, pine bark mulch, and similar landscaping materials. 
G.  Shrubs shall be maintained at a maximum height of 21/2 feet, except where such shrubs are screening the parking surface from an adjacent residential use. 
H.  In the event that landscaped areas are in the interior of a parking lot, they shall be a minimum of 6 feet in length with a minimum area of 36 square feet. 
I.  Continuous landscaped buffer strips shall be constructed along sidewalks and public rights-of-way where surface parking lots are adjacent to such sidewalks or public rights-of-way except at points of ingress and egress into the facility. Such landscaped buffer strips shall be a minimum of 5 feet in width and shall contain, in addition to ground cover, trees planted a maximum of 421/2 feet on center along the entire length. 
J.  Newly planted trees shall be a minimum of 21/2 inches in caliper as measured at a height of 6 inches above ground level, shall be a minimum of 10 feet in height, shall have a 40-foot minimum mature height, and shall be drought tolerant. Trees shall be planted at a minimum of 30 inches from any barrier curb, so as to prevent injury to trees from vehicle bumpers. 
K.  Where landscaped areas are located adjacent to vehicle overhangs, the trees shall be planted in line with the side stripes between parking spaces in order to avoid injury to trees by vehicle bumpers. 
L.  All landscaped areas, including trees located in the public right-of-way that are counted in the fulfillment of this requirement, shall be properly maintained in accordance with approved landscape plans. In the event that a tree or any plant material dies, it shall be replaced within 6 months so as to meet all requirements of this Section and to allow for planting in the appropriate planting season. 
M.  If it is determined by the City arborist that implementation of these regulations will result in the loss of parking spaces in existing lots, the UDO Administrator may increase the allowable percentage compact car spaces from 25% up to 35% so as to minimize the loss of parking spaces. 
N.  Notwithstanding Sec. 7.2.4.M. above, existing parking lots shall not be required to reduce the number of parking spaces by more than 3% as a result of implementing these landscaping regulations. 
O.  Upon written application by any person subject to the provisions of this Section, the Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized to grant administrative variances to the requirements of this Section only upon making all of the following findings: 
1.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, topography, subsurface conditions, overhead structures, or the existence of sufficient trees in the public right-of-way within 10 feet of the property line; 
2.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and 
3.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this article. 
Sec. 7.3. - Signs 

7.3.1. - Preamble and Purpose 
A.  In order to protect the public safety, to protect the tranquil environment, to protect community aesthetics, to protect the public investment in streets and highways, to promote commerce and to provide for the orderly and reasonable display of advertising for the benefit of the citizens of the City, it is hereby determined that the public health, safety and welfare require the adoption of this Section. 
B.  The purpose of this Section is to recognize that although signs and advertising are necessary, they should be reasonably regulated in the interest of protecting the public health, safety, welfare, environment and community aesthetics by the establishment of standards for location, size, illumination, number, construction and maintenance of all signs and advertising structures and for the prohibition of certain signs and advertising structures in the City. 
C.  The City further finds that the rights of persons to convey messages through signs and protection of First Amendment and other constitutional rights must be balanced with other important public interests such as traffic safety hazards, protecting property values, and restricting visual clutter that results in safety dangers as well as degradation of the City's important interests in protecting and enhancing its aesthetic environment. The City finds that regulation of the location, size, placement and design of signs through the following regulations is necessary to protect these public interests, particularly with regard to traffic and pedestrian safety as well as aesthetics, in an appropriate and balanced manner. 
7.3.2. - General Provisions 
A.  Defacing of Official Signs and Notices   
No person shall injure, deface, obliterate, remove, take down, disturb or in any other manner interfere with any signboard containing the name of any street or public place, or any bulletin board, or sign or notice erected, posted or placed, bearing the name of the City commission or any officer thereof. 
B.  Business License Required   
No person shall engage in or carry on the business or occupation of billposting, advertising, sign painting, outdoor advertising, installing or maintaining signs unless said business or occupation is in compliance with the City's Business Occupation Tax Ordinance. 
C.  Fastening Signs, Notices and Posters to Property-On Public Property   
1.  Generally   
It shall be unlawful for any person, except a public officer or employee in the performance of a public duty, to paste, print, nail, stake, tack or otherwise fasten any card, banner, handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind, or cause the same to be done, on any curbstone, lamppost, pole, hydrant, bridge, tree or area upon any public or publicly maintained street, sidewalk, right-of-way or property within the City, except as may be required by the provisions of this UDO, other ordinances of the City or the laws of the state or the United States or as may be otherwise authorized by this Section. 
2.  Consent of City Manager Required for City Property   
It shall be unlawful for any person, except a public officer or employee in the performance of a public duty, to paste, post, paint, print, nail, tack or otherwise fasten any card, banner, handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind, or cause the same to be done, on any City property. Any advertisement prohibited by this Section or Sec. 7.3.2.C.1. may be taken down, moved or destroyed by the City authorities. 
3.  Consent of Owner, Holder, Lessee or Agent Required for Private Property 
It shall be unlawful for any person, except a public officer or employee in the performance of a public duty or a private person giving legal notice, to paste, post, paint, print, nail, tack or otherwise fasten any card, banner, handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind, or cause the same to be done, upon any property without the written consent of the owner, holder, lessee, agent or trustee thereof. Any advertisement prohibited by this Section may be taken down, moved or destroyed by the City authorities. 
D.  Scattering Paste, Glue, Waste Matter, Paint or Other Materials on Public or Private Property   
No person shall scatter, daub or leave any paint, paste, glue or other substance used for painting or affixing advertising matter upon any public street or sidewalk, or scatter or throw or permit to be scattered or thrown any waste matter, paper, cloth or materials of whatsoever kind removed from signs or other advertising matter on any public street or private property. 
E.  Noncommercial Messages   
Any sign allowed herein may contain, in lieu of any other message or copy, any lawful noncommercial message that does not direct attention to a business operated for profit, or to a product, commodity or service for sale or lease, or to any other commercial interest or activity, so long as said sign complies with the size, height, area and other requirements of this Section. 
7.3.3. - Sign Standards 
A.  Awning, Marquee, Canopy and Projecting Signs   
Awning, marquee, canopy and projecting signs shall be securely fastened to the building surface, shall be no less than 8 feet above the ground when erected over pedestrian walkways and no less than 14 feet above areas of vehicle access at the lowest extremity of the sign. 



B.  Freestanding, Ground and Pole Signs   
Freestanding, ground and pole signs shall be securely affixed to a substantial support structure which is permanently and securely attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support. 

C.  Lighting Requirements   
No sign shall give off light which glares, blinds, or has any other such adverse effect on vehicular traffic. The light from an illuminated sign shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. No illuminated signs shall be constructed or maintained within 75 feet of any single-family dwelling. Signs with flashing, intermittent or animated illumination or effect are prohibited. Signs which simulate official traffic control, warning or public service signs are prohibited. Digital changeable copy signs and signs which include series, lines or rows of electric, neon or other lights are prohibited. 
D.  Construction and Maintenance;   
All signs for which a permit is required shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with City building and electrical codes. Such signs, together with their supports, braces, guys, anchors and similar parts, shall be maintained and protected as necessary to maintain a clean and safe appearance and condition. The UDO Administrator may cause to be removed after due notice any sign which shows gross neglect, becomes dilapidated or is not well maintained. 
E.  Fire Safety   
No sign shall obstruct any fire escape, any means of egress or ventilation or shall prevent free passage from one part of a roof to another part thereof, nor shall any sign be attached in any manner to a fire escape. 
F.  Vehicular Traffic   
No sign shall interfere with any roadway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of vehicular traffic. 
G.  Natural Features   
No sign shall be erected, painted or drawn on any tree, rock or similar natural feature. 
H.  Ownership   
No sign shall be located on any building, fence, or other property belonging to another person without the consent of the owner. 
I.  Prohibited Activities   
No sign shall advertise an activity, service, product or other item prohibited by the laws and regulations of the United States or the state or by the ordinances and regulations of the City. 
J.  Sound   
No sign shall emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any public roadway, public right-of-way or public sidewalk by a person of normal hearing. 
K.  Public Roads, Rights-of-Way and Utility Poles   
No sign, sign structure or advertising shall be located on or within any public roadway or public right-of-way, or shall any sign, sign structure or advertising device be located on any utility pole, except signs for public governmental purposes specifically authorized by local, state or federal law. 
L.  Street Intersections   
No sign or sign structure above a height of 3 feet shall be located within 15 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines extended of 2 streets, or of street intersection with a railroad right-of-way. However, a sign support structure of not more than 10 inches in diameter may be located within such intersection visibility area if all other requirements of this Section are met, and the lowest elevation of the sign surface is at least 12 feet above ground level. 

7.3.4. - Permit Required 
A permit shall be required for all permanent and temporary signs other than those specifically exempted from obtaining a permit by this Section. 
7.3.5. - Application 
A.  Application for sign permit shall be made through the office of the sign official. The applicant must submit sign plans indicating size, type of lettering, configurations, coloring, lighting and any electrical and structural specifications as per the requirements of this Section and the building codes. Standardized sign plans may be submitted in fulfillment of this requirement. Site plans showing specific location of signs shall be submitted with each application. 
B.  Each application shall contain an agreement to indemnify and hold the City harmless of all damages, demands, or expenses of every character which may in any manner be caused by the sign, sign structure or advertising matter. 
C.  The UDO Administrator shall process and approve or deny all sign applications within 20 calendar days of the City's receipt of a completed application including all required sign permit fees. This 20 day period may be extended if agreed to by the UDO Administrator and the applicant. Applications that do not comply with the provisions of these sign regulations, are incomplete, or contain false material statements shall be denied by the UDO Administrator. Complete applications that are in compliance with these sign regulations shall be approved. The UDO Administrator shall provide written notice to the applicant of the decision made on the application within the required time period. Should the application be denied, the reasons for the denial shall be stated in the written notice. If the UDO Administrator fails to act within the required time period, including any extension, the sign application shall be deemed to have been granted. Any resubmitted application shall be deemed to have been applied for on the date of resubmittal. Appeals from the issuance or denial of any sign permit shall be as provided in Sec. 11.2.9. 
7.3.6. - Fees 
A.  Schedule   
Permit fees shall be payable with the application for the sign permit. Sign permit fees shall be paid according to the schedule as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
B.  Double Fee Penalty   
If a sign is erected or painted before the issuance of permits, a penalty equal to the sign permit fee for the sign shall be charged. 
7.3.7. - Inspection 
The UDO Administrator may inspect, or cause to be inspected by his authorized representative, every sign installed under the provisions of this Section to determine that each sign meets the requirements set forth in this Section. 
7.3.8. - Signs Exempt From Permits 
The following signs are exempt from the permit requirements of this Section: 
A.  Official traffic or warning signs; 
B.  Changing of copy of bulletin board, poster board, display casement, marquee or changeable copy sign and the moving or relocating of embellishments that does not increase the area of embellishments; 
C.  Decorative flags or buntings; 
D.  Symbolic flag and award flag of institution or business, one for each business or one for each 50 feet of street frontage; 
E.  Construction signs not exceeding 32 square feet in area; 
F.  Residential real estate signs not exceeding 24 square feet in area; 
G.  Political signs (see Sec. 7.3.12.N.); 
H.  Directional signs not exceeding 6 square feet in area; 
I.  Residential Signs (see Sec. 7.3.12.B. and C.); 
J.  Signs of a governmental body, governmental agency or public authority, including traffic signs, traffic signals, traffic regulatory devices and warnings, official flags, emblems, official instruments, official public notices, and similar governmental signs or devices; 
K.  Temporary window signs and banners; and 
L.  Weekend directional signs (see Sec. 7.3.12.R.). 
7.3.9. - Prohibited Signs and Sign Devices 
The following signs and sign devices are prohibited under the provisions of this Section: 
A.  Signs that display intermittent lights resembling flashing lights associated with danger. 
B.  Signs using the word "stop" or "danger," or imitation of an official traffic control, warning or public service sign. 
C.  Signs which provide background of colored lights blending with traffic signals which might confuse a motorist when viewed from normal approach distance of 25 feet to 300 feet. 
D.  Any sign attached or applied to benches, trash receptacles or any other unapproved supporting structure. 
E.  Pennants, streamers, ribbons, whirligigs, spinning devices and similar-type devices. 
F.  Signs, other than temporary signs, which are not securely affixed to the ground or securely anchored so as to be immobile or otherwise affixed in a permanent manner to an approved supporting structure. 
G.  Signs attached to or placed on a vehicle that is parked on private property, except service vehicles parked temporarily parked there. 
H.  Roof signs. 
I.  Animated, flashing and digital changeable copy signs. 
J.  Billboards. 
K.  Flashing signs. 
L.  Marquee signs except for bona fide theaters. 
M.  Rotating signs. 
N.  Portable signs. 
O.  Commercial product signs on residentially zoned property. 
P.  Off-premises signs. 
Q.  Signs advertising alcoholic beverages. 
R.  Temporary signs unless permitted by this Section. 
7.3.10. - Nonconforming Signs 
A.  Signs which on the effective date of the ordinance from which this Section derives were legally erected and maintained under previous ordinances and regulations, or which become nonconforming with respect to the requirements of this Section, may be continued so long as the size of the sign is not increased beyond that existing as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this Section derives or any change thereto is made in conformance with this Section. However, the display face of a nonconforming roof sign located on an owner-occupied building may be replaced or repainted with a new display face so long as the total area of the sign is not increased. 
B.  A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another sign except one which complies with the requirements of this Section. 
C.  Minor repair and maintenance of nonconforming signs such as repainting, electrical repairs and neon tubing shall be permitted. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of a nonconforming sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this Section. 
D.  Illegally installed or non-permitted nonconforming signs, nonconforming signs for which no permit was issued, and all nonconforming temporary signs shall be removed or made to conform with the requirements of this Section within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this Section derives. 
7.3.11. - Vacant Buildings, Premises or Property 
A.  Any business identification signs advertising a service or commodity associated with a vacated building premises or closed business shall be removed or resurfaced by the owner or tenant not later than 60 days from time the premises are vacated or the business closes. 
B.  Real estate signs on a vacant or undeveloped property in a residential or professional office zoning district shall be limited to 1 residential real estate sign not exceeding 6 square feet in area. Real estate signs on a vacant or undeveloped property in a commercial zoning district shall be limited to 1 sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area. 

7.3.12. - Permitted Signs 
A.  Generally   
1.  In addition to general regulations and restrictions applying to all signs, no signs shall be permitted except in compliance with the following specific regulations and restrictions. Unless defined in this Section, the meaning of such terms as "single-family dwelling," "high density, single-family dwelling," "street frontage," and so forth shall be as defined in this UDO. 
2.  In addition to any other signs authorized in residential districts, one noncommercial sign not exceeding 2 square feet in sign area for each dwelling unit ("residential sign") is authorized. Such residential signs may be ground signs located within the yard areas of such residential lots or window signs. No commercial message may be placed on said residential signs. 
B.  Single-Family Dwellings, Two-Family Dwellings, and Townhouse   
Signs for single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, or townhouse shall be limited to 1 residential real estate sign not exceeding 6 square feet for each single-family, two-family, or townhouse dwelling or lot. Such signs shall be placed no closer than 10 feet to the street right-of-way except that when a residential structure is located within 10 feet of the street right-of-way, the sign shall be located as close as possible to the residential structure. Residential real estate signs shall be removed within 5 days of the signing of an agreement for the sale, rental or lease of the dwelling or lot. The sale of 4 or more dwellings in a development under construction may also be advertised by 1 residential real estate sign not exceeding 24 square feet in area. 

C.  Multiple-Family Dwellings and Developments and RS-17 Residential Developments   
Signs for multiple-family dwellings and developments of any size and RS-17 residential developments of 6 or more units shall be limited to 1 permanent freestanding sign or 1 permanent wall sign mounted on and parallel to the surface of the building, not exceeding 24 square feet in area, for the purpose of identifying the development. Multiple-family dwellings and developments of less than 12 units may have 1 residential real estate sign not exceeding 6 square feet. Multiple-family dwellings of 12 or more dwelling units may have 1 residential real estate sign not exceeding 12 square feet in area. 

D.  Roominghouses and Boardinghouses   
Signs for roominghouses and boardinghouses shall be limited to 1 permanent, nonilluminated sign not exceeding 72 square inches mounted flat against the wall of the building. 

E.  Permitted Home Occupations   
Signs for permitted home occupations in residential zoning districts shall be limited to 1 nonilluminated nameplate not exceeding 24 square inches in area mounted flat against a wall of the dwelling where the home occupation is located. 

F.  Signs for Churches and Other Places of Worship Located in Institutional Zoning Districts   
In lieu of signs permitted in Sec. 7.3.12.E. churches and other places of worship located in institutional zoning districts may have signs described as follows: 
1.  One permanent bulletin board not exceeding 6 square feet in area. 

2.  One temporary sign not exceeding 24 square feet in area announcing a special event. 

3.  A maximum of 2 permanent freestanding signs, or a maximum of 2 permanent wall signs mounted on and parallel to the surface of the building, or a maximum of 1 permanent freestanding sign and 1 permanent wall sign mounted on and parallel to the surface of the building. Each permanent freestanding or wall sign shall not exceed 45 square feet in area of which no more than 32 square feet may be a changeable copy panel. Permanent freestanding or wall signs shall be subject to approval of the City Commission, which shall determine the compliance of such signs, including location, size, design in accordance with the following criteria and color and appearance. However, the total number of such signs shall not exceed 2, and the size of each sign shall not exceed 45 square feet in area of which no more than 32 square feet may be a changeable copy panel. The following standards shall be considered in determining whether such signs are approved: 
a.  Suitability of the proposed signs in view of the character of the existing and proposed buildings of the church or other place of worship. 
b.  Suitability of the proposed signs in view of the character and development of the adjacent and nearby properties. 
c.  Suitability of the proposed signs in view of the area of the property on which the church or other place of worship is located. 
d.  Suitability of the proposed sign in view of the number and size of the streets on which the church or other place of worship is located. 
e.  Suitability of the proposed signs in view of the amount of public street frontage which the church or other place of worship has. 

G.  Public Buildings, Parks, Schools, Cemeteries, and Other Public Uses, Private and Parochial Elementary and Secondary Schools, Hospitals, Churches and Other Places of Worship   
Signs for public buildings, parks, schools, cemeteries, and other public uses, private and parochial elementary and secondary schools, hospitals, churches and other places of worship shall be limited to the following: 
1.  One permanent freestanding sign or 1 permanent wall sign mounted on and parallel to the surface of the building, not exceeding 24 square feet in area; 

2.  One permanent bulletin board, including changeable copy panel, not exceeding 24 square feet in area; and 

3.  One temporary sign not exceeding 24 square feet in area announcing a special event. 

H.  Colleges, Seminaries, and Other Institutions of Higher Learning   
Signs for colleges, seminaries, and other institutions of higher learning shall be limited to the following: 
1.  One permanent freestanding sign or 1 permanent wall sign mounted on and parallel to the surface of the building, not exceeding 24 square feet in area, for each street on which the institution has at least 500 linear feet of street frontage; 

2.  One permanent sign or bulletin board not exceeding 6 square feet in area; and 

3.  One temporary sign of any size announcing a special event provided such sign is not placed or suspended closer than 10 feet to any property line or street right-of-way line. 

I.  Nursery Schools, Day Care Centers, Nursing Homes, Sanitariums, Homes for the Elderly   
Signs for nursery schools, day care centers, nursing homes, sanitariums, homes for the elderly shall be limited to 1 permanent freestanding sign not exceeding 12 square feet in area located not closer than 10 feet to any property line. 

J.  Multiple-Tenant Office Buildings   
In addition to signs permitted in Sec. 7.3.12.K. for storefront or street-facing businesses, signs for multiple tenant office buildings shall be limited to a lobby directory except that a multistory office building in excess of 50,000 square feet may have 1 permanent business identification freestanding sign or 1 permanent business identification wall sign not exceeding 2 square feet of sign area per 5,000 square feet of building space to identify an office-type business or businesses which are located in the building. 

K.  Storefront or Street-Facing Business   
Signs for a storefront or street-facing business shall be limited to the following: 
1.  One Permanent Primary Sign   
The primary business identification sign may be a wall sign, a freestanding sign, a window sign, or awning or canopy sign. Such signs are not required to face the street, but shall be on a building side which is visible from the street. If a wall, a freestanding or awning or canopy sign, such sign shall not exceed 1 square foot of sign area for each linear foot of street frontage of the business, the total sign area not to exceed 500 square feet. If a window sign, such sign shall not exceed one-tenth of the total window surface of the window in which it is located. 

2.  One Permanent Secondary Sign   
The secondary business identification sign may be a wall sign, a window sign or an awning or canopy sign. If a wall, an awning or canopy sign, such sign shall not exceed 1 square foot of sign area for each linear foot of street frontage of the business for the street to which it is oriented, with a total sign area not to exceed 250 square feet. If a window sign, the area of such sign shall not exceed one-tenth of the total window surface area of the window in which it is located. 

3.  Temporary Signs Limited To:   
a.  Window signs, provided the area covered by such signs does not exceed one-sixth of window surface area of the window in which it is located and there are no more than 3 temporary signs per 160 square feet of window surface area; or 

b.  Banners not exceeding 150 square feet in area. Banners may be used for a period not to exceed 30 days in each calendar year. 

L.  Vehicular Businesses   
Signs for vehicular businesses shall be limited to signs permitted for storefront or street-facing businesses, as regulated by Sec. 7.3.12.K. above, and 1 business identification pole sign, the area of which shall not exceed 1 square foot of sign area for each linear foot of street frontage of the business, the total sign area not to exceed 175 square feet. 

M.  Shopping Centers   
In addition to signs permitted for individual businesses located in a shopping center, as may be regulated by Sec. 7.3.12.K. and Sec. 7.3.12.L., a shopping center may have 1 permanent pole sign or 1 permanent freestanding sign of not more than 3 square feet of sign area per each 1,000 square feet of building space, the total sign area not to exceed 500 square feet, to identify the shopping center and businesses which are located in the center. 

N.  Political Signs   
Political signs are permitted in all zoning districts, but they shall be limited only to developed properties. These signs are permitted for a period of not more than 6 weeks before a duly authorized election date. Political signs shall be removed within 1 week following the authorized general election date or within 1 week of the candidate's or issue's election or defeat, whichever comes first. Primary and general election dates shall be established by applicable federal, state or local law. Political signs shall not exceed 8 square feet in area and shall not exceed 2 signs per lot. Political signs shall not be located closer than 17 feet to the edge of a public road surface. However, no political sign shall be permitted in a public right-of-way. Political signs displayed in nonresidential or multiple-family zoning districts may only be placed in the window area of the primary structure. 
Political signs may be displayed on private property in connection with political campaigns or noncommercial civic health, safety or welfare campaigns. Political signs shall not exceed 8 square feet in sign area and shall not exceed a height of 6 feet. Political signs displayed in nonresidential or multifamily zoning districts may only be placed in the window areas of the primary structure. All such signs shall be removed within 10 days of the date of conclusion of the campaign. Candidates are obligated and required to remove campaign signs placed on their behalf that are unlawfully located or that extend beyond the conclusion of the campaign and shall be liable to the City for the costs incurred in removing such unlawful signs. Campaign signs are specifically prohibited in or upon any public right-of-way or other public property and shall not be located closer than 17 feet from the curb of a public road surface. 

O.  Service Stations   
Signs for service stations shall be limited to the following: 
1.  One permanent business identification pole sign with price panel, the maximum area of which shall be determined by the regulations for vehicular businesses in Sec. 7.3.12.L. 

2.  One permanent principal business identification wall sign mounted flat on the building for each street facing, the maximum area of which shall be determined by the regulations for storefront or street-facing businesses in Sec. 7.3.12.K. 

3.  One temporary A-frame or ground sign for display purposes not exceeding 6 feet in height and 4 feet in width. 

4.  Temporary signs shall be permitted, provided that they are limited to window signs, and the total window surface area covered by such signs does not exceed one-fourth of the window surface area of the window in which they are located. 

5.  Pennants, banners and other similar devices shall be permitted only for grand openings. The display time shall not exceed 10 days total time. 
6.  Prohibited signs and sign devices at service stations. The following signs and sign devices are prohibited: temporary promotional signs other than window signs, tire and oil displays placed away from the building, signs of wood or other combustible materials, signs attached to pumps and light poles other than directional signs, roof signs, vehicles used as signs, light bulb lines and searchlights. 
P.  Professional Offices   
Signs for a professional office shall be limited to a nonilluminated permanent freestanding business identification sign not exceeding 12 feet in area. Such sign may only announce the firm name and the service or product represented. 

Q.  Construction Signs   
During construction on or development of property, construction signs shall be permitted as follows: 
1.  Residential and professional office zoning districts. One construction sign not exceeding 24 square feet in area. 

2.  Commercial zoning districts. One construction sign not exceeding 100 square feet in area. 

R.  Weekend Directional Signs   
Weekend directional signs are permitted in all zoning districts and shall be limited to the following: 
1.  Weekend directional signs shall convey directions to a specific place or event. 
2.  Weekend directional signs shall be allowed on weekends from 5:00 p.m. on Fridays to 11:59 p.m. on Sundays. 
3.  Each weekend directional sign shall be legibly marked with the name of the owner who shall be responsible for removing signs by 11:59 p.m. on Sunday. If a party other than the owner is to be responsible for the removal of the sign, then the responsible party's name may be substituted. This information must be written in weatherproof ink or paint upon at least 1 face of the weekend directional sign and in letters of at least 1/2 inch in height. Each owner or responsible party shall give notice in the form of a letter to the City providing the name, address and telephone number of the sign owner or responsible party. 
4.  Weekend directional signs shall not exceed 4 square feet of sign area and 3 feet in height and shall be allowed to have 1 face on each side of the sign. Weekend directional signs shall be mounted on an independent post or pole and shall not be affixed in any manner to any tree, utility pole, bridge, curb, bench, or any other public facility or fixture, nor to any other sign or sign structure. Weekend directional signs shall be made of metal, plastic, laminated cardboard or some other durable and waterproof material. No such sign shall be made of paper. 

5.  There shall be no more than 2 weekend directional signs per intersection for any given place, activity or event, and all such signs must be located within 30 feet of a point defined by the intersections of the curbs of intersecting streets. 
6.  Weekend directional signs may be located in a public right-of-way but shall be located no closer than 1 foot to any curb. 
7.  Weekend directional signs may not be located in any part of the street frontage of schools, institutions of higher education or places of worship. 
8.  Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this Section shall subject the violator, in addition to other penalties that may be applied by the municipal court, to a suspension of the privilege of placing weekend directional signs for a period of up to 1 year, after notice and hearing before the City commission. 
7.3.13. - Severability 
Should any section or subsection of this Sec. 7.3. (Signs) including Sec. 7.3.1. through Sec. 7.3.12. be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such action shall not affect the validity of the sign ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid, it being the intent of the City Commission that each section and subsection of the sign ordinance be severable. 
Sec. 7.4. - Site Lighting 

7.4.1. - Purpose and Intent 
The purpose and intent of this Section is to provide a regulatory strategy for outdoor lighting that will permit reasonable uses of outdoor lighting for nighttime safety, utility, security, productivity, enjoyment and commerce; curtail and reverse the degradation of the nighttime visual environment and the night sky; preserve the dark night sky for astronomy; minimize glare, obtrusive light and artificial sky glow by limiting outdoor lighting that is misdirected, excessive or unnecessary; conserve energy and resources to the greatest extent possible; and help to protect the natural environment from the damaging effects of night lighting from man-made sources. 
7.4.2. - Conformance With Applicable Codes 
All outdoor illuminating devices must be installed in conformance with the provisions of this UDO, the Building Code and the Electrical Code as applicable and under appropriate permit and inspection. 
7.4.3. - Applicability 
For all land uses, developments and buildings that require a permit, all outdoor lighting fixtures shall meet the requirements of this UDO. All building additions of 50% or more in terms of additional dwelling units, gross floor area, or parking spaces, either with a single addition or with cumulative additions subsequent to the effective date of this Section, will invoke the requirements of this Section for the entire property, including previously installed and any new outdoor lighting. Cumulative modification or replacement of outdoor lighting constituting 60% or more of the permitted lumens for the parcel, no matter the actual amount of lighting already on a nonconforming site, will constitute a major addition for purposes of this Section. 
A.  Minor Additions   
Additions of less than 50% of additional dwelling units, gross floor area, or parking spaces that require a permit, and that include changes to existing lighting require the submission of a complete inventory and site plan detailing all existing and any proposed new outdoor lighting. Any new lighting on the site must meet the requirements of this Section with regard to shielding and lamp type. 
B.  Exempt Lighting   
The following luminaires and lighting systems are exempt from these requirements: 
1.  Interior lighting; 
2.  Lighting for pools used at night; 
3.  Underwater lighting used for the illumination of swimming pools and fountains; 
4.  Temporary holiday lighting; 
5.  Lighting required and regulated by the Federal Aviation Administration, or other federal, state or local agency; 
6.  Emergency lighting used by police, fire, or medical personnel, or at their direction; 
7.  All outdoor light fixtures producing light directly from the combustion of fossil fuels, such as kerosene and gasoline; and 
8.  Security lighting controlled and activated by a motion sensor device for a duration of 10 minutes or less. 
C.  Prohibited Lighting   
The following lighting systems are prohibited: 
1.  Aerial lasers; 
2.  Searchlight style lights, temporary searchlights may be turned on for 8 hours within a 24-hour period and for no more than 3 consecutive days, once each calendar year. 
3.  Other very intense lighting, defined as having a light source exceeding 200,000 lumens or intensity in any direction of 2 million candelas or more; and 
4.  Mercury vapor lamps. 
7.4.4. - Outdoor Lighting Standards 
All nonexempt outdoor lighting fixtures shall meet the following criteria: 
A.  Flood or spot lamps must be positioned no higher than 45 degrees above straight down (half-way between the vertical and the horizontal) when the source is visible from any off-site residential property or public roadway. 
B.  All light fixtures that are required to be shielded shall be installed and maintained in such a manner that the shielding is effective as described herein for fully shielded fixtures. 
7.4.5. - Specific Uses 
All lighting not directly associated with the special use areas designated below must conform to the lighting standards described in this Section. 
A.  Outdoor Sports, Recreation Fields, or Performance Areas   
Lighting of outdoor recreational facilities (public or private), such as, but not limited to, outdoor athletic fields, courts, tracks, special event or show areas shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Luminaires   
Facilities designed for municipal leagues, elementary to high school levels of play and training fields for recreational or social levels of play, college play, semi-professional, professional or national levels of play shall utilize luminaires with minimal uplight consistent with the illumination constraints of the design. Where fully shielded fixtures are not used, acceptable luminaires shall include those which: 
a.  Are provided with internal or external glare control louvers or lenses, and are installed so as to minimize uplight and offsite light trespass and glare; and 
b.  Are installed and maintained so as to avoid aiming more than 2.5 times the mounting height. 
2.  Illuminance   
All lighting installations shall be designed to achieve the illuminance levels for the activity as recommended by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA RP-6). 
3.  Off-Site Spill   
The installation must also limit off-site spill (off the parcel containing the sports facility) to the maximum extent possible consistent with the illumination constraints of the design. For all recreational or social levels of play and training fields, as well as, performance areas, illumination levels must not exceed 1.5 foot-candles at any location along any non-residential property line, and 0.5 foot-candles at any location along any residential property line. 
4.  Curfew   
Field lighting for these outdoor athletic facilities shall be turned off within 30 minutes after the last event of the night. 
5.  Setback   
All light poles shall be set back the greater of 50 feet or one foot for every foot in height from any residential property line or right-of-way. 
B.  Service Station Canopies and Parking Structures   
1.  All luminaires mounted on or recessed into the lower surface of service station canopies and parking structures must be fully shielded and use flat lenses. 
2.  The total light output of luminaires mounted on the lower surface, or recessed into the lower surface of the canopy, and any lighting within signage or illuminated panels over the pumps, must not exceed 50 foot-candles. 
3.  The total light output of illuminated areas of a service station other than as detailed in Sec. 7.4.5.B.2. above shall not exceed 15 foot-candles. 
4.  Illuminance levels for the interior of parking structures, where interior lighting is visible from outside the structure, must conform to the IESNA recommendation (RP-20). 
5.  Lights must not be mounted on the top or sides of a canopy and the sides of a canopy must not be illuminated. 
C.  Security Lighting   
1.  Security lighting is lighting that provides a level of illumination to clearly identify persons or objects and creates a psychological deterrent to unwanted or unsafe activity in the area being protected. 
2.  Security lighting must be directed toward the targeted area, and not adjacent properties. 
3.  Sensor activated lighting must be located in such a manner as to prevent direct glare and lighting into properties of others or into a public right-of-way, and the light must not be triggered by activity off the property. 
D.  Pedestrian Path Lighting   
Lighting posts must not exceed 16 feet from the finished grade. 
E.  Architectural Accent Lighting   
1.  Fixtures used to accent architectural features, materials, colors, style of buildings, landscaping, or art must be located, aimed and shielded so that light is directed only on those features. Such fixtures must be aimed or shielded to minimize light spill into the dark night sky in conformance with the luminaire standards. 
2.  Lighting fixtures must not generate glare, or direct light beyond the facade onto a neighboring property, streets or into the night sky. 
F.  Commercial Parking Areas   
1.  All lighting fixtures servicing parking lots, except floodlights, must be cutoff fixtures, directed downward and not toward buildings or other areas. 
2.  The minimum illumination level for a parking lot is 0.4 foot-candles at grade level and the ratio of the average illumination to the minimum illumination must not exceed 4:1. 
3.  Floodlights must be aimed or shielded to minimize uplight. 
4.  Light poles used in parking lots must not exceed 35 feet in height. 
7.4.6. - Variances 
A.  Any person may submit an application to the Zoning Board of Appeals for a variance from the provisions of this Section. The application should include, but not be limited to, evidence about the following: 
1.  How the proposed design and appearance of the luminaire are superior; 
2.  How light trespass and glare will be limited; 
3.  How the proposed solution will provide a benefit without negative impact on the health, safety, or welfare of the community. 
B.  The application may include the recommended practices of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, a professional engineer, or other authority on outdoor lighting. 
7.4.7. - Plans and Evidence of Compliance 
A.  Applicant   
The applicant for any permit required by any provision of the laws of the Decatur in connection with proposed work involving outdoor lighting fixtures must submit, as part of the application for permit, evidence that the proposed work will comply with this Section. Even should no other permit be required, the installation or modification, except for routine servicing and same-type lamp replacement of any exterior lighting, will require submission of the information described below. The submission must contain but is not necessarily limited to the following, all or part of which may be part or in addition to the information required elsewhere in the laws of the City upon application for the required permit: 
1.  Plans indicating the location on the premises of each illuminating device, both proposed and any already existing on the site. 
2.  Description of all illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, both proposed and existing. The description may include, but is not limited to catalog cuts and illustrations by manufacturers. 
3.  Photometric data, such as that furnished by manufacturers or similar, showing the angle of cut off of light emissions. 
B.  Additional Submission   
The above required plans, descriptions and data must be sufficiently complete to enable the Department to readily determine whether compliance with the requirements of this Section will be secured. If such plans, descriptions and data cannot enable this ready determination, the applicant must submit additional evidence of compliance to enable such determination, such as certified reports of tests, provided that the tests have been performed and certified by a recognized testing laboratory. 
C.  Subdivision Plats   
All new subdivided properties must submit information as described above for installed street lights and other common or public area outdoor lighting. 
D.  Certification   
For all projects, certification that the lighting as installed conforms to the approved plans shall be provided by an illumination engineer/professional before the Certificate of Occupancy is issued. Until this certification is submitted, approval for use by the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy will not be issued. 
Sec. 7.5. - Manufactured Homes, Preengineered Buildings 
No manufactured (mobile) home shall be permitted as any dwelling, accessory dwelling, principal building or structure in any residential zoning district. No preengineered metal building shall be permitted in any zoning district except the C-3 heavy commercial zoning district, except when modified by application of masonry, brick, ceramic tile, stucco or similar facade to the walls of the building. 
Sec. 7.6. - Performance Standards 
All uses shall be so designed, constructed and operated as not to be injurious or offensive to the occupants of adjacent premises by reason of emission of smoke, odors, dust, or other particulate matter, or by creation of noise, vibration, electrical disturbance, toxic or noxious waste materials, glare, fire or explosive hazard, or by generation of traffic of type or volume likely to cause congestion in the streets. To assist in carrying out these objectives the following conditions shall apply 

7.6.1. - Enclosure 
All processing and storage (except vehicle storage) shall be within a completely enclosed building except where "open use" is noted. 
7.6.2. - Heat and glare 
Any source of heat or glare shall not be visible from any lot line of the premises on which the use is located. 
7.6.3. - Odors 
Every use shall be so operated as to prevent emission of objectionable odors in such concentration as to be perceptible to any point at or beyond the lot line of the property on which the use is located. 
7.6.4. - Vibration 
Every use shall be so operated that the ground vibration inherently and recurrently generated is not perceptible without instruments at any point on any boundary line of the lot on which the use is located. 
7.6.5. - Dust, Dirt and Fly Ash 
Every use shall be so operated as to prevent the emission into the air of dirt or any other solid matter which may cause damage to property or discomfort to persons or animals at or beyond the lot line of the property on which the use is located. 
7.6.6. - Noxious Gases and Fumes 
No noxious, toxic or corrosive fumes or gases shall be emitted into the atmosphere. 
7.6.7. - Industrial Sewage Waste 
Every use shall be so operated as to prevent the discharge into any stream, lake or the ground of any waste which will be dangerous or discomforting to persons or animals or which will damage plants or crops or the public water supply at or beyond the lot line of the property on which the use is located. 
7.6.8. - Smoke 
For the purpose of grading the density of smoke the Ringelmann chart, as published and used by the U.S. Bureau of Mines, is hereby made, by reference, a part of this UDO. Every use shall be so operated as to prevent the emission of smoke, from any source whatever, to a density greater than described as number 1 on the Ringelmann chart, except that in C-3 smoke equal to, but not in excess of, that shade of appearance described as number 2 on the Ringelmann chart may be emitted for a period or periods totaling not more than 4 minutes in any 30 minutes. All measurements shall be made at the point of emission. 
7.6.9. - Noise 
Sound level shall be measured with a sound meter and associated octave band filter manufactured according to standards prescribed by the American Standards Association. Every use shall be so operated as to comply with the maximum performance standards governing noise described below. Objectionable noises due to intermittence, beat frequency or shrillness shall be muffled or eliminated so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses. 
Maximum Permitted Sound in Decibels Octave bands in adjacent use Along property line abutting a residential district between
8 a.m. and 6 p.m.* Along property line abutting an industrial or commercial district 0-75 72 m 79 150-300 59 66 300-600 52 59 600-1200 46 53 1200-2400 40 47 2400-4800 34 41 Over 4800 32 39 * Permissible sound level between 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. shall be decreased by 3 decibels in each octave band.  
7.6.10. - Electrical Disturbance and Radioactivity 
Each use shall be so operated as to prevent the emission of quantities of radioactive materials in excess of limits established as safe by the U.S. Bureau of Standards or the emission of electrical disturbance sufficient to adversely affect the operation at any point of any equipment other than the creator of such disturbance. 
7.6.11. - Traffic 
Every use shall be so designed to prevent decreased multimodal level of service (LoS) below the existing LoS measurement. All measurements shall use the methodologies outlined in the most recent edition of the Highway Capacity Manual, published by the Transportation Research Board. The Decatur Multimodal Transportation Impact Study Guidelines shall be used to identify the effect of each applicable use on the City of Decatur's transportation system, and to implement mitigation measures where LoS impacts are identified. 
(Ord. No. O-17-09, § 4, 6-19-17) 
Article 8. - Public Improvements 
Sec. 8.1. - Required Improvements 

8.1.1. - Bonds 
A.  Performance Bonds   
The applicant is required to file with the UDO Administrator a performance bond in an amount sufficient to ensure the completion of all street and public improvements required by the City. 
B.  Maintenance and Maintenance Bond   
1.  The applicant is responsible for maintenance of pavement and the drainage system for a period of one year and is required to post with the UDO Administrator a surety bond in the amount of 10% of the performance bond which was posted to ensure the completion of streets, roads and other public improvements which will be dedicated to public use. 
2.  The bond shall be valid for a period of one year, beginning on the date of final acceptance of streets by the City Commission. If, upon being notified of the failure of the pavement or drainage system, the applicant does not correct the deficiency or commence work on same within 10 days of such notice, it shall be deemed to be a failure on the bond, and the City Commission shall have the right to make the necessary repairs, either by Public Works or by private contract, and the bond shall be liable for the full amount of the cost of such repairs. 
8.1.2. - Streets and Sidewalks 
A.  Requirements Generally   
These street and sidewalk standards apply to existing and new public streets and existing private streets. Street improvements shall be provided as follows: 
1.  All street improvements shall comply with City standards and specifications as determined by and administered by the UDO Administrator. 
2.  Streets shall be graded to a width of not less than the right-of-way width. 
3.  Concrete curb and gutter shall be constructed in accordance with City standards. Any curb damaged after being set and before pavement is completed shall be replaced. 
4.  Pavement shall be installed in accordance with City standards and specifications. All streets and alleys shall be paved. 
5.  A concrete sidewalk must be installed on both sides of street rights-of-way. Installation shall be in accordance with City standards and specifications. 
6.  Driveway aprons shall be installed from edge of pavement to property line in accordance with City standards and specifications. 
7.  Handicap ramps shall be constructed at all street intersections. 
B.  Plans and Profiles   
Four copies of the complete plans and profiles for street improvements shall be submitted for approval of the UDO Administrator prior to approval of the final plat by the Planning Commission. 
C.  Underground Work   
All underground work consisting of sewers, waterlines, gas mains, power lines and telephone conduits shall be installed and earth backfill shall be compacted before pavement is laid. 
(Ord. No. O-17-09, § 5.1, 6-19-17) 
8.1.3. - Sewers and Sewage Disposal 
A.  Sanitary Sewers   
1.  Generally   
Except as otherwise provided, sanitary sewers shall be laid in all streets, service connections installed to each lot at the right-of-way line, and connections made to trunk line sewers. 
2.  Prior Approvals   
Two copies of the sewer plan, designed by a registered civil engineer, showing the proposed sewer in plan and profile, shall be submitted to and approved by the County Water and Sewer department prior to beginning installation of the sewer system. 
3.  Installation; Generally   
A qualified sewer contractor shall be employed to install the sewer. The installation shall be in conformance with County specifications and shall conform exactly to the approved plan with no exception unless approved by the County Sewer Department. 
4.  Utility Covers   
All utility cover castings shall be adjusted to the finished surface of paving. 
5.  Drawings to be Furnished   
Upon completion of the project, the UDO Administrator shall be given one copy of the plan and profile drawing showing the sewer as built with exact location and elevation of each service connection (stub-out) indicated. 
B.  Septic Tanks   
1.  Generally   
Septic tanks may be permitted in a subdivision wherever service by sanitary sewerage is not available or technically feasible upon obtaining special permission of the county health department and the UDO Administrator. The installation shall be in accordance with county standards and specifications and shall conform exactly to the plan approved by the county health department. 
2.  Lot Size   
The lot size shall be not less than the minimum standard and shall be of satisfactory size for the proper installation of a septic tank sewage system, as determined by the county health department. 
8.1.4. - Storm Drainage 
Adequate storm drain pipes, detention ponds and catch-basins shall be installed in accordance with City standards and the provisions of Sec. 9.3., Sec. 9.4., and Sec. 9.5., as appropriate. 
8.1.5. - Water 
A.  Generally   
Adequate water mains, acceptable to the City Engineer, Fire Chief and the County Water and Sewer Department shall be installed. Two copies of the water system plan, designed by a registered civil engineer, showing the proposed water system in plan and profile shall be submitted to and approved by the County Water and Sewer Department prior to beginning installation of the water system. Service stubs shall be extended from the main to each lot at the right-of-way line. 
B.  Fire Service   
Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with the specifications of the City Fire Department. Installation shall be approved by the City Fire Department. Hydrants shall be located so that all dwelling units are located within 500 feet of a hydrant. 
8.1.6. - Monuments 
Iron pins no less than 24 inches long nor less than 1/2 inch in diameter shall be set flush with the ground at every lot corner. 
Sec. 8.2. - Design Standards 

8.2.1. - Streets 
A.  Generally   
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of land to be served by such streets. These street design standards apply to both public and private streets. 
B.  Minor Streets   
Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
C.  Special Treatment   
Where a development abuts or contains any existing or proposed arterial street, the Planning Commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
D.  Railroad or Limited Access Highway Right-of-Way   
Where a development borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, the Planning Commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. 
E.  Reserve Strips   
Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited, except where their control is definitely placed in the City. 
F.  Street Jogs   
Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided. 
G.  Intersections   
1.  Generally   
Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as practicable. 
2.  Property Line to be Curved   
At each street intersection the property line at each block corner shall be rounded with a curve of radius R varying with the interior angle, as specified in the following table, unless sufficient data is presented to show that strict adherence to this section is impractical due to topographical or engineering considerations. 
Table of Intersection Returns Interior Angle in Degrees Intersection of Two Minor Streets Any Intersection on Arterial Streets R R 150-145 12 15 145-140 12 18 140-135 12 20 135-85 12 25 85-75 20 40 75-65 30 70 65-55 40 80 55-45 50 100 45-0 74 140  
H.  Right-of-Way Width   
Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown Sec. 8.2.2. 
I.  Half Streets   
Half streets shall be prohibited. 
J.  Dead-End Streets   
1.  Temporary dead-end streets may be platted where the City Commission deems desirable and where the land adjoins property not subdivided, in which case the streets shall be carried to the boundaries of the property. All temporary dead-end streets shall terminate with a cul-de-sac or other turnaround approved by the UDO Administrator. 
2.  Permanent dead-end streets, shall not be longer than 600 feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least 80 feet, and a street right-of-way diameter of at least 100 feet. Permanent dead-end streets shall not be required to be carried to the boundary of the property. 
K.  Street Alignment   
1.  Minimum Vertical   
Arterial street profile grades, unless otherwise specified by the state department of transportation shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum length equal in feet to 20 times the algebraic difference between the rates of grade, expressed in feet per 100; for all other streets, including minor streets and alleys, not less than 10 times the algebraic difference. In approaches to intersections, there shall be a suitable leveling of the street at a grade not exceeding 3% and for a distance of not less than 50 feet from the nearest line of the intersecting street. 
2.  Minimum Horizontal   
Radii of centerline horizontal curvature shall be as follows: 
Arterial street 1,260' Collector street 500' Minor street 200' Loop street 100'  
3.  Tangents   
Between reverse curves there shall be not less than the following minimum tangents: 
Arterial street 250' Collector street 100' Minor streets where there is no super-elevation 50'  
4.  Visibility Requirements   
Visibility requirements shall be as follows: 
a.  Minimum vertical visibility, measured between two points 4 feet above the pavement level, shall be: 
Arterial street 500' Collector street 300' Minor street 200'  
b.  Minimum horizontal visibility measured on centerline shall be: 
Arterial street 500' Collector street 300' Minor street 200'  
L.  Street Names   
No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the City Commission. 
M.  Street Grades   
Street grades, wherever feasible, shall not exceed the following with due allowance for reasonable vertical curves: 
Street Type Grade Arterial street 7% Collector-Commercial and Residential street 10% Minor street 12%  
1.  Minimum Grade   
No street shall have less than a 1% grade. 
N.  Open Access   
Major subdivisions must provide roadways that remain permanently open to the public and provide community-wide access as part of an overall connected street network. 
O.  Connectivity Required   
Proposed streets in major subdivisions must be interconnected and must connect with adjacent streets external to the subdivision in order to provide multiple routes for pedestrian and vehicle trips from, to and within the subdivision. 
P.  Stub Streets   
1.  Where a development adjoins un-subdivided land, stub streets within any new major subdivision shall be extended to the meet maximum block perimeter standards. 
2.  The stub street must be extended to the boundary of the abutting property to the point where the connection to the anticipated street is expected. 
3.  If a stub streets exists on an abutting property, the street system of any new subdivision must connect to the stub street to form a through street. 
4.  Where a stub street is provided, a barricade using a design approved by the UDO Administrator must be constructed at the end of the stub street, pending the extension of the street into abutting property. A sign noting the future street extension shall be posted at the applicant's expense. 
8.2.2. - Street Types 
Unless modified by the UDO Administrator for the purpose of providing on- or off-street bicycle facilities, wider sidewalks or traffic calming, all new or extended streets must meet the following standards: 
A.  Residential Narrow   

Width Right-of-way width 45' min Back-of-curb to back-of-curb 21' min Streetscape Sidewalk 6' min Planting area 6' min Curb and gutter 2' Travelway Travel lane 10' General Walkway type Sidewalk Planting type Tree lawn Tree spacing 40' o.c. avg. Parking type Not allowed  
B.  Residential Yield   

Width Right-of-way width 50' min Back-of-curb to back-of-curb 28' min Streetscape Sidewalk 5' min Planting area 5' min Curb and gutter 2' Travelway Parallel parking/travel lane 12' General Walkway type Sidewalk Planting type Tree lawn Tree spacing 40' o.c. avg. Parking type Parallel  
C.  Residential   

Width Right-of-way width (min) 60' Back-of-curb to back-of-curb (min) 36' Streetscape Sidewalk (min) 6' Planting area (min) 6' Curb and gutter 2' Travelway Parallel parking 7' Travel lane 9' General Walkway type Sidewalk Planting type Tree lawn Tree spacing 40' o.c. avg. Parking type Parallel  
D.  Woonerf   

Width Right-of-way width (min) two-way 
one-way 42' 
38' Fire access-alternate (min) 20' Streetscape Optional planting area (min) 3' Sidewalk (min) 6' Parallel parking (min) 8' Pavement (min) 8' Travelway Travel lane two-way 
one-way 16' 
12' General Walkway type - Planting type - Tree spacing - Notes Pedestrians and cyclists have legal priority over motorists Gateway signs indicate entrance to a woonerf Maximum length of a woonerf is between 1,200'-1,800'  
E.  Urban Mixed Use/High Density Residential: Parallel Parking   

Width Right-of-way width (min) 65' Back-of-curb to back-of-curb (min) 37' Streetscape Sidewalk (min) 8' Planting area (min) 6' Curb and gutter 2' Travelway Parallel parking 8' Travel lane 10' General Walkway type Sidewalk Planting type Tree grate Tree spacing 40' o.c. avg. Parking type Parallel  
F.  Urban Mixed Use/High Density Residential: Angled Parking   

Width Right-of-way width (min) 90' Back-of-curb to back-of-curb (min) 61' Streetscape Sidewalk (min) 8.5' Planting area (min) 6' Curb and gutter 2' Travelway 60° angled parking 18' Travel lane 12' General Walkway type Sidewalk Planting type Tree grate Tree spacing 40' o.c. avg. Parking type 60° angled  
G.  Alley Residential   

Width Easement width (min) 20' Travelway Travel lane 16' Travel lane, fire service route (min) 20'  
H.  Alley, Mixed Use   

Width Easement width (min) 24' Travelway Travel lane (min) 20'  
(Ord. No. O-17-09, § 5.2, 6-19-17) 
8.2.3. - Existing Streets, Streetscapes 
A.  Applicability   
A building or site may be renovated or repaired without meeting the requirements of this Section, provided any increase in gross floor area or improved site area does not exceed 25%. 
B.  Location   
This Section applies: 
1.  Along streets designated Downtown Core, Urban Mixed-Use or Regional Boulevard on the Community Transportation Plan Street Typology Map; 
2.  In the Downtown Decatur Special Pedestrian Area; and 
3.  In any C-1, C-2, C-3, MU, NMU, RS-17, RM-18, RM-22 or RM-43 zoning district. 
C.  Streetscapes Required   
1.  Existing streets, landscape zones and sidewalk clear zones that do not meet the width and planting standards of the Decatur Streetscape Table must be brought into compliance with the current standards prior to the issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. 
2.  Where an existing street is subject to multiple requirements in the Decatur Streetscape Table, the wider streetscape requirements apply. 
3.  On existing streets where there is insufficient right-of-way for the required streetscape improvements, the right- of-way needed for such improvements may be expanded by mutual agreement between the property owner and the entity holding the right-of-way, or a public access easement may be provided to the City to meet the required improvements. 
4.  Where an easement is provided to the City, the back of the minimum required sidewalk clear zone (adjacent to the lot) may be considered the lot line for the purpose of establishing yards, may not be included in lot coverage calculations, and may not be counted in minimum lot size requirements for new lots. 
Street Type District Landscape Zone
(min.) Sidewalk clear zone
(min.) Low Density Residential - - Urban Mixed Use/High Density Residential C-1, C-2, C-3, MU, NMU, RS-17, or RM-22 zoning district. 6 feet 8 feet Regional Boulevard/Downtown Core Downtown Decatur Special Pedestrian Area 6 feet 10 feet  
D.  Exemptions   
This Section does not apply to any lot or parcel for which a Land Disturbance Permit or Building Permit is issued, but the UDO Administrator determines that the permit is for an accessory use or structure to the principal use or structure or for minor repairs or additions to the principal building or structure in existence. 
E.  Required Streetscape Improvements   
The Downtown Decatur Streetscape Design Guidelines shall be used as a guide in planning streetscape and site improvements. Standard materials, details and specifications, including street trees, street lights, litter containers, benches and similar items, as described in the Downtown Decatur Streetscape Design Guidelines, shall be used for required streetscape improvements. 
1.  Sidewalks   
Sidewalks shall be built along all public streets. All sidewalks shall have a minimum width of 16 feet with a minimum clear zone of 10 feet and a minimum landscape zone of 6 feet. 
2.  Exception   
Where the existing building line does not presently provide a minimum sidewalk width of 15 feet, the minimum sidewalk width may be reduced to the actual width of the existing sidewalk. 
3.  Landscape Zone   
There shall be a continuous landscape zone adjacent to the curb which shall not be less than 5 feet in width. In addition to the planting of trees, this zone is also intended for the placement of street furniture including light poles, litter receptacles and similar items. Trees shall be planted a maximum of 40 feet on center. Newly planted trees shall be a minimum of 31/2 inches in caliper, and shall be limbed up to a minimum of 6 feet. 
4.  Outdoor Dining   
Accessory outdoor dining areas shall be permitted on a public or private sidewalk area where adjacent to and directly abutting a restaurant located in a building. However, the outdoor dining area shall not reduce the clear zone of a public sidewalk to a width of less than 5 feet. Tables, chairs, umbrellas and similar items shall be stored in the interior of the restaurant or in similar enclosed area so that a minimum clear zone of 10 feet is unobstructed when the outdoor dining area is not in use because of inclement weather or when the restaurant is closed. 
F.  Parking Areas and Driveways   
1.  Parking areas or driveways, except for a driveway to reach a side or rear yard on-site parking facility, are not permitted between the sidewalk and the front of the building. 
2.  Any permitted driveway shall be perpendicular to any adjacent street. 
3.  No property shall have more than one curb cut. 
4.  Surface parking areas shall not be located along or within 30 feet of any public street. Drive-in or Drive-through Facilities 
Vehicular access to a drive-in or drive-through use shall not be permitted from a street or street segment. 
G.  Special Exceptions   
Special exceptions to these requirements may be approved after consideration of the following standards: 
1.  The suitability of the proposed exception in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property. 
2.  The effect that the proposed exception will have on the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
3.  The impact that the proposed development will have on the public safety, traffic on the public streets, transportation facilities, utilities and other public services. 
4.  The impact that the proposed development will have on established property values and on the health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the residents of the City. 
5.  The economic or marketing impact that these guidelines may have on the property owner or developer. 
8.2.4. - Driveways 
A.  Width   
Unless approved by the UDO Administrator, the maximum width of curb cuts, not including flares or returns at the throat of the facility, for entrances, exits, service drives and similar facilities shall be 24 feet for two-way entrances and 12 feet for one-way entrances. 
B.  Distance   
1.  Except for an attached or detached single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling, entrances and exits shall be a minimum of 50 feet from the right-of-way line of any existing or proposed intersection, 40 feet from any existing or proposed curb cut, and 20 feet from any existing or proposed property line, unless approved by the UDO Administrator. 
2.  The distance of proposed entrance or exit to an existing intersection is measured to any property line or to any existing or proposed entrance or exit to any existing or proposed public street or to any existing entrance or exit to any existing private street or drive. 
(Ord. No. O-17-09, § 5.3, 6-19-17) 
8.2.5. - Blocks 
A.  Generally   
The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
1.  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
2.  Zoning district requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions; 
3.  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic; and 
4.  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
B.  Block Size   
The maximum perimeter for a block shall be no more 2,400 linear feet in all commercial and mixed use districts, and 3,200 linear feet in all residential districts. Block perimeters are measured along the back of the required sidewalk of any existing or proposed public street or existing private street that was built to public standards. 
C.  Pedestrian Easements   
Easements for pedestrian walks, not less than 10 feet wide, may be required where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. 
(Ord. No. O-17-09, § 5.4, 6-19-17) 
8.2.6. - Lots 
A.  Generally   
The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation, and the minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. 
B.  Dimensions   
Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of this UDO. 
C.  Corner Lots   
Corner lots for single family detached dwellings and two-family dwellings must have a minimum width of 75 feet along both lot frontages to permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets. 

D.  Street Frontage   
1.  Each lot, except within a cottage court, shall front upon a public street. 
2.  Cottage court dwellings may front on an open space or amenity space. Access required by the Fire Code continues to apply in these instances. 
E.  Double Frontage and Reverse Frontage Lots   
Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen reservation of at least 10 feet in width, with no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. 
F.  Side Lot Lines   
Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines. 
(Ord. No. O-17-09, §§ 5.5-5.7, 6-19-17) 
8.2.7. - Easements 
A.  Utilities   
Utility easements shall be avoided except in unusual cases where it is impractical to install utilities within the street right-of-way. In general, utility easements shall be granted to each specific utility provider and not to the City. 
B.  Drainage   
Where the subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, natural channel, or stream, the UDO Administrator shall determine if an easement shall be required to be dedicated and, if so, shall determine the dimensions required for such easement. 
8.2.8. - General Suitability 
A.  Uses Restricted for Certain Land   
1.  Land subject to flooding and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property unless the applicant provides satisfactory evidence to the UDO Administrator that: 
a.  The proposed uses do not present dangers to the public safety or welfare; and 
b.  All relevant previous provisions of Sec. 9.5. will be satisfied. 
2.  In situations where the requirements of Sec. 8.2.8.A.1. cannot be met, such land shall be set aside for open space, recreational activities, or other such suitable uses which do not present dangers to the public safety or welfare. 
8.2.9. - Public Sites and Open Spaces 
A.  Park Sites; Generally   
Where a site in a major subdivision is deemed suitable for a public park by the City Commission, such site shall be reserved for public usage. The subdivider shall allow a period of 45 days from the date of submittal of the preliminary plat during which time the City Commission is required to make known its intention of acquiring such site. If such notification shall be affirmative, the City Commission shall then set the period of time within which it shall acquire such site, upon consulting the subdivider and the proper authorities for such acquisition. 
B.  Parks and Playgrounds   
Parks and playgrounds may be dedicated to the City or reserved for public use under private ownership. If so dedicated, the land shall be used exclusively by the City for recreational purposes and the subdivider may stipulate a reasonable limit of time within which the proper authorities are required to make physical improvements to the site; otherwise the title to the site will revert to the subdivider. 
C.  Size and Location   
The UDO Administrator shall review and make a recommendation to the City Commission regarding the proposed size and location of parks and playgrounds in a major subdivision as part of the subdivision approval process. 
D.  Failure to Meet Requirements   
Where the proposed major subdivision is too small to provide space of suitable size for public open space use intended, the open space provided may be combined with that provided or to be provided in adjoining areas. 
8.2.10. - Post Office Common Mailbox 
Adequate provision for a location for delivery of US mail must be made on the site, subject to approval by the US Postal Service. 
Article 9. - Environmental Protection 
Sec. 9.1. - Tree Protection 

9.1.1. - Intent 
A.  The purposes of these regulations are to encourage the conservation of existing tree canopy and provide minimum requirements for the protection, maintenance and renewal of tree canopy cover across the City. The City believes that trees are an essential part of the community's infrastructure and recognizes that they provide measurable and valuable services and benefits to our community. These services and benefits include: 
1.  Improved health of Decatur's citizens and visitors; 
2.  Improved air quality; 
3.  Improved water quality; 
4.  Improved soil quality; 
5.  Stormwater control; 
6.  Energy conservation; 
7.  Increased property values; 
8.  Habitat for desirable wildlife; 
9.  Noise and glare buffering; 
10.  Privacy screening; 
11.  Increased community aesthetics and quality of life; and 
12.  Increased shade for active living activities like walking, and biking. 
B.  The City recognizes that trees and tree canopy are a community resource that requires active conservation and replanting efforts. The purpose of these regulations is to provide a basic framework for maintaining, conserving and increasing tree canopy cover across the City. The City's tree canopy cover will be measured every 5 years. Previous measurements of tree canopy showed 45.7% tree canopy cover in 2005 and 45.1% tree canopy cover in 2010. The next measurement will be made in 2014 of the 2014 tree canopy cover, and then every 5 years thereafter of the previous year's cover. 
9.1.2. - Review 
A.  Tree Permits   
Tree permits are required in Article 9. (see Sec. 9.1.17.). 
B.  Administrative Standards   
Administrative standards that provide detailed information on how this Section shall be administered and implemented are hereby established and included in a supplemental document made a part of this Section by reference. The City Arborist may waive or modify administrative standards based on site or tree conditions, property owner circumstances, or for the incorporation of alternative green technologies on a site. 
9.1.3. - Tree Species List 
There is hereby established a City Tree Species List that is included in the administrative standards and is hereinafter referred to as the tree species list. 
9.1.4. - Applicability and Exemptions 
A.  This Section applies to any and all real property within the City limits, including all public and private property and all zoning districts and to all protected trees growing within the City limits. 
B.  No protected tree shall be intentionally removed, destroyed, or disturbed without the written consent of the City Arborist in the form of an approved tree conservation plan, tree disturbance permit, tree removal permit or tree information permit as shown in the Table below. 
Applicability of Plan and Permit Requirements by Property Type and Activity Property Type Activity Plan/Permit Requirements Commercial 
(all zoning districts except R-85, R-60, R-50 & RS-17) Tree Removal Tree Conservation Plan & Tree Removal Permit 
Tree Replacement (unless site has 45% tree canopy cover after removal) 
Tree bank may not be used Tree Disturbance Tree Conservation Plan & Tree Disturbance Permit 
If the site has less than 45% canopy coverage after tree removals: 
 Tree Replacement to no net loss level if increase in impervious cover or floor area is less than 15% 
 Tree Replacement to 45% level if increase in impervious cover or gross floor area is 15% or more 
Tree bank may be used for up to 75% of tree planting requirement No tree impact, but project increases impervious cover or gross floor area by 15% or more Tree Conservation Plan 
Entire site must achieve 45% tree canopy cover 
Tree bank may be used for up to 75% of tree planting requirement No tree impact and project does not increase impervious cover or gross floor area by 15% or more No Requirements Residential (R-85, R-60, R-50 & RS-17 zoning districts) Tree Removal 
1. Diseased, dead, or trees with a moderate to high risk rating 
2. Up to 3 healthy, protected trees within an 18 month period Tree Information Permit 
Certified Arborists must be used to classify a tree as dead, diseased or hazardous 
Dead, diseased or hazardous trees do NOT count towards the allowable tree removal within the 18 month period Tree Removal 
3. The fourth or greater healthy, protected tree within an 18 month period Tree Removal Permit 
Tree Replacement: No Net Loss of the site's canopy cover at the time of tree removal 
Up to 50% of the canopy replacement requirement may be paid into the Tree Bank Tree Disturbance Tree Conservation Plan & Tree Disturbance Permit 
Tree Replacement: No Net Loss of the site's canopy cover at the time of tree removal 
Tree bank may be used for up to 50% of tree planting requirement No Tree Impact No Requirements  
C.  The following activities and trees are exempt from compliance with this Section: 
1.  Activities or trees included in approved community forest management plans, annual work plans, memoranda of understanding or other plans and agreements approved by the City Arborist or executed between the City and government entities, utility companies, public authorities, boards or commissions. 
2.  Activities or trees described in a waiver issued by the City Manager during and immediately after the period of an emergency such as a flood, ice storm, thunderstorm, windstorm, tornado, or any other disastrous act of nature. 
3.  Activities or trees on any portion of a property included within the limits of a valid site development permit issued prior to July 7, 2014, provided that all time constraints relating to the permit are observed. 
4.  In a case where a tree has been determined by a Certified Arborist to be at moderate to high risk of failure or to have a high or extreme risk rating that cannot otherwise be mitigated or to be in such a dangerous condition that it is threatening public health, safety or welfare or threatens to cause imminent harm to a building or other infrastructure and requires immediate removal, then verbal authorization may be given by the City Arborist for the tree to be removed; a tree information permit is required to be submitted within 72 hours of the removal. 
5.  Trees grown specifically for sale, such as Christmas trees and nursery stock. 
9.1.5. - Tree Canopy Cover Requirements 
A.  A minimum amount of 45% tree canopy cover shall be required on public and private commercial properties within parking lots and within and extending over impervious surfaces and as a condition of protected tree removal or disturbance as further defined in this Section. 
B.  Tree canopy cover provided by existing protected trees on July 7, 2014 shall be conserved on a property to the greatest extent possible. On residential property no less than 25% of the existing protected tree canopy cover must be conserved, except as noted in Sec. 9.1.17.A. The establishment of additional tree canopy cover shall not be required unless as a condition of protected tree removal or tree disturbance as further defined in this Section. 
C.  Tree canopy cover conserved or planted to meet the requirements of this Section shall be conserved on the site in perpetuity. Required tree canopy cover lost over time shall be replaced during the first planting season after the loss occurs. 
9.1.6. - Parking Lots 
A.  Parking lots shall maintain 45% tree canopy cover and a minimum of 10% of the interior of the parking lot in landscaped area. 
B.  A minimum of 1 large or medium canopy tree shall be required for every 8 parking spaces. All landscape islands shall include at least 1 canopy tree. Only those species approved for parking lots as listed in the tree species list shall be planted within parking lots, unless other species are approved by the City Arborist on a case-by-case basis. 
C.  The tree canopy cover of existing boundary trees and other protected trees that projects over the parking lot may be counted for meeting tree canopy cover requirements. Additionally, trees planted outside but within 3 to 10 feet of the perimeter of a parking lot shall receive 50% of the standard tree canopy cover credit as shown in the tree species list for the purpose of meeting the 45% requirement. 

9.1.7. - Tree Canopy Cover Credit 
A.  All existing healthy trees greater than 4 inches DBH, with the exception of invasive and non-native, flowering ornamental species, shall be eligible for tree canopy cover credit. Invasive species and nonnative, flowering ornamental species are identified in the tree species list. 
B.  The amount of tree canopy cover on a site shall be measured as the percent of the lot area that is covered by tree canopy, including canopy that projects over buildings and impervious surfaces. The canopy projected over and onto the applicant's property by a tree growing on a neighboring property or on the boundary between properties or on public property may be included in the measurement of total tree canopy cover existing on a site. 
C.  The amount of tree canopy cover credited to individual or group of existing trees shall be the actual projection of the combined crowns onto the ground measured in square feet as described in the administrative standards. The preservation of specimen trees within the buildable area of a lot shall receive double canopy credit in the calculation of existing tree canopy. 
D.  New trees shall receive credit at the time of planting based on the tree canopy cover potential for the species at maturity as listed in the table below and the tree species list. 
Tree Canopy Cover Credit by Mature Canopy Size Mature Canopy Size Category Amount of Tree Canopy Cover Credit Large 1,600 SF Medium 900 SF Small 400 SF Very Small 150 SF  
9.1.8. - Utility Company Requirements 
A.  All utility companies shall be required to submit an annual work plan to the City Arborist by December 1 each year for the following calendar year showing the proposed location, extent and type of work to be performed, type of tree disturbance that will occur and tree protection measures to be installed to minimize tree impact. The annual work plan shall include a list of subcontractors with names, address and City business license numbers. No work within the tree protection zone shall be performed until the annual work plan has been received by the City Arborist. 
B.  When changes are required to the annual work plan, notice in writing, for the City Arborist's approval, shall be submitted to the City Arborist prior to the changes taking place. These changes may include, but are not limited to, utility infrastructure installation, repair, and tree removal or disturbance not described in the annual work plan. 
C.  All work to be performed on or around protected trees shall be done in accordance with current ANSI A300 Standards for Tree Care Operations, ANSI Z133 Safety Standards, industry best management practices and the administrative standards that accompany this Section. 
D.  All tree pruning shall be supervised by a Certified Arborist. Pruning cuts shall be made in accordance with ANSI standards. Topping, tipping or heading cuts, flush cuts and stub cuts shall be prohibited. No climbing spurs or spikes shall be used in trees except when trees are to be removed or in cases of a public safety emergency, natural disaster or aerial rescue of personnel. 
9.1.9. - Tree Protection Requirements 
A.  Tree disturbance activities shall be prohibited within the tree protection zone, except that encroachment of less than 20% of the tree protection zone shall be allowed without an approved tree disturbance permit or tree conservation plan. 
B.  Damage to be avoided within the tree protection zone shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Soil compaction; 
2.  Gas, liquid or solid contamination of the soil; 
3.  Application of toxic chemicals to tree roots, trunk or crown; 
4.  Crushing or cutting of tree roots; 
5.  Attachment of ropes, wires, chains, nails, screws, advertising, posters or any other objects to tree trunks or scaffold limbs of public trees; 
6.  Wounding of tree roots, trunk and scaffold limbs; 
7.  Improper pruning, including topping; and 
8.  Excessive heat or desiccation causing bark, wood, limb, or large-scale bud or leaf injury. 
C.  During land disturbance and land development, active protection shall be required for protected trees and shall be in accordance with current ANSI A300 Standards for Tree Care Operations, ANSI Z133 Safety Standards, industry best management practices and administrative standards that accompany this Section. 
D.  Active tree protection measures, at a minimum, shall consist of the erection of tree protection fencing around the outer limits of the critical root zone, posting of tree protection area signs in both English and Spanish, and avoidance of any land disturbance or land development activities within the tree protection zone. 
E.  The City Arborist may require the expansion of the critical root zone up to 20% or approve encroachment of up to 20% by land disturbance activities. In no case shall land disturbance activities be approved within 10 feet of the trunk of a protected tree. 
F.  All tree protection measures shall be installed prior to land disturbance and shall be maintained until after final inspection. The City Arborist shall be contacted for an on-site conference after tree protection measures are installed and prior to land disturbance. 
G.  When the City Arborist determines that significant damage has occurred to any protected tree due to either permitted or non-permitted land disturbance activities, the City Arborist may require that the tree be treated according to professional standards to mitigate the damage. 
H.  If the City Arborist determines that the tree is irreparably damaged due to permitted land disturbance activities, the City Arborist may require that the tree be removed and the tree canopy cover replaced to maintain no net loss, or that the entire site be brought into compliance with the 45% canopy goal, depending on the scale of the project and existing canopy coverage. If the City Arborist determines that the tree is irreparably damaged due to non-permitted land disturbance activities, the City Arborist may require that the tree be removed and 2 times the tree canopy cover of the removed tree be replaced. 
9.1.10. - Tree Conservation Plan 
A.  A tree conservation plan shall be submitted as part of an application for a tree disturbance permit. The plan shall be prepared and certified by a registered forester, registered landscape architect, or certified arborist. No tree disturbance permit shall be issued without an approved tree conservation plan. 
B.  The plan shall include all information appropriate to the situation and as described in the administrative standards. 
C.  Applicants for a tree disturbance or site development permit may request a pre-submittal conference with the City Arborist to discuss tree ordinance and tree conservation plan requirements. 
D.  Upon submittal, the tree conservation plan shall be reviewed by the City Arborist and either approved or returned with comments explaining the changes necessary for compliance with this Section. Corrections to be made or reasons for denial shall be noted on the plan, or otherwise stated in writing to the applicant. 
E.  Full compliance with an approved tree conservation plan and tree protection measures shall be required and maintained during all phases of construction and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
9.1.11. - Tree Canopy Replacement Requirements 
A.  For commercial sites that have 45% or greater tree canopy cover after the permitted removal of a protected tree, tree canopy replacement shall not be required. 
B.  The removal of a protected tree without a valid tree removal permit shall require tree canopy cover replacement on site with trees of comparable or greater mature canopy size and species quality in the amount of 2 times the tree canopy cover removed, regardless of the amount of tree canopy cover existing on the site after the removal. 
C.  For commercial sites that have less than 45% tree canopy cover after the permitted removal of a protected tree, the amount of tree canopy cover removed from the site shall be replaced on the site by trees of comparable or greater mature canopy size and species quality to maintain no net loss of tree canopy cover. For commercial sites, payments in lieu of required replacement planting shall not be approved. 
D.  For residential sites, removal of a protected tree, that requires a tree removal permit, shall require replanting to maintain no net loss. For residential sites, payments in lieu of required replacement shall be allowed for up to 50% of the required canopy replacement amount. 
E.  A tree planting design shall be submitted along with the tree removal permit application as described in the administrative standards. 
F.  On residential properties, any projects requiring a land disturbance or land development permit will require no net loss of tree canopy. A tree conservation plan shall be required for such projects. If required replacement trees cannot be accommodated on the site, as determined by the City Arborist, then a payment in lieu of planting for up to 50% of the tree canopy cover requirement may be made to the tree bank. For residential properties with greater than 60% tree canopy cover, a payment in lieu of planting for up to 100% of the tree canopy cover requirement may be made to the tree bank. 
G.  On commercial properties with less than 45% tree canopy cover and a land disturbance or land development project proposes a 15% or more increase in impervious cover or gross floor area, then the planting of additional tree canopy cover to achieve 45% tree canopy cover across the site shall be required. A tree conservation plan shall be required for such projects. If required replacement trees cannot be accommodated on the site as determined by the City Arborist, a payment in lieu of planting for up to 75% of the tree canopy cover requirement may be made to the tree bank. 
H.  All trees planted to meet tree canopy replacement requirements shall meet ANSI Z60.1 Standards for Nursery Stock and all planting shall be done in accordance with current ANSI A300 Standards for Tree Care Operations, ANSI Z133 Safety Standards and industry best management practices, as well as the administrative standards that accompany this Section. 
9.1.12. - Tree Maintenance Requirements 
A.  All protected trees shall be maintained in accordance with current ANSI A300 Standards for Tree Care Operations, ANSI Z133 Safety Standards, industry best management practices, and the administrative standards that accompany this Section. 
B.  Planted trees shall be maintained throughout the establishment period. Maintenance shall include, at a minimum, watering, mulching, training pruning, and if necessary, pest management. 
9.1.13. - Decatur Tree Bank 
A.  There is hereby established a Decatur Tree Bank that shall receive payments made by property owners in lieu of planting additional tree canopy cover as approved by the City Arborist, in addition to forfeited bonds and forfeited escrow funds. Funds in the tree bank shall be administered by the City Manager. 
B.  Where it is determined by the City Arborist that it is impractical or impossible to fully meet the tree canopy cover requirements for a site, the portion of the canopy that cannot be accommodated on the site may be satisfied by a payment into the tree bank that shall be made prior to the issuance of a tree removal or tree disturbance permit. The amount of the payment shall be calculated using the standard tree canopy value listed in the City's fee schedule. 
C.  The tree bank funds shall be available for use by the City for the establishment, maintenance, improvement and expansion of tree canopy cover on public or private property. Funds shall not be used on private property to meet the requirements of a development project. Funds may be used on private property to expand and improve the City's tree canopy. The expenditure of tree bank funds shall be permitted for various activities related to tree conservation including, but not limited to: 
1.  Purchase of trees; 
2.  Planting of trees; 
3.  Maintenance of trees during the establishment period; 
4.  Purchase of greenspace; and 
5.  Funding tree care educational programs. 
9.1.14. - Tree Planting Bond and Escrow Account 
A.  Tree removal and tree disturbance permit holders that are also required to have an approved tree conservation plan shall be required to furnish a 3-year tree planting bond or other financial security for trees planted to meet the requirements of the tree ordinance when determined by the City Arborist. The amount of the bond shall be equal to 125% of tree planting expenses, including materials and labor. 
B.  The City Arborist shall inspect planted trees and assess their health at the end of the establishment period and shall provide a written report to the permit holder indicating what actions, if any, are required before the bond will be released. If trees are found to be dead, dying or not healthy at the time of the inspection then replacement tree planting shall be required and the bond for replacement trees shall be retained for an additional 3 years. 
C.  In the case of boundary trees, an escrow account shall be established prior to final inspection to ensure the health and survival of conserved trees. 
D.  For boundary trees, an escrow account shall be established in the amount totaling the estimated cost of removal plus the cost to replace the boundary tree's canopy cover calculated as described for the tree planting bond plus the standard tree canopy value. 
E.  In establishing the cost to replace the boundary tree's canopy cover, replacement trees shall be of comparable or greater mature canopy size and species quality to the boundary tree, shall be ecologically compatible with the intended growing site, and shall fully replace the canopy of the boundary tree. 
F.  Boundary tree health and potential for survival shall be determined by the City Arborist after a maximum of 3 years after project completion, at which time the arborist shall either authorize the return of escrow funds to the permit holder or to the tree owner for the removal and replacement of the boundary tree should the boundary tree die, be destroyed or be determined to be in irreversible decline as a result of the permit holder's disturbance activities. The City Arborist may also require that the escrow account remain in place for up to an additional 2 years if signs of tree decline are evident but treatment options by the permit holder could be taken to improve tree health and longevity. 
G.  Neither the tree owner nor the permit holder shall be entitled to receive interest on any escrow funds required by this provision. Any funds not collected by either the boundary tree owner or the permit holder within a period of 5 years shall be deposited in the tree bank. 
9.1.15. - Standard Tree Canopy Value 
A.  A standard value for each square foot of tree canopy shall be established by the City for the purpose of calculating payments to the tree bank. The standard tree canopy value for a protected tree shall be determined on a square foot basis for the actual tree canopy or tree canopy cover credit for the species, whichever is greater. 
B.  The standard tree canopy value shall be based on a general but reasonable estimate of the average cost for a tree that would provide comparable canopy and including shipping, labor, installation, and 3 years of maintenance. 
C.  The City Arborist shall make a recommendation to the City Manager each year on the amount of the standard tree canopy value. The current standard tree canopy value shall be listed in the City's fee schedule. 
9.1.16. - Tree Planting Easements 
The City is hereby authorized to enter into agreements with the owners of private property located within the City for the purpose of acquiring easements to plant trees on such property, in consideration for which said property owner shall acquire ownership of such trees as the City may plant. Provided, however, that any such agreement shall limit the duration of the easement to a time period of 3 years and shall limit the property interest acquired by the City to that distance sufficient to allow the planting of trees. Provided, further, that under such agreement the private property owner shall agree to maintain the trees planted thereon and shall also agree to hold the City harmless for any liability attributable to the planting or presence of the trees on the private property. 
9.1.17. - Development Permits 
A.  Tree Information Permit   
1.  Property owners in residential zoning districts are allowed to remove up to 3 healthy, protected trees during an 18 month period. A tree information permit shall be filed with the City to track the reasons for the tree removal, the amount of tree canopy removed and a plan for replanting, if applicable. No recompense or replanting is required if only 3 trees are removed within the 18 month period. 
2.  Residential-zoned properties that are pending real estate sale or title transfer, have been sold or title transferred in the past 18 months, are pending demolition or have had a dwelling on the site that has been demolished in the past 18 months are subject to the tree removal permit requirements and must comply with the tree conservation plan requirements. 
B.  Tree Removal Permit   
1.  A tree removal permit shall be required to remove any standing protected tree within the City except as noted in Sec. 9.1.17.A. above. A tree removal permit application shall be prepared by a Certified Arborist. 
2.  The reasons for requiring a permit for the removal of a protected tree include: 
a.  To provide an opportunity for tree owner education on tree condition, risk management, maintenance options, tree care standards and best management practices, and the functions, benefits and value of trees; 
b.  To provide tree risk management and mitigation options; 
c.  To encourage the conservation of existing trees; 
d.  To promote tree replacement and no net loss of tree canopy cover; and 
e.  To promote the planting of additional trees and increases in tree canopy cover. 
3.  The City Arborist is responsible for reviewing all tree removal permit applications. When reviewing an application for tree removal, the City Arborist shall consider the following factors, as applicable: 
a.  Reason for removal; 
b.  Intended use of site where tree is located; 
c.  Tree species, size and condition; 
d.  Impact of planned activities on tree health and stability; 
e.  Function and value of tree; 
f.  Current tree canopy cover on the site; 
g.  Impact of removal to the site; 
h.  Impact of removal to the environment; 
i.  Impact of tree on value of property; 
j.  Potential for replacement of tree canopy elsewhere on the site; and 
k.  Potential for replacement of tree canopy on the public street right-of-way or other nearby public property. 
4.  A tree removal permit shall be issued under one or more of the following circumstances: 
a.  Tree is dead; 
b.  Tree has a high or extreme risk of failure that cannot otherwise be mitigated; 
c.  The commercial site has 45% tree canopy cover remaining after the proposed removal. 
d.  Unavoidable site modifications resulting from land disturbance or land development activities will require the removal or result in the destruction of the tree; 
e.  Site plan modifications or the use of alternative designs to prevent removal or irreparable damage to the tree are impossible or not practical, based on a cost and benefit analysis; 
f.  Intended use of property cannot be achieved without tree removal; 
g.  Tree replacement to mitigate the removal of the protected tree and maintain no net loss of tree canopy is possible; and 
h.  On residential property, the requirement for conservation of 25% of the existing protected tree canopy cover as described in Sec. 9.1.5.B. is upheld. 
C.  Tree Disturbance Permit   
1.  A tree disturbance permit shall be required before any land disturbance or site development activities causing impact to a protected tree can occur. Tree impact is any tree disturbance that proposes or has the potential to affect 20% or more of a tree protection zone. A tree conservation plan shall be submitted with all tree disturbance permit applications. 
2.  The reasons for requiring permits for tree disturbance include: 
a.  To provide the opportunity for tree owner education on tree function, the location of tree roots and the tree protection zone, tree protection methods, and tree care standards and best management practices; 
b.  To determine and discuss with the tree owner how to minimize the impact of the land disturbance and site development; 
c.  To encourage the conservation of existing tree canopy; 
d.  To provide tree risk management and mitigation options; and 
e.  To promote the planting of additional trees and increases in tree canopy cover. 
3.  The City Arborist is responsible for reviewing all tree disturbance permit applications. When reviewing an application for tree disturbance, the City Arborist shall consider the following factors, as applicable: 
a.  Tree species, size and condition; 
b.  Alternatives to tree impact; 
c.  Type of land disturbance; 
d.  Extent of land disturbance; 
e.  Percent of tree protection zone to be disturbed; 
f.  Tree protection methods to be employed; 
g.  Impact of planned activities on tree health and stability; 
h.  Long-term use of site where tree is located; 
i.  Function and value of tree; 
j.  Current tree canopy cover on the site; 
k.  Potential for replacement of tree canopy elsewhere on the site should the impact result in tree decline and the need for removal; and 
l.  Potential for replacement of tree canopy on the public street right-of-way or other nearby public property should the impact result in tree decline and the need for removal. 
4.  A tree disturbance permit shall be issued if all of the following conditions occur: 
a.  It is impossible or impractical to move tree disturbance activities to another location on site; and 
b.  Tree replacement to maintain no net loss of tree canopy is possible should disturbance activities result in tree decline and the need for removal. 
5.  If tree disturbance results in the death or loss of health of a protected tree within 3 years after project completion, the removal of the dead or declining tree and replacement of 2 times the tree canopy cover removed shall be required. 
9.1.18. - Violations and Penalties 
A.  Violations of this Section may result in the withholding of a certificate of occupancy, revocation or revision of a permit, issuance of a stop work order, or issuance of a court citation. Examples of violations include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Protected tree removal without a tree removal permit; 
2.  Land disturbance or land development without a tree disturbance permit or approved tree conservation plan; 
3.  Improperly installed or maintained tree protection; and 
4.  Encroachment of 20% or more of a tree protection zone. 
B.  When it is deemed necessary, the UDO Administrator may require sureties to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Section. 
C.  Any person guilty of a violation of this Section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances. In addition to such penalties or in lieu thereof, the Municipal Court may require mitigation in the form of tree replacement or payments to the tree bank for replacement tree canopy cover. 
9.1.19. - Appeals 
A.  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the City Arborist relating to the application of this Sec. 9.1. may appeal in writing to the UDO Administrator. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the date of the written decision of the City Arborist being appealed and shall specify the grounds for appeal. The UDO Administrator shall provide a decision, in writing, within 30 days of the receipt of the written appeal. 
B.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the UDO Administrator may file and appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to the provisions of Sec. 11.2.10. 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 1, 1-20-15) 
Sec. 9.2. - Stream Buffer Protection 

9.2.1. - Description 
This Section establishes the requirement for protective buffer zones for streams within the City, as well as the requirements that minimize land development within those buffers. It is the purpose of these buffer zone requirements to protect and stabilize stream banks, protect water quality and preserve aquatic and riparian habitat. 
9.2.2. - Findings and Purposes 
A.  Findings   
Whereas, the City Commission finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
1.  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; 
2.  Removing pollutants delivered in urban storm-water; 
3.  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
4.  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks; 
5.  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
6.  Maintaining base flow of streams; 
7.  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
8.  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; 
9.  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
10.  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; and 
11.  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
9.2.3. - Purposes 
It is the purpose of this Section to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
A.  Create buffer zones along the streams of the City for the protection of water resources; and 
B.  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
9.2.4. - Applicability 
This Section shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in Article 12. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
A.  Grandfather Provisions   
This Section shall not apply to the following activities: 
1.  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before March 15, 2004. 
2.  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
3.  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of March 15, 2004. 
4.  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved as of March 15, 2006. 
B.  Exemptions   
The following specific activities are exempt from this Section. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
1.  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
a.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
b.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
c.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
d.  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
e.  Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
f.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
2.  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in Sec. 9.2.4.B.1. above. 
3.  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this Section takes effect or approved under the terms of this Section. 
4.  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this Section takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
5.  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this Section, the person performing it shall report such work to the City Manager on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit, submit the necessary documentation to obtain a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the City Manager to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
6.  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for 3 years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
C.  Application   
After March 15, 2004, the stream buffer requirements stipulated herein shall apply to new subdivisions and site plans or any other construction or land disturbance in the vicinity of a stream, whether or not the stream is located within the parcel where the activity is proposed. 
D.  Development within a Buffer   
Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to Sec. 9.2.5.B. 
9.2.5. - Land Development Requirements 
A.  Buffer and Setback Requirements   
All land development activity subject to this Section shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
2.  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 

3.  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
B.  Variance Procedures   
Variances from the above buffer and setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
1.  Where a parcel was platted prior to March 15, 2004, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this Section, and the City Manager finds and determines that the requirements of this Section prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance requires mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
2.  Except as provided above, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall grant no variance from any provision of this Section without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the Zoning Board of Appeals. The City shall give public notice of each such public hearing in accordance with the procedures for variances in Sec. 11.2.9. The City Manager shall be present at any such variance hearings and the Board shall consider the testimony of the City Manager when granting any variance or relief from the requirements of this Section. 
3.  Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
a.  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing as of March 15, 2004 prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
b.  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in the Section would create an extreme hardship. 
4.  Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of this Section, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
5.  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information in addition to the requirements of Article 11.: 
a.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
b.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
c.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
d.  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
e.  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
f.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
g.  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and 
h.  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
6.  In addition to the variance criteria for approval in Article 11., the following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
a.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
b.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
c.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; 
d.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
e.  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; and 
f.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
9.2.6. - Other Buffer Regulations and Requirements 
This Section is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this Section should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this Section imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
9.2.7. - Development on Buffer Zone Properties 
A.  Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
1.  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than two-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback. 
2.  A description of all proposed land disturbance or land development within the buffer and setback; 
3.  When a mitigation or restoration plan is required by the City Manager, such restoration plans shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer or other qualified professional familiar with stream bank restoration or bioengineering, as appropriate, and shall include a certification from such professional engineer or other qualified professional that the plan is in accordance with current recommended practices for the protection of riparian or aquatic environments; and 
4.  Any other documentation that the City Manager may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to ensure that this Section is addressed in the approval process. 
B.  All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. In addition to the required paper copies, a digital file of the property survey, final plat or site plan depicting the affected stream buffer areas shall be provided to the City Manager in an acceptable format. The survey information shall be georeferenced to the State Plane Coordinate System (Georgia West). 
9.2.8. - Responsibility 
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this Section shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon City, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
9.2.9. - Inspection 
A.  The City Manager may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the City Manager or his designee in making such inspections. The City Manager shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as he/she may reasonably deem necessary to carry out his/her duties as prescribed in this Section, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
B.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the City Manager who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his/her official duties. 
9.2.10. - Violations, Enforcement and Penalties 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this Section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
A.  Notice of Violation   
If the City Manager determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this Section, he/she shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
1.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
2.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
3.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
4.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
5.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
6.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals by filing a written notice of appeal within 10 calendar days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient). 
B.  Penalties   
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the City Manager shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the City Manager may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
1.  Stop Work Order   
The City Manager may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
2.  Withhold Certificate of Occupancy   
The City Manager may refuse to authorize a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
3.  Suspension, Revocation or Modification of Permit   
The City Manager may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the City Manager may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
4.  Penalties   
In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the City Manager shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the City Manager has taken one or more of the actions described above, the City Manager may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Any violation of this article is punishable, upon conviction, according to the provisions of Section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances. Each day any violation of this Section shall continue shall constitute a separate defense. 
C.  Appeals   
Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the City Manager may file an appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to the provisions of Sec. 11.2.10. 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 2, 1-20-15) 
Sec. 9.3. - Stormwater Management 

9.3.1. - Description 
This Section addresses post-development stormwater management requirements for new development and redevelopment in the City. The Section defines requirements for a post-development stormwater management plan, which is required in order to undertake land development activities. The plan shall contain the details of how the development will address post-development stormwater runoff quality and quantity impacts resulting from the permanent alteration of the character and hydrology of the land surface as well as the nonpoint source pollution from land use activities. The Section also outlines the water quantity and quality performance design criteria for managing this runoff and specifies local requirements for the use of structural stormwater controls and nonstructural practices, in order to protect public health and safety; for the protection of public and private property and infrastructure, and for the protection of the environment. Ongoing long-term inspection and maintenance provisions are also required by this Section. The majority of technical criteria and standards required by this Section are adopted by reference through the use of the Georgia Stormwater Management Design Manual, as may be amended by local requirements contained in the City's stormwater management policy guidelines. 
9.3.2. - Introduction 
It is hereby determined that: 
A.  Land development projects and other land use conversions, and their associated changes to land cover, permanently alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, which in turn increase flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; 
B.  Land development projects and other land use conversions also contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
C.  The impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quantity and quality can affect public safety, public and private property, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; These adverse impacts can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff quantity and quality from new development and redevelopment, by the use of both structural facilities as well as nonstructural measures, such as the conservation of open space and greenspace areas. The preservation and protection of natural area and greenspace for stormwater management benefits is encouraged through the use of incentives or "credits." The Georgia Greenspace Program provides a mechanism for the preservation and coordination of those greenspace areas which provide stormwater management quality and quantity benefits; 
D.  Localities in the State of Georgia are required to comply with a number of both state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution; 
E.  Therefore, the City has established this set of stormwater management policies to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of postdevelopment stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It has determined that it is in the public interest to regulate post-development stormwater runoff discharges in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, post-construction soil erosion and sedimentation, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with post-development stormwater runoff. 
9.3.3. - General Provisions 
A.  Purpose and Intent   
The purpose of this Section is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This Section seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
1.  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
2.  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, stream bank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
3.  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
4.  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
5.  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the County's greenspace protection plan; 
6.  Encourage preservation of existing tree canopy by reducing the applicable post-development stormwater management performance criteria, as specified in Sec. 9.3.5. 
7.  Encourage the use of green infrastructure and low impact development practices as defined in the Coastal Supplement to the Georgia Stormwater Management by reducing the applicable post-development stormwater management performance criteria, as specified in Sec. 9.3.5. 
8.  Require new developments and redeveloped properties that generate concentrated stormwater flows to connect to nearby storm sewer systems via underground conveyance; 
9.  Require new developments and redeveloped properties that generate concentrated stormwater flows to discharge above-ground flows into a stabilized, engineered channel from the point of release to the point of connection to the public stormwater system if connection to such storm sewer system via underground conveyance is not feasible; 
10.  Manage runoff impacts to adjacent properties by requiring post development runoff to be directed away from existing adjacent structures and released in a manner similar to the existing condition and by maintaining a drainage path for any existing off-site runoff that drains through the site; and 
11.  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities, and nonstructural stormwater management practices, green infrastructure practices, low impact development practices, and maintaining existing trees/canopies to be preserved to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and 
12.  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and longterm follow up. 
B.  Additional Requirements   
The list above is a general set of objectives to reduce the impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quantity and quality from land development activities. The City may establish additional requirements in the stormwater management policy guidelines, which set more specific objectives based upon a watershed management plan, a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit requirement, impervious surface targets, the findings of a watershed assessment or study, or in order to address a local flooding or water quality problem or to assist in compliance with a pollutant total maximum daily load (TMDL) goal or restriction. 
C.  Applicability   
This Section shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, land disturbance applications, and grading applications. The following applicability table lists categories of sites and developments and defines applicable stormwater management criteria based upon defined parameters of improvements or land disturbing activities associated with the project. The standards of this Section (including, but not limited to, the performance criteria of Sec. 9.3.5.) apply to all new development or redevelopment unless otherwise indicated in the following table. 
Applicability Table Type of Site/Development Defined Parameters Applicable Criteria Hotspot Land Use (as defined by City Manager) Any creation, addition, and/or replacement of any impervious area and/or land disturbing activity, regardless of size of these improvements/activities. All stormwater management criteria (see Notes 1. and 2.). Agricultural or Silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities Any creation, addition, and/or replacement of impervious area or any land disturbing activity. All stormwater management criteria, with the exception of water quality, stream channel protection, overbank flood protection and extreme flood protection performance criteria. Repairs to Stormwater Management System Any repairs to stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the City Manager. All stormwater management criteria, with the exception of water quality, stream channel protection, overbank flood protection and extreme flood protection performance criteria. Minor subdivision, or the new development and redevelopment of a detached single-family dwelling on a lot of record (See Note 3.) New development and redevelopment where the post development runoff does increase more than 0.55 cfs from the pre-development runoff, using the 10-year storm event. (See Note 4.) All stormwater management performance criteria; however, water quality is not required until the creation, addition, and/or replacement of impervious area is 5,000 SF or more (see Notes 1. and 2.). New development and redevelopment where the post development runoff does not increase more than 0.55 cfs from the pre-development runoff, using the 10-year storm event. (See Note 4.) All stormwater management criteria, with the exception of water quality, stream channel protection, overbank flood protection and extreme flood protection performance criteria. Major subdivision, or any new development and redevelopment, not specifically listed above (See Note 3.) The creation, addition, and/or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious area; and/or 10,000 square feet or more of land disturbing activities. All stormwater management criteria, with the exception of water quality performance criteria (see Notes 1. and 2.). The creation, addition, and/or replacement of more than 1,200 square feet but less than 5,000 square feet of impervious area; and/or 5,000 square feet to less than 10,000 square feet of land disturbing activities. All stormwater management criteria, with the exception of water quality performance criteria (see Notes 1. and 2.). The creation, addition, and/or replacement of less than 1,200 square feet and below of impervious area; and/or less than 5,000 square feet of land disturbing activities. All stormwater management criteria except water quality, unless a temporary deferral is requested by applicant and granted by City Manager (see Notes 1., 2., and 5.).  
Applicability Table Notes: 
1.  When conducting stormwater management performance criteria calculations, the pre-developed condition of an existing impervious area that is removed shall revert to the coefficient/curve number for such area in its natural undeveloped state. (Refer to Pre-development definition within Article 12. and the City's Stormwater Management Policy Guidelines.) 
2.  When performing the overbank and extreme flood protection stormwater management criteria, attenuate the stormwater runoff to a level of 90 percent of that which would be generated from the site in its natural undeveloped state for all storms from the 2-year, 5-year, 10-year, 25-year, 50-year, and 100-year storm. Refer to Sec. 9.3.5.C. and Sec. 9.3.5.D. for overbank and extreme flood protection performance criteria; Sec. 9.3.4.C.3.d. for redevelopment site limits; and the City's Stormwater Management Policy Guidelines. 
3.  In subdivisions and/or similar phased development projects, multiple separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different schedules. In order to establish the applicable parameter that defines the development, the creation, addition, and/or replacement of impervious areas shall be totaled for all of the multiple separate land activities that will be associated with the site, regardless of ownership. 
4.  A 0.55 cfs increase is equivalent to approximately 4,058 square feet of impervious surface. 
5.  If the site does not have an existing stormwater detention facility, the required attenuation of the post-development stormwater runoff to meet the stream channel protection, overbank flood protection and extreme flood protection criteria may be deferred no more than once in a 5-year period. Any such deferral expires at the time of any subsequent development or redevelopment of the property. 
D.  Compatibility with Other Regulations   
This Section is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
E.  Stormwater Design Manual   
The City Manager will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, Coastal Supplement to the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, and any relevant local addenda as may be established in the City's stormwater management policy guidelines, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and the City's stormwater management policy guidelines may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. All references to the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM) and Coastal Supplement to the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual shall mean the latest edition. 
9.3.4. - Permit Procedures and Requirements 
A.  Permit Application Requirements   
1.  No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this Section and obtaining a stormwater management permit prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
2.  Unless specifically exempted by this Section, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the City Manager a permit application on a form provided by the City Manager for that purpose. 
3.  Unless otherwise exempted by this Section, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
a.  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with Sec. 9.3.4.B.; 
b.  Stormwater management plan in accordance with Sec. 9.3.4.C.; 
c.  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with Sec. 9.3.4.D., if applicable; 
d.  Performance bond in accordance with Sec. 9.3.4.E., if applicable; and 
e.  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with Sec. 9.3.4.F. 
B.  Stormwater Concept Plan Meeting   
Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, it is recommended that the land owner or developer meet with the City Manager for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting should take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process, and before formal application is made to the Planning Commission for subdivision or site plan approval. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. To accomplish this goal the following information should be included in the concept plan which should be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
1.  Existing Conditions/Proposed Site Plans   
Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys; boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, walkways, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. Plans shall be at a minimum scale of 1 inch equals 20 feet (1" = 20') and shall contain elevation contours at a minimum 2-foot intervals, or as otherwise stipulated in the stormwater management policy guidelines. 
2.  Natural Resources Inventory   
A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
3.  Stormwater Management System Concept Plan   
A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain and floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings, where applicable. Local watershed plans, the City's greenspace protection plan (if applicable), and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
C.  Stormwater Management Plan Requirements   
1.  The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this Section, including the performance criteria set forth in Sec. 9.3.5. below. This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this Section and be prepared under the direct supervisory control of either a registered professional engineer or a registered landscape architect licensed in the State of Georgia. The requirements of Sec. 9.3.4.C.3.c. Existing Conditions Hydrologic Analysis, Sec. 9.3.4.C.3.d., Post-Development Hydrologic Analysis, Sec. 9.3.4.C.3.e., Stormwater Management System and Sec. 9.3.4.C.3.f., Post-Development Downstream Analysis shall be prepared under the direct supervisory control of a registered professional engineer, who shall seal and sign the work. Portions of the overall plan may be prepared and stamped by a registered land surveyor licensed in the State of Georgia as appropriate, such as boundary surveys, contour maps, erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
2.  The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this Section are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. In addition to the requirements stipulated in the stormwater management policy guidelines, the stormwater management plan shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Concentrated Stormwater Runoff   
All new development and redeveloped properties that generate a concentrated stormwater flow are required to: 
i.  Connect to nearby storm sewer systems via underground conveyances. 
ii.  Discharge such concentrated flows into a stabilized, engineered channel, from the point of release to the point of connection to the public stormwater system in cases where the City Manager determines that connection to existing storm sewer systems via underground conveyances is not feasible. 
iii.  Prevent concentrated surface stormwater discharge across streets, sidewalks, or other public improvements. Such concentrated surface stormwater discharge is not permitted. 
b.  Manage Runoff Impacts   
Manage runoff impacts to adjacent properties by requiring post-development runoff to be directed away from existing adjacent structures and released in a manner similar to the existing condition, and by maintaining a drainage path for any existing off-site runoff that drains through the site. The predevelopment runoff patterns/paths shall be maintained. 
c.  Detention or Retention   
In order to minimize the risk of pollution or adverse environmental impact, stormwater detention or retention ponds shall be set back from property boundaries a minimum distance, as follows: 
i.  10 feet from a property line; 
ii.  100 feet from a private well; 
iii.  250 feet from a known contaminate source; 
iv.  50 feet from a septic system tank or leach field. 
d.  Digital File   
In addition to the required paper copies, a digital file of the property survey, final plat or site plan depicting the affected land disturbance and stormwater system areas shall be provided to the City Manager in an acceptable format. The survey information shall be geo-referenced to the State Plane Coordinate System (Georgia West) and the Mean Sea Level Datum. 
e.  Fencing   
Permanent fencing at least 6 feet in height shall be required around all detention or retention facilities having a maximum water depth of more than 3.5 feet or a bank with slope ratio greater than 1.5 horizontal to 1.0 vertical. Fencing shall be installed and maintained to allow the free flow of runoff into the detention or retention facility. Fencing shall include a gate of sufficient size to permit entrance of equipment necessary to allow periodic maintenance. Fencing may be waived by the City Manager in nonresidential developments where the detention facility is 500 feet of more from a residence and in residential developments where detention is provided in natural areas such as stream channels, if permitted, and where fencing would affect stream flow or cause other environmental damage. 
f.  Location of Detention Facilities   
When an aboveground detention or retention facility is to be used on a site to be developed with single-family, two-family or townhouse dwellings, such a facility shall not be located in front of the front building line. This requirement may be waived by the City Commission when it is not feasible to achieve the required detention or retention in any other manner. 
3.  The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
a.  Common Address and Legal Description of Site   
The description shall include a metes and bounds description of the site, parcel tax ID, and total site acreage. 
b.  Vicinity Map   
The vicinity map shall be at a scale no larger than 1 inch = 1,000 feet and shall show the boundaries of the site relative to the surrounding area. 
c.  Existing Conditions Hydrologic Analysis   
The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. The predevelopment conditions for redevelopment sites shall be modeled in accordance with the City's stormwater management policy guidelines. 
d.  Post-Development Hydrologic Analysis   
The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in Sec. 9.3.5.; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50% of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in Sec. 9.3.5. must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. The spreadsheet-based computer modeling tool developed by the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District, when available, may be utilized to perform the post-development hydrologic water quality analysis. 
e.  Stormwater Management System   
The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum hydraulic head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes for all outlet control structures or devices; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in Sec. 9.3.5., drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
f.  Post-Development Downstream Analysis   
A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten% of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual, and any other requirements stipulated in the City's stormwater management policy guidelines. 
g.  Construction-Phase Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan   
An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with Sec. 9.4. Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control, and/or NPDES permit when required for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
h.  Landscaping and Open Space Plan   
A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
i.  Operations and Maintenance Plan   
Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
j.  Maintenance Access Easements   
The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. The local government will establish which stormwater facilities and practices will require regular maintenance. 
k.  Inspection and Maintenance Agreements   
Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is acceptable to the City Manager and is dedicated to and accepted by the City as provided in Sec. 9.3.4.D. below, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance with Sec. 9.3.4.D. 
i.  Local and Non-Local Permits   
The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the City Manager that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
D.  Stormwater Management Inspection and Maintenance Agreements   
Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the City Manager requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. The executed stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement shall include but is not limited to structural stormwater control facilities, nonstructural stormwater management practices, green infrastructure practices, low impact development practices, and maintaining existing trees/canopies to be preserved. 
1.  All private stormwater facilities and practices will require formal inspection and maintenance agreements. 
2.  The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the City Manager prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat or site plan approval. 
3.  The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless the facility is dedicated to, and officially accepted by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
4.  As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
5.  In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City Manager may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in Sec. 9.3.5. 
6.  The City, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this Section and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by fee simple title, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
7.  The City Manager or the [City Manager's designee] is authorized to execute such maintenance agreements on behalf of the City, including any such maintenance agreements entered into prior to the enactment of this Section. 
E.  Performance and Maintenance Bonds   
Maintenance of private facilities shall be performed in accordance with and at the frequency stipulated by the maintenance agreement. If upon an inspection by the City Manager, it is found that the facility is not being maintained in accordance with maintenance agreement, the City Manager may require that, in addition to the owner providing the required maintenance to bring the facility into compliance with the applicable regulations, the owner shall post a performance bond with the City, in an amount stipulated by the City Manager, to ensure the future maintenance obligations are met. 
F.  Application Procedure   
1.  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the City Manager. 
2.  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in Sec. 9.3.4.A. above (2 copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
3.  The City Manager shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
4.  If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the City Manager shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event Sec. 9.3.4.F.3. above and this paragraph shall apply to such resubmittal. 
5.  Upon a finding by the City Manager that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this Section, the City Engineer may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
6.  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this Section and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
b.  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
c.  The City Manager shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
d.  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the City Manager; and 
e.  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by Sec. 9.3.6.B. 
G.  Application Review Fees   
The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the City and shall be made at the time of application, and prior to the review of the application. No building permit for the development shall be issued until all required stormwater and soil erosion and sediment control permits and review fees have been paid. 
H.  Modifications for Off-Site Facilities   
1.  The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be located on a fee simple lot with adequate access if it is to be dedicated to the City, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the City Manager which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
2.  To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City Manager that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
a.  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
b.  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
c.  Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
d.  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; 
e.  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any known state or federal regulations; or 
f.  Adverse impact to the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit. 
9.3.5. - Post-Development Stormwater Management Performance Criteria 
The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this Section: 
A.  Water Quality   
All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
1.  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
2.  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
3.  Appropriate green infrastructure practices and low impact development practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Coastal Supplement to the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
4.  Preservation of existing tree canopies as defined in the City's Stormwater Management Policy Guidelines; and 
5.  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the City Manager are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
B.  Stream Channel Protection   
Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
1.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the 75-foot stream buffer required by Sec. 9.2. Stream Buffer Protection. 
2.  Twenty-four-hour extended detention storage of the 1-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the City Manager for sites that discharge directly into larger streams, rivers, wetlands, or lakes, or to a man-made channel or conveyance system where the reduction in these flows will not have an impact on upstream or downstream stream bank or channel integrity, and provided that in any case where the requirements for stream channel protection are not met on site, the applicant shall pay into a stormwater mitigation bank established by the City the cost of providing the required level of stream channel protection, including easements and/or property acquisition costs and cost of design and construction of the appropriate treatment protection feature or features. 
3.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
C.  Overbank Flooding Protection   
Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to 90% of the pre-development rate for the 2-year through 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the City Manager for sites where the post-development downstream analysis submitted by the applicant shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions, and provided that in any case where the requirements for overbank flood protection are not met on site, the applicant shall pay into a stormwater mitigation bank established by the City the cost of providing the required level of overbank flood protection, including easements and/or property acquisition costs and cost of design and construction of the appropriate treatment protection feature or features. 
D.  Extreme Flooding Protection   
Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) and safely conveying the post-development peak discharge rate to 90% of the pre-development rate for the 50-year and 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the City Manager for sites where the post-development downstream analysis submitted by the applicant shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions, and provided that in any case where the requirement for extreme flood protection are not met on site, the applicant shall pay into a stormwater mitigation bank established by the City the cost of providing the required level of extreme flood protection, including easements and/or property acquisition costs and cost of design and construction of the appropriate treatment protection feature or features. 
E.  Structural Stormwater Controls   
All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual or the City's stormwater management policy guidelines, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the City Manager before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the City Manager may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
F.  Stormwater Credits for Nonstructural Measures   
The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required above. The applicant may, if approved by the City Manager, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
G.  Green Infrastructure and Low Impact Development Practices   
The use of one or more green infrastructure and low impact development practices by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the criteria for water quality volume, stream channel protection, overbank flood protection, and extreme flood protection above. The minimum criteria and the potential reduction in the post development stormwater management criteria as defined in the Coastal Supplement to the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. The applicant may, if approved by the City Manager, take credit for the use of these green infrastructure and low impact development practices. See the City Stormwater Policy Guidelines for additional information as to how to implement these credits. 
H.  Preservation of Existing Tree Canopies   
Taking measure to preserve existing tree canopies during land development activities by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the criteria for water quality volume, stream channel protection, over-bank flood protection, and extreme flood protection above. The minimum criteria and potential reductions to the post-development stormwater management criteria is defined in the City's Stormwater Policy Guidelines. The applicant may, if approved by the City Manager, take credit for the preservation of existing tree canopies. See the City Stormwater Policy Guidelines for additional information as to how to implement these credits 
I.  Drainage System Guidelines   
1.  Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters, shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. 
2.  Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
b.  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and 
c.  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
d.  Stormwater conveyances shall comply with the requirements of Sec. 9.3.4.C.2., paragraphs a. Concentrated Stormwater Runoff, and b. Manage Runoff Impacts. 
3.  Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry or convey runoff from a single lot must meet the requirements of Sec. 9.3.5.I.2.d. 
J.  Dam Design Guidelines   
Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which contains an existing dam shall ensure that the dam remains in compliance with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety or other applicable regulations. 
9.3.6. - Construction Inspections 
A.  Inspection   
1.  Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the City Manager or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the City Manager. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
a.  The date and location of the inspection; 
b.  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
c.  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
d.  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
2.  If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
B.  Final Inspection and As Built Plans   
Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final as-built conditions and design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A satisfactory final inspection by the City Manager is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
9.3.7. - Ongoing Inspection and Maintenance 
A.  Long-Term Maintenance Inspection   
1.  Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this Section. A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been adequately maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the City Manager shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City Manager may correct the violation as provided in Sec. 9.3.7.D. 
2.  Inspection programs by the City Manager may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
B.  Right-of-Entry for Inspection   
The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the City Manager to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this Section is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this Section. 
C.  Records of Maintenance Activities   
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the City Manager. 
D.  Failure to Maintain   
If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City Manager after 30 days written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by having the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition performed by City personnel or by utilizing contracted services. The City Manager may assess the owner of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and the lien may be placed on the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
9.3.8. - Violations, Enforcement Penalties, and Appeals 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this Section or the requirements of an approved storm-water management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this Section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
A.  Notice of Violation   
If the City Manager determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this Section, he/she shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this Section without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
1.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
2.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
3.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
4.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this Section and the date for the completion of such remedial action, such date to be not less than ten days from after the date of the notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient); 
5.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
6.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days after the notice of violation. 
B.  Penalties   
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the City Manager shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the City Manager may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
1.  Stop Work Order   
The City Manager may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
2.  Certificate of Occupancy   
The City Manager may to authorize a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
3.  Suspension, Revocation or Modification of Permit   
The UDO Administrator may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the City Engineer may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
4.  Penalties   
In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the City Manager shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the City Manager has taken one or more of the actions described above, the City Manager may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Any violation of this Section is punishable, upon conviction, according to the provisions of Section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances. Each day any violation of this Section shall continue shall constitute a separate defense. 
C.  Appeals   
Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the City Manager may file an appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to the provisions of Sec. 11.2.10. 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 3, 1-20-15) 
Sec. 9.4. - Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control 

9.4.1. - Title 
This Section will be known as the "City Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance." 
9.4.2. - Purpose 
The purpose of this Section is to establish guidelines for the control of soil erosion and sediment pollution as required by the Georgia Erosion and Sediment Control Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., as amended. 
9.4.3. - Exemptions 
This Section shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
A.  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968; 
B.  Granite quarrying and land-clearing for such quarrying; 
C.  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
D.  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than 1 acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than 1 acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. There is also established a 75-foot buffer required by Sec. 9.2. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph and Sec. 9.2. shall be enforced by the City; 
E.  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aquaculture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
F.  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in Sec. 9.4.4.C.15. and Sec. 9.4.4.C.16. no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
G.  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NCRS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
H.  Any project involving less than 5,000 square feet of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than 5,000 square feet which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the City from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted in this Sec. 9.4.3.; 
I.  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of Department of Transportation or state road and tollway authority which disturb 1 or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
J.  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United states engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
K.  Any public water system reservoir. 
9.4.4. - Minimum Requirements 
A.  General Provisions   
Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the state (NPDES) general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this Section shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of Sec. 9.4.4.B. and Sec. 9.4.4.C. below. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this Section and the state (NPDES) general permit. 
B.  Minimum Requirements/BMPs   
1.  Best management practices as set forth in Sec. 9.4.4.B. and Sec. 9.4.4.C. below shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with Sec. 9.4.4.B.2. below any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
2.  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by the City or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
3.  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by the City or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure occurs. 
4.  The UDO Administrator may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the Board of Natural Resources, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
C.  Rules, Regulations, Ordinances, and Resolutions Adopted   
The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
1.  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
2.  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
3.  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
4.  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
5.  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
6.  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
7.  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
8.  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
9.  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
10.  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
11.  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
12.  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
13.  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
14.  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in Sec. 9.4.4.B.2.; 
15.  Except as provided in Sec. 9.4.4.C.16. below, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table year round; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. There is also established a 75-foot buffer required by Sec. 9.2. Unless a variance is granted by the director, the buffer that offers the greatest protection shall apply. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
i.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
ii.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
16.  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the Board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. There is also established a 75-foot buffer required by Sec. 9.2. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
i.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
ii.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
D.  Stream Buffer Requirements   
Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent the City from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in Sec. 9.4.4.B. and Sec. 9.4.4.C. Stream buffers shall be as specified in Sec. 9.2. 
E.  Injury to Property   
The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this Section or the terms of the permit. 
9.4.5. - Application/Permit Process 
A.  General   
The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinances, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, stream buffer protection ordinance, this Section, and other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. The City shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. 
B.  Application Requirements   
1.  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City without first obtaining a permit from the City to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
2.  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the City and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in Sec. 9.4.5.C. below. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of Sec. 9.4.4.B.. and Sec. 9.4.4.C. will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by five copies of the applicant's soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
3.  A fee, in accordance with the City's current fee schedule shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
4.  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
5.  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the City shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the City. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by Sec. 9.4.4.C.15. and Sec. 9.4.4.C.16. have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required by Sec. 9.4.5.B.7. below, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the City and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the City to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The City, if so authorized to conduct plan review, shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the City to act within 35 days of receipt shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
6.  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this Section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the City may deny the permit application. 
7.  The City may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this Section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the City may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the City with respect to alleged permit violations. 
C.  Plan Requirements   
1.  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in Sec. 9.4.4.B. and Sec. 9.4.4.C., or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this Section. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
2.  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
D.  Permits   
1.  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the City of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
2.  No permit shall be issued by the City unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the City has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this Section, any variances required by Sec. 9.4.4.C.15. and Sec. 9.4.4.C.16. are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per Sec. 9.4.5.B.7. are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
3.  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
4.  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the City, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this Section. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
5.  The City may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application. 
9.4.6. - Inspection and Enforcement 
A.  The City will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the City shall regulate both primary and secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this Section, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this Section. 
B.  The City shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this Section, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
C.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the City, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. 
D.  The District or the Commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The districts or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
E.  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
9.4.7. - Penalties and Incentives 
A.  Failure to Obtain a Permit   
If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this Section without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City. 
B.  Stop Work Orders   
1.  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this Section, the director or the City shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the City shall issue a stop work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the City shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning; 
2.  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the City shall issue an immediate stop work order; and 
3.  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
4.  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the City or by the director, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the City or by the director. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
C.  Bond Forfeiture   
If through inspection it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, they shall be deemed in violation of this Section and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited their performance bond, if required to post 1 under the provisions of Sec. 9.4.5.B.7. The City may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
D.  Monetary Penalties   
Any person who violates any provisions of this Section, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this Section, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this Section shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Section, notwithstanding any provisions in the City Charter to the contrary, the municipal court shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
9.4.8. - Education and Certification 
A.  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
B.  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site, a minimum of 1 person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said person and who meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
C.  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this Section. 
D.  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person involved in land disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
9.4.9. - Administrative Appeal and Judicial Review 
A.  Administrative Remedies   
The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the City upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of this Section; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to an appeal before the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of Article 11. 
9.4.10. - Liability 
A.  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this Section, nor the compliance with provisions of this Section shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the City or district for damage to any person or property. 
B.  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this Section or the terms of the permit. 
C.  No provision of this Section shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
Sec. 9.5. - Floodplain Management/Flood Damage Prevention 

9.5.1. - Description 
A.  Floodplain management involves the designation of floodprone areas and the managing of their uses. It is also aimed at minimizing modifications to streams, reducing flood hazards, and protecting the beneficial uses of the floodplain such as water quality protection. As such, floodplain management can be seen as a subset of the larger consideration of surface water and stormwater management. 
B.  Floodplain regulations and development restrictions can greatly reduce future flooding impacts, preserve greenspace and habitat, and protect their function in safely conveying floodwaters and protecting water quality. This Section aims to help communities integrate floodplain management with stormwater management during the land development process. 
9.5.2. - Introduction 
It is hereby determined that: 
A.  The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  Flood hazard areas can serve important stormwater management, water quality, stream bank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological purposes when permanently protected as undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas. 
C.  Effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can (1) Protect human life and health; (2) Minimize damage to private property; (3) Minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; and (4) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
D.  Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and Section 36-1-20(a) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Commission establishes this set of floodplain management and flood hazard reduction provisions for the purpose of regulating the use of flood hazard areas. It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property. 
9.5.3. - General Provision 
A.  Purpose and Intent   
The purpose of this Section is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, stream bank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
1.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
2.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
3.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
4.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
5.  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and 
6.  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, stream bank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
B.  Applicability   
This Section shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the City. 
C.  Designation of Ordinance Administrator   
The UDO Administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this Section. 
D.  Basis for Establishing Areas of Special Flood Hazard, Areas of Future-Conditions Flood Hazard and Associated Floodplain Characteristics - Flood Area Maps and Studies   
For the purposes of defining and determining "Areas of Special Flood Hazard," "Areas of Future-conditions Flood Hazard," "Areas of Shallow Flooding," "Base Flood Elevations," "Floodplains," "Floodways," "Future-conditions Flood Elevations," "Future-conditions Floodplains," potential flood hazard or risk categories as shown on FIRM maps, and other terms used in this ordinance, the following documents and sources may be used for such purposes and are adopted by reference thereto: 
1.  The Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated May 16, 2013, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto. For those land areas acquired by City of Decatur through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for DeKalb, dated May 16, 2013, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto and hereby adopted by reference. 
2.  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the base or one-percent (100-year) floodplain and flood-prone areas, including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, State or Federal agency applicable to the City; and 
b.  Any base flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared utilizing FEMA approved methodology and approved by the UDO Administrator. 
3.  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas, including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, State or Federal agency applicable to the City; and 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared utilizing FEMA approved methodology approved by the UDO Administrator. 
4.  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the Public Works Department, Division of Design, Environment and Construction. 
E.  Compatibility with Other Regulations   
This Section is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this Section are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
F.  Severability   
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this Section shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this Section. 
G.  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability   
The degree of flood protection required by this Section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This Section does not imply that land outside the Areas of Special Flood Hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Section shall not create liability on the part of the City or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Section or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
9.5.4. - Permit Procedures and Requirements 
A.  Permit Application Requirements   
1.  No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an Area of Special Flood Hazard or Area of Future-conditions Flood Hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this Section prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
2.  Unless specifically excluded by this Section, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the UDO Administrator a permit application on a form provided by the UDO Administrator for that purpose. 
3.  No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this Section. 
B. Floodplain Management Plan Requirements 
An application for a development project with any Area of Special Flood Hazard or Area of Future-conditions Flood Hazard located on the site shall include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
1.  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the above by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor. 
2.  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in Section 9.5.6.B.2; 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of flood openings as required in Section 9.5.6.A.5; and 
e.  Design plans certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). 
3.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
4.  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, Special Flood Hazard Areas and regulatory floodways, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
5.  Copies of all applicable State and Federal permits necessary for proposed development, including but not limited to, permits required by Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; 
6.  All appropriate certifications required under this ordinance. 
7.  In addition to the required paper copies, a digital file of the property survey, preliminary plat or site plan depicting the floodplain areas shall be provided to the UDO Administrator in an acceptable format. The survey information shall be geo-referenced to the State Plane Coordinate System (Georgia West) and shall be tied to the current mean sea level datum. 
8.  The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
C.  Construction Stage Submittal Requirements   
1.  For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the UDO Administrator a certified as-built Elevation Certificate or Floodproofing Certificate for non-residential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. A final Elevation Certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed professional engineer or architect and certified by same using the FEMA Floodproofing Certificate. This certification shall also include the design and operation/maintenance plan to assure continued viability of the floodproofing measures. 
2.  Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The UDO Administrator shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
D.  Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator   
Duties of the UDO Administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
1.  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this Section have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
2.  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; 
3.  When Base Flood Elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the UDO Administrator shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of Sections 9.5.5 and 9.5.6; 
4.  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new and substantially improved structures; 
5.  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
6.  When floodproofing is utilized for a non-residential structure, the UDO Administrator shall review the design and operation/maintenance plan and obtain certification from a licensed professional engineer or architect; 
7.  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (GA DNR) prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
8.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the Areas of Special Flood Hazard (e.g. where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the UDO Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this Section. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; 
9.  All records pertaining to the provisions of this Section shall be maintained in the office of the UDO Administrator and shall be open for public inspection; 
10.  Coordinate all flood insurance rate map (FIRM) revisions with the GA DNR and FEMA; and 
11.  Review variance applications and make recommendations to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
9.5.5. - Standards for Development 
A.  Definition of Floodplain Boundaries   
1.  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
2.  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the City. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the City, then it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the UDO Administrator. 
B.  Definition of Floodway Boundaries   
1.  The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the City. If floodway data is not available from the City, then it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the UDO Administrator. 
C.  General Standards   
1.  No development shall be allowed within any Area of Special Flood Hazard or Area of Future-conditions Flood Hazard that could result in any of the following: 
a.  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
b.  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
c.  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
d.  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
2.  Any development within any Area of Special Flood Hazard or Area of Future-conditions Flood Hazard allowed under Sec. 9.5.5.C.1. above shall also meet the following conditions: 
a.  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
b.  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2.0 percent; 
c.  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
d.  Verification of no-rise conditions (less than 0.01 foot), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of Section 9.5.5.D.; 
e.  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from flood waters; and 
f.  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) or Conditional Letter of Map Amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the UDO Administrator using the FEMA Community Concurrence forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of development, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys and plans for a final Letter of Map Revision (LOMR). 
D.  Engineering Study Requirements for Floodplain Encroachments   
An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and floodways. This study shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the UDO Administrator prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and floodways. This study shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the UDO Administrator prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
1.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
2.  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the UDO Administrator. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
3.  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
4.  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
E.  Floodway Encroachments   
1.  Located within Areas of Special Flood Hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
2.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in Section 9.5.5.E.2. below. 
3.  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment will not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A licensed professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
4.  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the UDO Administrator until an affirmative Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA or a no-rise certification is approved by the UDO Administrator. 
F.  Maintenance Requirements   
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on the property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is maintained. The UDO Administrator may direct the property owner (at no cost to the City) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the flood-plain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the UDO Administrator. 
9.5.6. - Provisions for Flood Damage Reduction 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions shall apply: 
A.  General Standards   
1.  New construction and substantial improvements of structures (residential or non-residential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of Sec. 9.5.5.C., Sec. 9.5.5.D. and Sec. 9.5.5.E. have been met; 
2.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure; 
3.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
4.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
5.  Elevated Buildings - All new construction and substantial improvements that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect to meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
i.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
ii.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
iii.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions 
b.  So as not to violate the "Lowest Floor" criteria of this ordinance, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms. 
6.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located 3 feet above the base flood elevation or 1 foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
7.  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable State requirements for resisting wind forces; 
8.  All proposed development shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the City to reduce exposure to flood hazards; 
9.  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
10.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
11.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to, or contamination from, such systems during flooding; 
12.  Other public utilities such as gas and electric systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or public safety hazards from them, during flooding; 
13.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this Section, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced; 
14.  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones, or multiple base flood elevations cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence; 
15.  When only a portion of a proposed structure is located within a flood zone or the future conditions floodplain, the entire structure shall meet the requirements of this Section; and 
16.  Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, shall be reasonably safe from flooding: 
a.  All such proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area; 
b.  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
c.  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
B.  Building Standards for Structures and Buildings within the Future-Conditions Floodplain   
1.  Residential Buildings   
a.  New Construction   
New construction of principal residential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of Sec. 9.5.5.C., Sec. 9.5.5.D. and Sec. 9.5.5.E. have been met. If all of the requirements of Sec. 9.5.5.C., Sec. 9.5.5.D. and Sec. 9.5.5.E. have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than 3 feet above the base flood elevation or 1 foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section Sec. 9.5.6.A.5. 
b.  Substantial Improvements   
Substantial improvement of any principal residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than 3 feet above the base flood elevation or 1 foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of Sec. 9.5.6.A.5. 
2.  Nonresidential Buildings   
a.  New Construction   
New construction of principal non-residential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of Sections 9.5.5.C., D. and E. have been met. If all of the requirements of Sections 9.5.5.C., D. and E. have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than 1 foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 9.5.6.A.5a. New construction that has met all of the requirements of Sections 9.5.5.C., D. and E. may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to 1 foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the UDO Administrator using the FEMA Flood-proofing Certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
b.  Substantial Improvements   
Substantial improvement of any principal non-residential structure located in A1- 30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the UDO Administrator to be elevated or floodproofed. Substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than 1 foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 9.5.6.A.5a. Substantial improvements may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to 1 foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the UDO Administrator using the FEMA Flood-proofing Certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
3.  Accessory Structures and Facilities   
Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which meet the requirements of Sections 9.5.5.C., D. and E. and are permitted to be located within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to provide adequate flood openings in accordance with Section 9.5.6.A.5a and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure. 
4.  Standards for Recreational Vehicles   
All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  Meet all the requirements for Residential Buildings-Substantial Improvements (Section 9.5.6.B.1.), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
5.  Standards for Manufactured Homes   
a.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of Sections 9.5.5.C., D. and E. have been met. If all of the requirements of Sections 9.5.5.C., D. and E. have been met, all new construction and substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than 3 feet above the base flood elevation or 1 foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 9.5.6.A.5a. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
i.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than 3 feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or 1 foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
ii.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of Section 9.5.6.-A.7. 
C.  Building Standards for Structures and Buildings Authorized Adjacent to the Future-Conditions Floodplain   
1.  Residential Buildings   
For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least 3 feet above the base flood elevation or 1 foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 9.5.6.A.5.a. 

2.  Nonresidential Buildings   
For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal non-residential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least 1 foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 9.5.6.A.5a. Non-residential buildings may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. 

D.  Building Standards for Residential Single-Lot Developments on Streams Without Established Base Flood Elevations and Floodway (A-Zones)   
For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has Areas of Special Flood Hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), the UDO Administrator shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a Federal, State, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this Section. If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
2.  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than 3 feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided for floodprone enclosures in accordance with Section 9.5.6.A.5.a. 
E.  Building Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO-Zones)   
Areas of Special Flood Hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of 1 to 3 feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than 1 foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least 3 feet above the highest adjacent grade. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 9.5.6.A.5a; 

2.  New construction and substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus 1 foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice, and shall provide such certification to the UDO Administrator using the FEMA Floodproofing Certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan; and 
3.  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
F.  Standards for Subdivision of Land   
1.  All subdivision proposals shall identify the Areas of Special Flood Hazard and Areas of Future-conditions Flood Hazard therein and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; 
2.  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; 
3.  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with Section 9.5.4.B.2; 
4.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
5.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters, and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; and 
6.  All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the City to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
9.5.7. - Variance Procedures 
The following variance procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity, or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this Section. 
A.  Requests for variances from the requirements of this Section shall be submitted in accordance with the procedures in Sec. 11.2.9. The UDO Administrator shall be present at all such Zoning Board of Appeals variance proceedings and the Board shall consider the UDO Administrator's testimony when deciding any variance. 
B.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
C.  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this Section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
D.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
E.  In reviewing such requests, the UDO Administrator and Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this Section. 
F.  Criteria for variances. 
1.  In addition to the criteria for variances in Sec. 11.2.9., a variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
2.  The provisions of this ordinance are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
3.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance resulting from the lowest floor elevation being placed below the base flood elevation will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property, and that such costs may be as high as $25.00 for each $100.00 of insurance coverage provided. 
4.  The UDO Administrator shall maintain the records of all variance actions, both granted and denied, and report them to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
G.  In addition to the requirements for variances in Sec. 11.2.9., any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the UDO Administrator and Zoning Board of Appeals shall deem necessary for the consideration of the request. 
H.  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this Section, the UDO Administrator and the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this Section. 
I.  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
9.5.8. - Violations, Enforcement and Penalties and Appeals 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this Section or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this Section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
A.  Notice of Violation   
If the UDO Administrator determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this Section, they shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this Section without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
1.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
2.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
3.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
4.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this Section and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
5.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
6.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the UDO Administrator by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation. 
B.  Penalties   
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the UDO Administrator shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than 10 days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the UDO Administrator may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
1.  Stop Work Order   
The UDO Administrator may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
2.  Withhold Certificate of Occupancy   
The UDO Administrator may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
3.  Suspension, Revocation or Modification of Permit   
The UDO Administrator may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the UDO Administrator may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
4.  Civil Penalties   
In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within 10 days, or such greater period as the UDO Administrator shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the UDO Administrator has taken one or more of the actions described above, the Municipal Court may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
5.  Criminal Penalties   
For intentional and flagrant violations of this Section, the UDO Administrator may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. For intentional and flagrant violations of this ordinance, the UDO Administrator may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in Municipal Court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
C.  Appeals   
Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the UDO Administrator may file an appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to the provisions of Sec. 11.2.10. 
Sec. 9.6. - Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection 

9.6.1. - Description 
An illicit discharge is defined as any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system (stormwater drainage system) that is not composed entirely of stormwater runoff (except for discharges allowed under an NPDES permit or non-polluting flows). These non-stormwater discharges occur due to illegal dumping or illegal connections to the stormwater drainage system. This Section provides the City with the authority to deal with illicit discharges and establishes enforcement actions for those persons or entities found to be in noncompliance or that refuse to allow access to their facilities. 
9.6.2. - Introduction 
It is hereby determined that: 
A.  Discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system that are not composed entirely of stormwater runoff contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
B.  These non-stormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and improper connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system from residential, industrial, commercial or institutional establishments; 
C.  These non-stormwater discharges not only impact waterways individually, but geographically dispersed, small volume non-stormwater discharges can have cumulative impacts on receiving waters; 
D.  The impacts of these discharges adversely affect public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
E.  These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges into the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
F.  Localities in the State of Georgia are required to comply with a number of state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution due to improper non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
G.  Therefore, the City adopts this Section to prohibit such non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. It is determined that the regulation of spills, improper dumping and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety, and the environment. 
9.6.3. - General Provisions 
A.  Purpose and Intent   
The purpose of this Section is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by Federal law. This Section establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this Section are to: 
1.  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system by any person; 
2.  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
3.  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the municipal separate storm sewer system; and 
4.  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this Section. 
B.  Applicability   
The provisions of this Section shall apply throughout the corporate limits of the City, Georgia. 
C.  Compatibility with Other Regulations   
This Section is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this Section are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this Section imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
D.  Responsibility for Administration   
The City Manager shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Section. 
9.6.4. - Prohibitions 
A.  Prohibition of Illicit Discharges   
No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
1.  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
2.  Washing of an individual vehicle by the owner of such vehicle while located on his/her own property and using biodegradable soap only; washing of an individual pet by the owner of such pet while located on his/her own property using biodegradable soap only; 
3.  Discharges or flows from fire fighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the City Manager as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
4.  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
B.  Prohibition of Illegal Connections   
The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
1.  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
2.  A person violates this Section if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the municipal separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
3.  Improper connections in violation of this Section must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the DeKalb County Water and Sewer Department. 
4.  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the City Manager requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the City Manager. 
9.6.5. - Industrial or Construction Activity Discharges 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the City Manager prior to allowing discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
9.6.6. - Access and Inspection of Properties and Facilities 
The City Manager shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this Section. 
A.  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the City Manager. 
B.  The owner or operator shall allow the City Manager ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
C.  The City Manager shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the City Engineer to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
D.  The City Manager may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the City Manager. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
E.  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the City Manager and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
F.  Unreasonable delays in allowing the City Manager access to a facility is a violation of this Section. 
G.  If the City Manager has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the City Manager is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this Section, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this Section or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the City Manager may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
9.6.7. - Notification of Accidental Discharges and Spills 
A.  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the municipal separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
B.  Said person shall notify the City Manager or other authorized enforcement agency in person, by phone, or by facsimile no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the City Manager within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
C.  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
D.  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this Section. 
9.6.8. - Violations, Enforcement and Penalties 
A.  Violations   
1.  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Section. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this Section, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this Section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
2.  In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the City Manager is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The City Manager is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in Sec. 9.6.8.E. below. 
B.  Notice of Violation   
Whenever the UDO Administrator finds that a violation of this Section has occurred, the UDO Administrator may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
1.  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this Section and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals by filing a written notice of appeal within 10 calendar days of service of notice of violation. 
2.  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
C.  Enforcement Measures After Appeal   
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 15 days of the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals upholding the decision of the City Manager then representatives of the City Manager may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary, and may utilize City personnel or employ qualified outside contractors capable of performing any work required, as appropriate, in order to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
D.  Costs of Abatement of the Violation   
1.  Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, pursuant to Sec. 9.6.8.B. above, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within 15 days of receipt of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
2.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall become liable to the City by reason of such violation. 
E.  Penalties   
In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein, the City Manager may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Any violation of this Section is punishable, upon conviction, according to the provisions of Section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances. Each day any violation of this Section shall continue shall constitute a separate defense. 
F.  Appeals   
Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the City Manager may file an appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to the provisions of Sec. 11.2.10. 
G.  Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance   
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Section is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
H.  Remedies Not Exclusive   
The remedies listed in this Section are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the City Manager may seek cumulative remedies. 
I.  Fee Recovery   
The City Manager may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this Section, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 4, 1-20-15) 
Sec. 9.7. - Stormwater Utility 

9.7.1. - Establishment of Utility 
A.  Findings   
The City Commissioners make the following findings of fact: 
1.  The professional engineering and financial analyses conducted on behalf of and submitted to the City Commissioners properly assess and define the stormwater management problems, needs, goals, program priorities and funding opportunities of the City. 
2.  Given the problems, needs, goals, program priorities and funding opportunities identified in the professional engineering and financial analyses submitted to the City, it is appropriate to authorize the establishment of a separate accounting unit which shall be dedicated specifically to the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of stormwater systems in the City. 
3.  Stormwater management is applicable and needed throughout the City. Intense urban development in the City has radically altered the natural hydrology of the area and the hydraulics of stormwater systems, with many natural elements having been replaced or augmented by man-made facilities. As a result, the specific service, system and facility demands in the City now exceed the service capability of many of the systems. An advanced level of service is needed in the City due to its urbanization. Therefore a stormwater utility service area subject to stormwater service charges should encompass the entirety of the City to enable the City to successfully manage, operate and improve stormwater systems at an advanced level. 
4.  It is most equitable that a portion of the needed stormwater service level continue to be funded from the City's general tax revenues, and therefore that the City Commissioners may allocate general fund support to stormwater management in the future in the form of a combination of service charge payments for City-owned properties and a supplemental allocation of general fund funding. 
5.  The stormwater needs in the City include but are not limited to protecting the public health, safety and welfare. Funding of stormwater services and facilities is therefore incidental to the fundamental regulatory function of the City in protecting the public health, safety and welfare. 
6.  Provision of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities renders and/or results in both service and benefit to individual properties, property owners, citizens and residents of the City and to all properties, property owners, citizens and residents of the City concurrently in a variety of ways as identified in the professional engineering and financial analyses, and the service and benefits differ among the individual properties, property owners, citizens and residents in relation to the demands they impose individually and collectively on the stormwater systems. 
7.  The service and benefit rendered or resulting from the provision of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities may differ over time depending on many factors and considerations, including but not limited to location, demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater programs, systems and facilities, and risk exposure. It is not practical to allocate the cost of the City's stormwater management programs, systems and facilities in direct relationship to the services or benefits rendered to or received by individual properties or persons over a brief span of time, but it is both practical and equitable to allocate the cost of stormwater management among properties and persons in proportion to the long-term demands they impose on the City's stormwater programs, systems and facilities which render or result in services and benefits. 
8.  The City presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities which have been developed, installed and acquired through various mechanisms over many years. The future usefulness and value of the existing stormwater systems and facilities owned and operated by the City, and of future additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the City to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use and enhance the stormwater systems and facilities in the City. In order to do so, the City must have adequate and stable funding for its stormwater management program operating and capital investment needs. 
9.  The City Commissioners find, conclude and determine that a stormwater utility provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering stormwater management services and benefits throughout the City, and the most equitable means to fund an advanced level of stormwater services in the City through stormwater service charges and other mechanisms as described in the professional engineering and financial analyses prepared for the City. 
B.  Establishment of a Utility and an Enterprise Fund   
1.  There is hereby established a stormwater utility which shall be responsible for stormwater management programs throughout the City, and which shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of stormwater systems and facilities. The stormwater utility management unit shall be composed of such personnel, employees and agents of the City as the City Commissioners may from time to time determine and their compensation shall be fixed and determined by the City Manager as approved by the City Commissioners. 
2.  A stormwater enterprise fund shall be established in the City budget and accounting system for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the stormwater utility, including but not limited to rentals, rates, charges, fees and licenses as may be established by the City Commissioners and other funds that may be transferred or allocated to the stormwater utility. All revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be placed in the stormwater enterprise fund and all expenses of the utility shall be paid from the stormwater enterprise fund, except that other revenues receipts, and resources not accounted for in the stormwater utility enterprise fund may be applied to stormwater management programs, facilities, operations and capital investments as deemed appropriate by the City Commissioners, upon recommendation by the City Manager. 
3.  The City Commissioners hereby confer upon the stormwater utility operational control over the existing stormwater management programs, systems and facilities performed, provided or owned and heretofore operated by the City and other related assets, including but not limited to properties other than roadways upon which such systems and facilities are located, easements, rights-of-entry and access, and certain equipment used solely for stormwater management. 
C.  Scope of Responsibility   
1.  The City owns or has legal access for purposes of operation, maintenance and improvement of those stormwater systems and facilities which: 
a.  Are located within public streets, rights-of-way and easements; 
b.  Are subject to easements, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other permanent provisions for adequate access for operation, maintenance and/or improvement of systems and facilities; or 
c.  Are located on public lands to which the City has adequate access for operation, maintenance and/or improvement of systems and facilities. 
2.  Operation, maintenance and/or improvement of stormwater systems and facilities which are located on private property or public property not owned by the City and for which there has been no public dedication of such systems and facilities for operation, maintenance and/or improvement of the systems and facilities shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, except as that responsibility may be otherwise affected by the laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America. 
3.  It is the express intent of this Section to protect the public health, safety and welfare of all properties and persons in general by regulation of the stormwater system and facilities, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specific property within or outside the boundaries of the City. The City expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the City, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. 
4.  To the extent any permit, plan approval, inspection or similar act is required by the City as a condition precedent to any activity or change upon property not owned by the City, pursuant to this or any other regulatory ordinance, regulation, or rule of the City or under federal or state law, the issuance of such permit, plan approval or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall it afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit or negligent issuance of a permit, seeking the imposition of money damages against the City, its officers, employees or agents. 
D.  Enforcement Methods and Inspections   
1.  All property owners and developers of real property to be developed within the City shall provide, manage, maintain and operate on-site stormwater systems and facilities sufficient to collect, convey, detain, control and discharge stormwater in a safe manner consistent with all City development regulations and the laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America. Any failure to meet this obligation shall constitute a nuisance and be subject to an abatement action filed by the City in the municipal court. In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the owner fails to properly abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the court, the City may enter upon the property and cause such work as is reasonably necessary to be performed, with the actual cost thereof charged to the owner in the same manner as a stormwater service charge. 
2.  In the event that the City shall file an action pursuant to Sec. 9.7.1.D.1. above, from the date of filing such action the City shall have lien rights in relation to any service charge assessed against the property in the same manner as a tax levied against the property, which rights may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lien on the general execution docket of the Superior Court of DeKalb County, Georgia. In addition, the City shall have the right to pursue collection of the service charge through other legal action or judgment. 
3.  The City shall have the right, pursuant to the authority of this Section, for its designated officers and employees to enter upon private property and public property owned by other than the City, upon reasonable notice to the owner thereof, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering tests thereon in order to assure compliance with any order or judgment entered pursuant to this Section. 
E.  General Funding Policy   
1.  It shall be the policy of the City that funding for the stormwater utility program, systems and facilities shall be equitably derived through methods which have a demonstrable relationship to the varied demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater program, systems and facilities by individual properties or persons and/or the level of service rendered by or resulting from the provision of stormwater programs, systems and facilities. Stormwater service charge rates shall be structured so as to be fair and reasonable, and the resultant service charges shall bear a substantial relationship to the cost of providing services and facilities. Similarly situated properties shall be charged similar rentals, rates, charges, fees or licenses. Service charge rates shall be structured to be consistent and coordinated with the use of other funding methods employed for stormwater management within the City, including but not limited to general tax revenues allocated to stormwater management, plan review and inspection fees, special fees for services, fees in lieu of regulatory requirements, impact fees, system development charges and special assessments. 
2.  The cost of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities may include operating, capital investment and reserve expenses, and may consider stormwater quality as well as stormwater quantity management problems, needs and requirements. 
3.  To the extent practicable, credits against stormwater service charges and/or other methods of funding stormwater management shall be provided for on-site stormwater control systems and activities constructed, operated, maintained and performed to the City's standards by private property owners which eliminate, mitigate or compensate for the impact that the property or person may have upon stormwater runoff discharged to public stormwater systems or facilities or to private stormwater facilities which impact the proper function of public stormwater systems or facilities. 
4.  Stormwater utility service charge rates, fees and other similar charges shall be established by the City Commissioners. 
Sec. 9.8. - Stormwater Management Rates 

9.8.1. - Findings 
The City Commissioners of the City make the following findings of fact: 
A.  The professional engineering and financial analyses conducted on behalf of and considered by the City Commissioners properly assess, define and project the cost of stormwater management systems and facilities of the City. 
B.  Given the projected cost of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities identified in the professional engineering and financial analyses submitted to the City, it is appropriate to adopt a stormwater service fee rate methodology and to charge service fees to properties and persons within the City in a manner that recovers the cost of programs, systems and facilities and other costs associated therewith, including but not limited to allocations of the cost of services provided to the stormwater management utility by other funds of the City and other government entities and agencies, interest on bonds, operational and emergency reserves, allowances for delinquencies and bad debt, and such other costs as may be deemed reasonable and appropriate by the City Commissioners of the City to ensure the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of stormwater programs, systems and facilities in the City. 
C.  Stormwater management is applicable and needed throughout the City and the stormwater service fee rate methodology and service fees should be applicable throughout the City to enable the City to successfully manage, operate and improve stormwater programs, systems and facilities at an advanced level. 
D.  It is most equitable that a portion of the needed stormwater program, systems and facilities continue to be funded from the City's general tax revenues, and therefore that the City Commissioners may allocate general fund support to stormwater management in the future in the form of a combination of service fee payments for City-owned properties and a supplemental allocation of the general fund. 
E.  The stormwater needs in the City include but are not limited to protecting the public health, safety and welfare. Funding of stormwater programs, systems and facilities is therefore incidental to the fundamental regulatory function of the City in protecting the public health, safety and welfare. 
F.  Provision of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities renders and/or results in both services and benefits to individual properties, property owners, citizens and residents of the City and to all properties, property owners, citizens and residents of the City concurrently in a variety of ways as identified in the professional engineering and financial analyses, and the services and benefits differ among the individual properties, property owners, citizens and residents in relation to the demands they impose individually and collectively on the stormwater systems and facilities. 
G.  The services and benefits rendered or resulting from the provision of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities may differ over time depending on many factors and considerations, including but not limited to location, demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater systems and facilities, and risk exposure. It is not practical to allocate the cost of the City's stormwater management programs, systems and facilities in direct relationship to the services or benefits rendered to or received by individual properties or persons over a brief span of time, but it is both practical and equitable to allocate the cost of stormwater management among properties and persons in proportion to the longterm demands they impose on the City's stormwater programs, systems and facilities which render or result in services and benefits. 
H.  The City presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities which have been developed, installed and acquired through various mechanisms over many years. The future usefulness and value of the existing stormwater systems and facilities owned and operated by the City, and of future additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the City to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use and enhance the stormwater systems and facilities in the City. In order to do so, the City must have adequate and stable funding for its stormwater management program operating and capital investment needs. 
9.8.2. - Stormwater Service Fee Rates 
Stormwater service fee rates may be determined and modified from time to time by the City Commissioners of the City so that the total revenue generated by said fees and any other sources of revenues or other resources allocated to stormwater management by the City Commissioners shall be sufficient to meet the cost of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities, including but not limited to the payment of principal and interest on debt obligations, operating expense, capital outlays, non-operating expense, provisions for prudent reserves and other costs as deemed appropriate by the City Commissioners of the City. Stormwater service fee revenues in any given year may exceed or be less than the cost of service in that year, provided, however, that the stormwater service fee rate shall be based on meeting the long-term projected cost of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities. All unencumbered stormwater management funds derived from service fees and other sources of revenue not expended at the end of a fiscal year shall remain in the stormwater management utility enterprise fund account and balances shall be forwarded to the next fiscal year. 
A.  Single-family dwelling units. Single-family dwelling units, as defined by this Section, shall be billed for one equivalent residential unit, as defined in this Section. 
B.  Other developed lands. All developed lands not classified as single-family dwelling units, as defined by this Section, shall be billed for one equivalent residential unit, as defined by this Section, for each 2,900 square feet of impervious surfaces or partial increment thereof located on the property. 
C.  The stormwater service charge rate per equivalent residential unit (as defined in this Section) in accordance with the City's current fee schedule shall be charged. 
9.8.3. - Exemptions and Credits 
Except as provided in this Section, no public or private property shall be exempt from stormwater utility service fees or receive a credit or offset against such service fees. No exemption, credit, offset or other reduction in stormwater service fees shall be granted based on the age, tax, or economic status, race or religion of the customer, or other condition unrelated to the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management systems and facilities. A Stormwater Utility Service Fee Credit Technical Manual shall be prepared by the City Manager and approved by the City Commission specifying the design and performance standards of on-site stormwater systems, facilities and activities that qualify for application of a service fee credit, and how such credits shall be calculated. 
A.  Properties not defined in this Section as developed land shall be exempt from stormwater service fees. 
B.  Railroad tracks shall be exempt from stormwater service fees. However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings or other developed land used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater service fees. 
C.  Developed land than other single-family dwelling units, including but not limited to multiple-family dwelling unit residential properties, manufactured home and mobile home parks, commercial, retail and office buildings, public buildings and structures, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas covered with impervious surfaces, parking lots, parks and other recreational properties, public and private schools and universities, research facilities and stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, agricultural uses covered by impervious surfaces, and water and wastewater treatment plants and all other types of developed land except single-family dwelling units may receive a credit against the stormwater service fee applicable to the property. The stormwater utility service fee credit for on-site stormwater control systems or facilities that reduce or mitigate the impact of impervious surfaces on the subject property shall be proportional to the extent that the on-site stormwater control systems or facilities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner meets or exceeds the City's development and performance standards contained in the Stormwater Utility Service Fee Credit Technical Manual and other requirements and conditions. The amount of the stormwater utility service fee credit shall not be related to the cost incurred by the property owner for performing, constructing, providing and/or maintaining such programs, systems, facilities, services and activities. 
D.  Groups of single-family dwelling units represented by an incorporated homeowner's association that owns, operates and maintains on-site stormwater control systems or facilities, or that provides services or activities that reduce or mitigate the impact of impervious surfaces located on the subject properties may receive a credit against the stormwater service fee applicable to the properties represented by the homeowner's association. Such service fee credit shall be based on attaining and continuing compliance with the technical requirements and performance standards contained in the Stormwater Utility Service Fee Credit Technical Manual and other requirements and conditions. The stormwater utility service fee credit for on-site stormwater control systems or facilities, or for services or activities provided by groups of single-family dwelling units represented by an incorporated homeowner's association shall be proportional to the extent that the on-site stormwater control systems or facilities provided, operated and maintained by the homeowner's association meets or exceeds the City's development and performance standards contained in the Stormwater Utility Service Fee Credit Technical Manual and other requirements and conditions. Such credits shall be proportionately allocated among all properties represented by the incorporated homeowner's association. The stormwater utility service fee credit for services and activities that reduce or mitigate the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management systems and facilities shall not be related to the cost of such services and activities to the homeowner's association or any person or entity providing same. 
E.  Individual single-family dwelling units required by the City to install on-site detention or that provide services or activities that reduce or mitigate the impact of impervious surfaces located on the subject properties may receive a credit against the stormwater service fee applicable to the subject property. Such service fee credit shall be based on attaining and continuing compliance with the technical requirements and performance standards contained in the Stormwater Utility Service Fee Credit Technical Manual and other requirements and conditions. The stormwater utility service fee credit for on-site stormwater control systems or facilities, or for services or activities provided by individual single-family dwelling units shall be a fixed amount and shall be subject to the requirement that the on-site stormwater control systems or facilities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner meet the City's development standards and performance standards contained in the Stormwater Utility Service Fee Credit Technical Manual and other requirements and conditions. The stormwater utility service fee credit for services, facilities and activities shall not be related to the cost of such services and activities to the homeowner or any person or entity providing same. 
9.8.4. - Stormwater Service Fee Billing, Delinquencies, and Collections 
A.  A stormwater service fee bill may be sent though the United States mail or by alternative means, notifying the customer of the amount of the bill, the date the payment is due, and the date when past due. The stormwater service fee bill may be billed and collected along with other fees and charges, including but not limited other utility bills, assessments or property taxes, as deemed most effective and efficient by the City Manager of the City. Failure to receive a bill is not justification for non-payment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each parcel of developed land shall be ultimately obligated to pay such fees and other charges and any associated fines or penalties, including but not limited to interest on delinquent service fees. If a customer is underbilled or if no bill is sent for developed land the City may backbill for a period of up to 1 year, but shall not assess penalties for any delinquency during that backbilled period. A late charge of 1% of the unpaid balance of any stormwater utility service fee bill shall be charged when a bill becomes delinquent. Thereafter, an additional charge of 1% based on the unpaid bill and any applicable delinquency charge shall be charged for each month the bill remains delinquent. 
B.  Stormwater service fee bills for commercial or multiple residential condominium properties may be delivered to the individual condominium owners apportioning the stormwater service fee for the entire property equally among all properties. 
9.8.5. - Appeals 
Any customer who believes the provisions of this Section have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner and sequence. 
A.  An appeal must be filed in writing with the City Manager or her/his designated representative. In the case of stormwater service fee appeals, the appeal shall include a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer containing information on the total property area, the impervious surface area, and any other features or conditions that influence the hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events. 
B.  Using information provided by the appellant, the City Manager shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property and respond to the appeal in writing within 60 days. In response to an appeal, the City Manager may adjust the stormwater service fee applicable to any property in conformance with the general purposes and intent of this Section. 
C.  All decisions by the City Manager shall be served on the appellant personally or by registered or certified mail, sent to the billing address of the appellant. All decisions of the City Manager shall be final. 
D.  Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city, after exhausting his/her administrative remedies, shall have a right to appeal to the Superior Court of DeKalb County pursuant to the provisions of Sec. 11.2.11. 
Article 10. - Buildings and Fire 
Sec. 10.1. - Buildings and Building Regulations 

10.1.1. - In General 
A.  Penalty for Violation of Article   
Any person guilty of a violation of this Article shall be punished as provided in Section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances. 
B.  Permits   
1.  When required, any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
2.  Ordinary minor repairs and maintenance scopes of work (less than $1000.00 in value) may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes, and excepting work proposed in a Historic District for which permits are otherwise required. 
3.  Fees as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges are required at the time of permit. 
4.  A reinspection fee may be required for the inspection of construction due to the following: 
a.  Upon initial reinspection it is found that a previously reported building code violation has not been corrected "prior to reinspection or as otherwise approved by the Building Official". 
b.  The work is not ready for inspection when an inspection is requested and performed. 
c.  Work has been made inaccessible for proper inspection. 
d.  A permit is obtained only after the work is posted with a notice of code violations. 
e.  Payment of the reinspection fee shall be made prior to the reinspection. 
f.  Any required fees shall be paid to the City clerk before any building permits shall be issued, and shall be deposited in the general fund of the City. 
g.  Construction shall begin within 8 months from the issuance of such permit and failure to do so will terminate the permit, and all fees for such permit shall be forfeited to the City. Construction shall not begin after such expiration date until a new permit has been obtained and the fees paid. 
h.  The building permit number shall be conspicuously posted on a sign in front of the property prior to undertaking any construction. 
i.  No permit shall be granted for structural change, alteration or extension of any building located in the first fire district for the purpose of extending or enlarging an existing nonconforming use or to accommodate the change of an existing nonconforming use to a more extensive or different nonconforming use. 
5.  Expiration of building permits. Construction, alteration, additions to or repair of residential buildings of no more than 4 dwelling units and/or associated accessory buildings: 
a.  A building permit under which the work is not completed within 12 months after issuance shall expire by limitation and a new permit shall be secured before the work is continued. An additional fee equal to the amount of the fee for the expired permit shall be required prior to issuance of the new permit; however, for second and subsequent renewals, an additional fee equal to twice the amount of the fee for the expired permit shall be required prior to issuance of the new permit. 
b.  Construction, alteration, additions to or repair of residential buildings of more than 4 dwelling units and all commercial, industrial, institutional and other types of construction: 
i.  A building permit under which the work is not completed within 24 months after issuance shall expire by limitation and a new permit shall be secured before the work is continued. An additional fee equal to twice the amount of the fee for the expired permit shall be required prior to issuance of the new permit. 
C.  Plans and Specifications to be Followed in Construction   
1.  Construction shall be completed according to plans and specifications submitted for a permit. The premises shall not be occupied or used for the purposes presented in the plans until the permitted work has been completed and a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued by the Building Official. 
2.  Any person who violates a provision of the construction codes or fails to comply with permitted plans, including all structural, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems submitted for permit, shall be punished as provided by City Code Chapter 1-12. 
D.  Steel in Reinforced Concrete Construction   
The steel used in all reinforced concrete construction shall not be covered until it has been inspected by the City building inspector. 
E.  House Numbers   
1.  All persons owning or occupying houses in the City fronting on the various streets shall be required to obtain from the UDO Administrator a number for their respective houses, and anyone erecting a new house shall obtain from the UDO Administrator the number for such house erected. For each business house or place of business occupying 20 feet, a number shall be obtained, and each residence lot which is improved will require a number for every 50 feet, but if more than 1 house is on the 50 feet, separate numbers for each house will be required. 
2.  The UDO Administrator shall furnish numbers, as required by this section, in the following manner beginning at the Courthouse Square and going out all streets leading therefrom, with all even numbers on the left side of the street and all odd numbers on the right side of the street. On all streets which do not start from the courthouse, numbering shall be started at the nearest end to the courthouse, and the streets shall be numbered in like manner as those starting from the courthouse with the exception of Candler Street which shall be numbered starting at the Georgia Railroad going both ways viz: going north, North Candler; going south, South Candler. 
3.  All persons owning or occupying houses in the City fronting on the various streets and alleys shall be required to display in a conspicuous place the number assigned to such owner or occupant of the property by the UDO Administrator in accordance with the centenary system. The number shall be erected by the owner or occupant within 10 days after being served with notice of the proper number assigned to the property. Anyone erecting a new house shall obtain from the UDO Administrator the number for such house at the time the building permit is issued. The street number shall be conspicuously posted on a sign in the front of the property prior to undertaking any new construction. 
F.  Disposal of Construction Waste   
1.  Waste materials, including but not limited to building materials, rubbish, litter, refuse, paper and similar materials, shall not be allowed to accumulate within a building or construction site, nor in the immediate vicinity of a building or construction site, nor in any public street or right-of-way, but shall be removed from the premises as rapidly as practical. 
2.  Such waste materials may be stored temporarily in a construction-type commercial container which shall be maintained so that the area surrounding such container is clean and free of accumulations of refuse. Such container shall be removed and/or emptied when full. 
G.  Demolition of Structures   
Demolition of any structure shall not begin until all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
1.  A permit for demolition scope of work, including any required Erosion and Sedimentation Control or Tree Conservation Plan, has been obtained from the City. 
2.  A State-licensed Pest Control Agency has certified, and the Building Official has received verification, that the premises do not show or contain evidence of vermin and/or rodent infestation that would be disturbed or migrate from the premises during demolition and that abatement of any evident infestation condition has been accomplished prior to demolition. 
3.  A State-licensed hazardous material abatement contractor has provided copies of all required lead-based paint and asbestos program forms submitted to the Georgia Environmental Protection Division, with approved landfill invoices receipting any asbestos materials from the site, to the Office of the Building Official. 
4.  All utilities are terminated and capped at the right-of-way. 
10.1.2. - Building and Construction Codes 
A.  Generally   
1.  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Commission to enforce and adopt the state minimum standards codes as defined by O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9). The adoption also includes the latest edition of the following state minimum standard codes, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, for all permits approved after the adoption of this ordinance: 
2.  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a), the latest edition of the state minimum standard codes, enumerated in said Section, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall be enforced in the City by inspection and fees. 
3.  Generally. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction, or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
B.  Permissive Codes   
1.  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(b) and O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(X), the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted and as amended from time to time by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA), is hereby adopted as part of the city's Code of Ordinances and is enforceable by the design environment and construction division within the department of public works. 
2.  Pursuant to O.C.G.A § 8-2-25B and § 8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(X) the National Green Building Standard (ICC 700), as adopted and amended from time to time by the Georgia Department of Community affairs (DCA) is hereby adopted as part of the city's Code of Ordinances and is enforceable by the design environment and construction division within the department of public works. 
C.  Required Codes   
1.  Building   
The provisions of the International Building Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one-and two-family dwellings. 
2.  One- and Two-Family Dwellings   
The provisions of the International Residential Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures of detached one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures. 
3.  Electrical   
The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances thereto. 
4.  Gas   
The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances, and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
5.  Mechanical   
The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
6.  Plumbing   
The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
7.  Energy   
The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating, and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
D.  International Building Code   
1.  Exceptions to Restrictions in Fire District   
One and two-family dwellings, and townhouses may be of any type construction permitted by this Code provided that structures are: 
a.  Separated by a minimum of 10 feet and greater than 5 feet from the property line or; 

b.  Separated by a masonry wall having a 2-hour fire resistance rating. 

2.  Separation   
a.  Each townhouse shall be considered a separate building and shall be completely separated from any adjoining dwelling by use of a masonry wall that provides a fire resistant rating of not less than 2 Hours; or a wall that provides a fire resistance rating of not less than 2 Hours tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 with exposure from both sides and an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 13. 
b.  Such wall shall be continuous from the foundation through the roof and shall extend not less than 2 feet above the roof, except that such wall need not extend above the roof where said roof is constructed of a material having a fire resistance rating of 2 Hours for an area within 4 feet of each side of the wall. 
c.  Such wall shall extend 18 inches beyond the adjoining front and rear walls. 

d.  Such wall shall not be penetrated by plumbing, piping, ducts, electrical or other building services. 
e.  Each dwelling unit sharing such wall shall be designed and constructed to maintain its structural integrity independent of the unit on the opposite side of the wall. 
f.  Each garage that adjoins a dwelling unit shall be separated from it by a minimum of 1 layer of five-eighths-inch fire resistive gypsum board, and doors located in the separation shall have a minimum fire resistive rating of 20 minutes. 
3.  Automatic Fire Extinguishing System   
a.  New Residential Properties   
The following types of new residential properties shall be provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, 1985 edition: 
i.  Hotels/motels 
ii.  Multiple-family dwellings of 3 or more stories 
iii.  Lodginghouses or roominghouses 
iv.  Dormitories 
b.  New Business Occupancy Properties   
The following types of new business occupancy properties shall be provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, 1985 edition: 
i.  All new business occupancy buildings 4 or more stories in height. 
c.  Existing Highrise Residential Occupancies   
i.  All existing highrise residential occupancy buildings shall be provided with an approved sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, 1985 edition. 
ii.  It is hereby ordered that a 4-year period, beginning with the approval date of this UDO, shall be granted before an existing building is required to be provided with an approved sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, 1985 edition. 
d.  Existing Highrise Business Occupancies   
i.  Existing Highrise   
All existing highrise business occupancy buildings shall be provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, 1985 edition, or other approved automatic fire extinguishing system. 
ii.  Undue Hardship   
Whenever, in the opinion of the City Manager, the full implementation of this requirement would cause an undue hardship in a specific case, the City Manager may waive the requirements in question to provide that an equivalent means of achieving substantially the same degree of safety is ensured. Such waiver shall be in writing and shall state the equivalent methods by which the safety shall be ensured and shall be made a part of the plans or permits in question. 
e.  Appeals   
The owner of a building or structure, or his authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the City Manager to the City Commission whenever one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
i.  The provisions of this Section do not apply to the specific case in question. 
ii.  An equally good or more desirable form of automatic fire extinguishing system can be employed to meet the requirements of this Section. 
iii.  The intent and meaning of this Section has been misconstrued or incorrectly applied. 
f.  Variance   
The City Commissioners, when so appealed to and after a public hearing, may vary from the decision of the City Manager regarding the requirements of this Section when it finds that the enforcement thereof would be unjust and contrary to the purpose of this section and the public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
i.  Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building or structure and which are not applicable to other buildings and structures. 
ii.  The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the appellant. 
iii.  Granting the variance will not confer on the appellant any special privilege that is denied by this section to other buildings or structures. 
4.  More Restrictive Requirements to Apply   
Where the provisions of Sec. 10.1.2.D.3. are in conflict with other sprinkler requirements in this Code, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. 
E.  Standard Mechanical Code   
1.  Adoption   
The International Mechanical Code, as amended and approved by the state department of community affairs for use as the state minimum standard mechanical code, is hereby adopted as the heating, ventilating and air conditioning code of the City. Such code shall have the same force and effect as if it were fully set forth or described in this section. A copy of the code shall be properly attested and kept on file with the City clerk. 
2.  Schedule of Permit Fees   
a.  Reinspection   
A reinspection fee may be required for the inspection of a heating, ventilation, air conditioning or refrigeration system, boiler, chimney or vent due to the following reasons: 
i.  Upon initial reinspection it is found that a previously reported code violation has not been corrected. 
ii.  The work is not ready for inspection when an inspection is requested and performed. 
iii.  Work has been covered or made inaccessible for proper inspection. 
iv.  A permit is obtained only after the work is posted with a notice of code violation. 
v.  The reinspection fee shall be paid in full prior to the reinspection. 
3.  Plans; Specifications; Documents   
a.  Plans Required   
In order to safeguard life, health and property and to promote public welfare, plans and specifications shall be submitted for any heating systems, appliances or equipment having a total required input in excess of 500,000 Btu per hour, and plans shall be submitted for any air conditioning or refrigeration system in excess of 25 tons. Such plans and specifications shall have been prepared by a professional mechanical engineer legally registered under the laws of the state regulating the practice of engineering and shall have the engineer's official seal affixed to the drawings, specifications and accompanying data. 
b.  Plan Review   
When plans are required by this Code, the Building Official shall examine or cause to be examined contract documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of this Code and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
c.  Affidavits   
The Building Official may accept a sworn affidavit from a professional mechanical engineer legally registered under the laws of the state regulating the practice of engineering stating that the plans submitted conform to this Code, and he may, without any examination or inspection, accept such affidavit, provided that the engineer who made such affidavit, agrees to submit to the Building Official copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and, upon completion of the mechanical system, a certification that the system has been installed in accordance with the requirements of this Code. Where the Building Official relies upon such affidavit, the engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of this Code. 
4.  Conditions of Permit   
a.  Permit Intent   
A permit shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the code, nor shall such issuance of a permit prevent the Building Official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans or in construction, or of violations of this Code. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 6 months after its issuance or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 6 months after the time the work is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods of not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. Such extensions shall be in writing by the Building Official. 
b.  Permit Issued on Basis of an Affidavit   
Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the Building Official, are hazardous or complex, the Building Official shall require the engineer who signed the affidavit or made the drawings or computations to supervise such work. This person shall be responsible for the conformity of the work with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports, as inspections are performed, and, upon completion, make and file with the Building Official a written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the approved plans and with the structural provisions of this Code. If such engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are approved by the Building Official. 
F.  Property Maintenance Code   
1.  Adoption   
The International Property Maintenance Code, as amended and approved by the state department of community affairs for use as the state minimum standard building code, is hereby adopted as the housing code of the City, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended by this section. Such code shall have the same force and effect as if it were fully set forth or described in this section. A copy of the code shall be properly attested and kept on file with the City clerk. Deletions, modifications and amendments to the code are as follows: 
2.  Amendments   
The particulars in which the Standard Housing Code is modified and amended are as follows: 
3.  Scope   
The scope of the code shall prohibit mobile homes and house trailers for residential occupancy. 
4.  Unsafe Structures   
Allow 60 days time for the performance of any act it requires. 
5.  Appointment   
In addition to its other duties, as specified in the Decatur City Code, the Zoning Board of Appeals is also designated to carry out the duties of the housing board of adjustments and appeals specified in the International Property Maintenance Code. 
6.  Violations and Penalties   
Modify the last sentence by deleting the last 2 words thereof: "state laws," and substituting therefor the words "the provisions of section 1-12 of the Code of the City of Decatur, Georgia." 
7.  Maintenance of Exterior Areas of   
Exterior areas of multiple dwellings and roominghouses shall be properly maintained and kept in good repair. Parking lots, walkways, drives and other paved surfaces shall be maintained in sound paved condition and free of potholes, paving failures or other conditions that constitute a dangerous or hazardous condition to vehicles or pedestrians. Yards, open areas and play areas shall be maintained with grass, ground covers or other landscape materials to prevent erosion and sedimentation. 
8.  Required Space in Dwelling Unit   
Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 300 square feet of habitable floor area for the first occupant thereof, at least 100 square feet of additional habitable floor area for each of the next 3 occupants, and at least 75 square feet of additional habitable floor area for each additional occupant. 
9.  Required Space in Sleeping Rooms   
In every dwelling unit and in every rooming unit, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by 1 occupant shall contain at least 75 square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than 1 occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant 12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of floor area for each occupant under 12 years of age. No room shall be occupied by more than 4 persons. 
10.  Care of Premises   
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of a residential building, structure or property to utilize the premises of such residential property for the open storage of any motor vehicle which has been abandoned, ice box, refrigerator, stove, glass, building material, building rubbish, commercial equipment, industrial equipment or similar items. It shall be the duty and responsibility of every such owner or occupant to keep the premises of such residential property clean and to remove from the premises all such items as listed above including, but not limited to, weeds, dead trees, garbage, etc., upon notice from the building official. 
11.  Effect of Division Upon Pending Suits or Proceedings   
Nothing in this division nor in the code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding now pending in any court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, nor any cause or causes of action accrued or existing, under any act or ordinance repealed hereby. Nor shall any right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this division. 
12.  Compliance with Property Maintenance Code   
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy, any dwelling, dwelling unit, apartment or any space designed or intended to be used for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or eating therein which does not comply with the requirements of the International Property Maintenance Code then in effect, as adopted by the City, and without first obtaining a valid certificate of occupancy from the building official of the City. 
G.  Plumbing Code   
1.  Adoption   
The International Plumbing Code, as amended and approved by the state department of community affairs for use as the state minimum standard plumbing code, is hereby adopted as the plumbing code of the City. Such code shall have the same force and effect as if it were fully set forth or described in this section. A copy of the code shall be properly attested and kept on file with the City clerk. 
2.  Schedule of Permit Fees   
a.  Reinspection; Cause   
A reinspection fee may be required for the inspection of plumbing installations due to the following: 
i.  Upon initial reinspection it is found that a previously reported code violation has not been corrected. 
ii.  The work is not ready for inspection when an inspection is requested and performed. 
iii.  Work has been covered or made inaccessible for proper inspection. 
iv.  A permit is obtained only after the work is posted with a notice of code violation. 
v.  The reinspection fee shall be paid in full prior to the reinspection. 
3.  Exemption   
Subsection (d) of O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26, relating to self-inspection of water and sewer projects by master plumbers or utility contractors, shall not be applicable within the City. 
H.  Swimming Pool Code   
1.  Adoption   
The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, as amended and approved by the state department of community affairs for use as the state minimum swimming pool code, is hereby adopted as the swimming pool code of the City, save and except such portions as are deleted, modified or amended by this section. Such code shall have the same force and effect as if it were fully set forth or described in this section. A copy of such code shall be properly attested and kept on file with the City clerk. Deletions, modifications and amendments to the code are as follows: 
2.  County Health Department Regulations Enforced   
All of the rules and regulations of the county health department governing swimming pools shall be complied with by any person operating a swimming pool in the City. 
3.  Location of Swimming Pools   
Private swimming pools and public swimming pools not owned or operated by the City shall not encroach on any front or side yard required by this Code or the City zoning ordinance, nor shall such pools be located between the front property line and the setback line established by the buildings closest to the front property line in any zoning district. For the purposes of this division, property lines along both street sides of a corner lot shall be considered front property lines. 
(Ord. No. O-15-15, 10-19-15) 
10.1.3. - Flow-Rate Restrictions 
A.  Purpose of Article   
It is the purpose of this article to require the use of ultra-low flow plumbing fixtures in all new construction or when replacing plumbing fixtures during renovation or remodeling of existing buildings; to require the certification of plumbing fixtures regarding flow rates and serviceability standards; to promote compliance with state laws for the purpose of conserving water; to maintain the integrity of drinking water supplies; and to reduce wastewater flows. 
B.  Standards for Fixtures   
No plumbing fixture shall be installed which does not meet the standards listed in this section or the state plumbing code, whichever is stricter. This includes all plumbing fixtures installed in newly constructed buildings or when replacing plumbing fixtures during remodeling or renovation of existing buildings, except as noted in Sec. 10.1.3.D. below. The effective date of this requirement shall be February 1, 2016. 
1.  All plumbing fixtures installed as referred to in this section shall not exceed the following maximum water use rates: 
Toilets 1.6 gallons per flush Urinals 1.0 gallons per flush Showerheads 2.5 gallons per flush, at 60 psi gauge pressure Kitchen faucets 2.5 gallons per minute Bathroom and lavatory faucets 2.0 gallons per minute  
2.  The flow restriction device in a showerhead must be a permanent and integral part of the showerhead and must not be removable to allow flow rates in excess of that stated in Sec. 10.1.3.B.1. above. 
3.  Lavatory faucets located in restrooms intended for use by the general public shall be of the metering or self-closing type, in addition to the flow requirement listed in Sec. 10.1.3.B.1. above. 
4.  The flow rates for all showerheads, kitchen, bathroom and lavatory faucets shall be determined in accordance with ANSI/ASME A112.18.1M-1989 Plumbing Fixture Fittings, as amended; except that maximum flow rates may not exceed those given in Sec. 10.1.3.B.1. above. 
5.  All toilets and urinals shall be certified to meet the hydraulic performance standards for low consumption water closets specified in ANSI/ASME A112.19.2-1990 Vitreous China Plumbing Fixtures, as amended, and ANSI/ASME A112.19.6-1990 Hydraulic Requirements for Water Closets and Urinals, as amended. 
C.  Product Certification   
The manufacturer shall certify compliance with the standards in Sec. 10.1.3.B. above by labeling the fixture and packaging as described in this section and providing, upon request, appropriate certification by an independent national testing organization acceptable to the City building official. Effective April 1, 1992, all toilets, urinals, showerheads or faucets shall be clearly labeled to indicate the maximum flow rate or water usage of the fixture at the specified test pressure. Toilets and urinals shall additionally be labeled ASME A112.19.2M, as prescribed in Section 8 of such standard. The label shall be affixed to the fixture and remain there until the proper building and/or plumbing inspections have been conducted. Also, the packaging must be clearly marked to identify water use rates when offered for retail. 
D.  Exceptions   
Permission for the exceptions listed in this section must be obtained from the building official. New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building may be exempt from the standards of Sec. 10.1.3.B. above for the following: 
1.  Showers and faucets installed for safety purposes, such as emergency eye wash stations, etc. 
2.  Plumbing fixtures specifically designed for the physically handicapped. 
3.  Fixtures specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or for installation in a correctional institution which may require more water for proper operation. 
4.  Instances of building renovation where significant plumbing modifications would be required to accommodate the lower flows or for specialized purposes which cannot be accommodated by existing technology. 
E.  Enforcement   
This Article shall be enforced by the City. Citations for violations may be issued by the building official or his authorized representative. Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this article shall be tried before the municipal court of the City. Upon conviction, such person, corporation, partnership or other entity found guilty of a violation of this article shall be punished as provided in Section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances. 
10.1.4. - Inefficient Plumbing Replacement 
A.  Applicability   
Any building constructed prior to January 1, 1993, and offered for sale or sold must meet the standard, except for: 
1.  Any building containing multiple-family dwellings that are rented; 
2.  Any building that is being advertised for foreclosure; 
3.  Any building that will be demolished after sale, except the purchaser may not obtain water service for the building unless such service is solely for demolition or construction-related purposes; 
4.  Any building that is sold or conveyed between spouses, or between parents and their children, including conveyances during the administration of the estate of such spouse, parent or child; or 
5.  The building is a historic structure or eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places. 
B.  Administration   
1.  The UDO Administrator will coordinate with DeKalb County to administer and enforce this Section. 
2.  The UDO Administrator must prepare a certificate in which a home inspector, the UDO Administrator, or a licensed plumber pursuant to the laws of the state asserts, under penalty of perjury, that all buildings on the property only contain water-conserving plumbing fixtures and that all other kinds of plumbing fixtures have been removed from all structures on the property. 
C.  Disclosure Requirements   
Any person selling a building must disclose the requirements of this Section to potential purchasers prior to the execution of any contract to purchase and sell such building. 
D.  Purchaser's Responsibility   
No person who purchases a building may obtain water service from DeKalb County until such time as that person has demonstrated that all toilets, urinals, showerheads, lavatory faucets, and kitchen faucets are water conserving plumbing fixtures. 
E.  Water conserving plumbing fixtures   
Water conserving plumbing fixtures mean ultra-low-flow toilets that use a maximum of 1.6 gallons per flush; urinals that use a maximum of 1.0 gallon per flush; showerheads that emit a maximum of 2.5 gallons per minute; lavatory faucets that emit a maximum of 2.0 gallons per minute; kitchen faucets that emit a maximum of 2.2 gallons per minute. 
F.  Duty   
Nothing in this Section is intended to or shall be construed to create any duty upon the agent of any transferee of any building; unless otherwise mutually agreed to in writing. 
10.1.5. - Substandard Buildings 
A.  Findings of the Existence of Nuisances   
1.  The City Commissioners of the City find and declare that within the City limits of the City there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the City; or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the City; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
2.  The City Commissioners of the City further find and declare that within the limits of the City where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the City and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. 
3.  The City Commissioners of the City further find and declare that there exist within the limits of the City dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings or structure unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the City, and 
4.  The City Commissioners of the City further find and declare that there exist within the limits of the City vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of such dwellings, buildings and structures. 
B.  Continued Use of Other Laws and Ordinances   
It is the intent of the City Commissioners of the City that nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the City to enforce any provisions of any local enabling Act, charter, or ordinance or regulation, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
C.  Duties of Owners   
1.  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building or structure, or property within the City limits of the City to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the City, or such ordinances that regulate and prohibit activities on property and that declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances; 
2.  The City Manager, the deputy City Manager, and the building official, are designated as public officer(s) to exercise the powers prescribed by this article; 
3.  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least 5 residents of the City charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes, is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building or structure, or property. If the public officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists, and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the Municipal Court of the City, Georgia, at a date and time certain and at a place within the City where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing; 
4.  If after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
a.  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
b.  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building or structure and all debris from the property. 
c.  For purpose of this article, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia Appraiser Classification as provided in Chapter 39A of Title 41 of O.C.G.A., qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the City. 
5.  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such abatement action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or by any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. 
6.  The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
7.  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer, the City Commissioners of the City, and the City are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
8.  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the City Manager and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
9.  If the public officer's investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building or structure finds that it is in such condition as to make it imminently dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of its occupants, the public officer shall order that such dwelling, building or structure be vacated. 
D.  Collection of Lien   
1.  The lien provided for in Sec. 10.1.5.C.8. above attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of DeKalb County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required by Sec. 10.1.5.K. below. The Clerk of Superior Court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of DeKalb County and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
2.  Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this section, the public officer responsible for enforcement actions in accordance with this section shall transmit to the City Manager a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition or closure. It shall be the duty of the City Manager to collect the amount of the lien, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically Chapter 4 of Title 48 of O.C.G.A.; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78, which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure, shall not apply. The City Manager shall remit the amount collected to the City Commissioners of the City. 
3.  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this section may be initiated at any time following receipt by the City Manager of the final determination of costs in accordance with this section. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this section. 
4.  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this section shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this section, together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the City Manager in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
5.  The City Commissioners of the City may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the City, agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
E.  Appeal   
Review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement or demolition of a dwelling, building or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
F.  Other Citations   
The public officers designated in Sec. 10.1.4.B. and any designated agent of such officers, may issue citations to the owner, occupants, and/or persons in possession of the property and premises for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. Any owner who fails to comply with any order issued pursuant to Sec. 10.1.5.C.4. shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, thereof shall be punished as provided in Section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances. Any person removing the notice provided for in Sec. 10.1.5.C.6. shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances. 
G.  Nuisance Abatement Powers   
Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the City Commissioners of the City to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
H.  Conditions of Nuisances   
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he/she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure that are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the City. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
1.  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
2.  Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; 
3.  Dilapidation; 
4.  Disrepair; 
5.  Structural defects; and 
6.  Uncleanliness. 
7.  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
I.  Powers of Public Officers   
The public officer(s) designated in this article shall have such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this article and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17, including the following powers in addition to others granted in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-10 and §§ 41-2-12 through 41-2-17: 
1.  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the City in order to determine which dwellings, buildings or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
2.  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
3.  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purpose of the article; and 
4.  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under the article to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. 
J.  Service of Complaints   
1.  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner. At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within 3 business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
2.  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in DeKalb County once a week for 2 consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
3.  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
K.  Filing of Lis Pendens   
A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of DeKalb County at the time of filing the complaint. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
10.1.6. - High Performance Building Standards 
A.  Single-Family and Two-Family Residential Standards   
1.  Applicability.   
The following standards apply to: 
a.  Any newly constructed building containing attached or detached single-family dwelling units, two-family dwelling units, live-work, or an accessory dwelling units; and 
b.  Any substantial improvement to an existing building containing attached or detached single-family dwelling units, two-family dwelling units, live-work or an accessory dwelling units that increases the total floor area by more than 20% or modifies more than 85% of the building's thermal envelope. 
An effective date for this category is established as March 1, 2017. 
2.  High Performance Building Certification   
All buildings subject to this paragraph must comply with one of the following: 
a.  Any level of Certification using the current version of the National Green Building Standard-ICC 700 for new homes or renovations; or 
b.  Any level of certification using the current version of LEED for Homes; or 
c.  Any level of certification using the current version of the EarthCraft House, Earthcraft Renovation or the EarthCraft Sustainable Preservation program 
3.  General Requirements   
The following apply to all buildings subject to this paragraph a.: 
a.  All dwelling units must receive envelope and duct tightness verification in accordance with the current Georgia Residential Energy Code. Visual inspection may not be used in lieu of testing. The building thermal envelope for newly constructed buildings must test at less than 5 Air Changes per Hour when tested at 50 Pascals (< 5 ACH50) or, as an alternative, must demonstrate an Envelope Leakage Ratio of less than 0.33 CFM50/Square Foot of Building Envelope (< 0.33 ELR50) for dwelling units 1,500 square feet or less in floor area. Substantial improvement projects are exempt from this requirement and must comply with thresholds as outlined in the Georgia Residential Energy Code (7 ACH50 as of 2014). 
b.  No alterations will be mandated to systems that are not being modified as part of the planned construction process, unless otherwise required by state or local rules and regulations. 
c.  All dwelling units must be provided with a whole house ventilation system that complies with ASHRAE 62.2-2010 table 4.1a, or equation 4.1a, and may not rely on exhaust as the sole whole house ventilation strategy. The system must be designed and verified in accordance with ASHRAE 62.2-2010. 
ASHRAE 62.2-2010 Equation 4.1a 
CFM = 0.01 × Floor Area + 7.5 × (bedrooms + 1) 
2-2010 Table 4.1a Continuous Whole-House Mechanical; Ventilation System Airflow Rate Requirements Dwelling Unit Floor Area (square feet) Number of Bedrooms 0-1 2-3 4-5 6-7 >7 Airflow in CFM <1,500 30 45 60 75 90 1,501-3,000 45 60 75 90 105 3,001-4,500 60 75 90 105 120 4,501-6,000 75 90 105 120 135 6,001-7,500 90 105 120 135 150 >7,501 105 120 135 150 165 For SI: 1 sq. ft. = 0.0929 m 2 , 1 cubic foot per minute = 0.0004719 m 3 /S.  
d.  The ventilation system airflow must be verified via airflow testing to be capable of providing quantities of outside air (in cubic feet per minute, CFM) that satisfy ASHRAE 62.2-2010, but may operate by default at a lower ventilation rate. The method of verification must be a volumetric air flow measuring device or measurement of the velocity of the air in the duct and calculating the CFM. Ventilation controls must be labeled and easily accessible for occupants, and are encouraged to offer occupant variability such as a temporary override switch that resets itself. The occupant must not be able to reduce the outside air to below 10% of the required outside air. All kitchen and bath exhaust devices must satisfy ASHRAE 62.2-2010 CFM efficiency and sone requirements and must terminate to the exterior. 
e.  Outside air must be ducted from a manufactured outside air intake device that is protected from animals and large debris and is at least 10 feet from pollutant sources. Unless a filter is otherwise installed in the outside air duct, the outside air must be connected to the return air plenum upstream of the main system filter. 
4.  Exemptions   
a.  The UDO Administrator may issue an exemption from any of these requirements when circumstances particular to the building under review render full compliance with such requirements infeasible. The burden shall be on the applicant to demonstrate that one of the following criteria has been met rendering full compliance with the requirements infeasible: 
i.  The least expensive allowed project certification and verification fees exceed 10% of the construction costs (not including construction costs incurred to comply with the high performance building requirements); or 
ii.  The building is a designated historic building or a contributing building within a designated historic district and the Historic Preservation Commission has denied a certificate of appropriateness necessary for compliance with these requirements due to the negative impact such compliance would have on the historic qualities of the building. 
iii.  The building is a historic structure or eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places, and when compliance with these requirements would cause the building to cease to be a historic structure or make the structure ineligible for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places. 
b.  All decisions granting or denying such infeasibility exemptions shall be made by the UDO Administrator in writing within 20 days of the filing of a request by the applicant that contains all information demonstrating compliance with the required criteria for exemption. The applicant shall be notified when a final decision is made and shall be provided a copy of the written decision. Appeals by any party aggrieved by the decision shall be made in accordance with Sec. 11.2.9. 
B.  Multiple-Family Residential Standards   
1.  Applicability   
The following standards apply to: 
a.  Any newly constructed building containing multiple-family dwelling units; and 
b.  Any substantial improvement to an existing building containing multiple-family dwelling units. 
2.  Low-Rise High Performance Building Certification   
All buildings subject to this paragraph B. that are up to 3 stories in height must comply with one of the following: 
a.  Silver Certification using the current version of the National Green Building Standard-ICC 700-2012; or 
b.  Any level of certification using the current version of LEED for Homes; or 
c.  Any level of certification using the current version of any applicable EarthCraft program, including but not limited to the EarthCraft House or the EarthCraft Sustainable Preservation program. 
3.  Mid-Rise and High-Rise High Performance Building Certification   
All buildings subject to this paragraph B. that are 4 or more stories in height must comply with one of the following: 
a.  Silver Certification using the current version of the National Green Building Standard-ICC 700-2012; or 
b.  Any level of certification using the active version of LEED for Homes or LEED Building Design and Construction; or 
c.  Any level of certification using the current version of any applicable EarthCraft program, including but not limited to Earthcraft Multifamily, Earthcraft Light Commercial, or the EarthCraft Sustainable Preservation program. 
d.  Three globes certification using the current version of the Green Globes program. 
4.  General Requirements   
The following requirements apply to all buildings subject to this paragraph B.: 
a.  Dwelling units must test at less than 5 Air Changes per Hour when tested at 50 Pascals (< 5 ACH50) or, as an alternative, must demonstrate an Envelope Leakage Ratio of less than 0.33 CFM50/Square Foot of Building Envelope (< 0.33 ELR50) for dwelling units 1,500 square feet or less in floor area. 
b.  Low, mid, and high rise multiple family dwelling buildings must be tested in accordance with the Georgia State Supplements and Amendments to the 2009 International Energy Conservation Code, Chapter 4, Section 402.4.2.2. Applicants using Protocol 1 may sample of one every four adjacent units (per floor) for blower door testing. If the sampled unit in each set of four passes the other three units in the same floor sample are deemed to comply. If the sampled unit fails, it must be further air sealed and retested until it passes and all remaining units in the four-unit sample must also be tested and pass. Protocol 2 (RESNET sampling protocol) may be employed in lieu of 1 in 4 sampling option, provided a certified Home Energy Ratings professional is conducting the test. Blower door testing may be performed as unguarded (single fan) or guarded (via pressurizing/depressurizing adjacent units) as allowed by the certifying program. 
c.  Duct systems must be leak tested in compliance with the 2011 Georgia Energy Code for residential homes. Compliance testing is not required for any duct system if 100% of the duct system and air handler is located within the building's thermal envelope. 
d.  All dwelling units must comply with ASHRAE 62.2-2010 with or without Amendment J. 
e.  No alterations will be mandated to systems that are not being modified as part of the planned construction process, unless otherwise required by state or local rules and regulations. 
C.  Commercial Use and Public Use Standards   
1.  Applicability   
The following standards apply to: 
a.  Any newly constructed building greater than 3,000 square feet in floor area that contains a commercial use or a public use; and 
b.  Any substantial improvement to an existing building that contains a commercial use or a public use and is greater than 3,000 square feet in floor area, or where the building is larger than 3,000 square feet and the gross floor area of the renovation project exceeds 10% of the total building gross floor area. The area that is substantially-improved must comply with these high performance building standards. 
2.  High Performance Building Certification   
All buildings subject to paragraph C. must comply with one of the following: 
a.  Any level of certification using the current version of LEED Building Design and Construction; or 
b.  Any level of certification using the current version of the applicable EarthCraft Light Commercial or the EarthCraft Sustainable Preservation program; or 
c.  Three globes certification using the current version of the Green Globes program. 
3.  General Requirements   
No alterations to any building subject to this paragraph C. will be mandated to systems that are not being modified as part of the planned construction process, unless otherwise required by state or local rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. O-16-02, § 1, 2-16-16; Ord. No. O-17-02, § I, 3-20-17; Ord. No. O-18-01, 3-5-18) 
Sec. 10.2. - Fire and Fire Prevention 

10.2.1. - In General 
A.  Fire District Established; Boundaries   
The fire district of the City is hereby established. The boundaries of the fire district are shown upon the map designated as the "fire district map," an official copy of which is on file in the office of the City clerk. Such map is incorporated in this section and made a part of this section by this reference. The fire district map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon are a part of this section and have the same force and effect as if the fire district map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon were all fully set forth or described in this section. 
B.  Open Burning   
No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit open burning of leaves, rubbish or trash of any kind, or any other open burning in any area of the City except as follows: 
1.  For cooking food for immediate human consumption. 
2.  Operation of devices using open flames such as kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters and other flame-making equipment. 
3.  Setting and maintenance by contractors and tradesmen of miscellaneous small fires necessary in such activities as street paving work, installation or repair of utilities, provided that such fires are kept small in size. 
4.  Open burning in other than predominantly residential areas for the purpose of land clearing or construction or right-of-way maintenance, provided the following conditions are met: 
5.  Prevailing winds at the time of burning are away from the area's population. 
6.  The location of the burning is at least 1,000 feet from any structure or dwelling located in a predominantly residential area. 
7.  No heavy smoke producing materials are burned such as heavy oils, asphaltic materials, natural or synthetic rubber. 
8.  A certified burning apparatus is used in accordance with the instructions for the proper use of the apparatus and the apparatus is manned by qualified personnel at time apparatus is in use. 
9.  Burning for training fire department personnel under the supervision of the fire chief or such officer designated by the fire chief. 
10.  Recreational fires in commercially available chimineas or outdoor fireplaces. 
a.  Chimineas or outdoor fireplaces shall be used according to their intended use, and the manufacturer's recommendations. 
b.  Chimineas or outdoor fireplaces shall have a chimney, screen, or other approved method to arrest sparks. Untreated wood, lumber, manufactured fire logs, or charcoal shall be the only substances permitted to be burned in Chimineas or outdoor fireplaces. 
c.  Chimineas or outdoor fireplaces shall not be operated inside structures, on combustible surfaces or balconies, or within 25 feet of combustible construction. 
d.  Chimineas or outdoor fireplaces shall have a non-combustible surface underneath to catch sparks. 
11.  Aerial luminaries are prohibited. Unmanned free-floating devices capable of producing an open flame, such as, but not limited to, devices commonly known as sky lanterns, flying luminaries, floating lanterns and fire balloons. 
C.  Gasoline in Glass Containers   
It shall be unlawful for any person in the City to sell, give, supply or furnish gasoline in glass containers. 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, possess or store gasoline in glass containers. 
2.  It shall be unlawful for any person to transport gasoline in glass containers in or through the City. 
D.  Penalty for Violation of Section   
Any person guilty of a violation of this Section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in Section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances. 
10.2.2. - Fire Prevention Code 
A.  Adoption   
120-3-3 "State Minimum Fire Safety Standards", as amended and approved by the state department of community affairs for use as the state fire prevention code, is hereby adopted as the fire prevention code of the City, save and except such portions as are deleted, modified or amended in Sec. 10.2.2.B. below. Such code shall have the same force and effect as if it were fully set forth or described in this section. A copy of such code shall be properly attested and kept on file with the City clerk. 
B.  Amendments   
1.  123-3-3 "State Minimum Fire Safety Standards" adopted in section 46-31 is amended by revising Chapter 5, "Fire Service Features," which shall read as follows: 
Section 503.2.7 Grade. The grade of the fire apparatus access road shall not exceed 10%.120-3-3 "State Minimum Fire Safety Standards" adopted in Sec. 10.2.2.A. above is amended by adding the following new section to Chapter 9 Fire Protection Systems, which shall read as follows: 
Automatic sprinkler systems-Required 
C.  New Residential Properties   
The following types of new residential properties shall be provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, currently adopted edition: 
1.  Hotels/motels. 
2.  Multiple-family dwellings of 3 or more stories. 
3.  Lodginghouses or roominghouses. 
4.  Dormitories. 
5.  Exceptions: 
a.  Sprinkler systems are not required in one- and two-family dwellings, personal care homes with no more than 6 occupants, and townhouses separated by a 2-hour rated masonry wall or a 10-foot horizontal separation. 
b.  New residential occupancies not exceeding 4 stories in height may be provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 13R, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies up to Four Stories in Height, 2013 edition. 
D.  New Business Occupancy Properties   
The following types of new business occupancy properties shall be provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, 2013 edition: 
1.  All new business occupancy buildings 4 or more stories in height. 
10.2.3. - Fire Safety Standards 
A.  Application of Article   
Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12(b), the City does hereby adopt the State Minimum Fire Safety Standards adopted in the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq. to apply to those buildings and structures listed in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13 of such chapter. As used in this section, the term "state rules and regulations" shall mean the State Minimum Fire Safety Standards adopted in the rules and regulations promulgated by the state safety fire commissioner pursuant to such chapter from time to time, including all subsequent revisions thereof as fully as if same were set out in this section in their entirety. The provisions of this article and the state rules and regulations shall apply only to those buildings and structures listed in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13. Without limiting the foregoing, the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13(b) are hereby specifically adopted for application to buildings and structures located within the City. 
B.  Penalty for Violation of Article   
Any person violating the provisions of this article, upon conviction, shall be punished according to the provisions of Section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances. 
C.  Plans and Specifications   
1.  Plans and specifications for all proposed buildings and structures which come under the classification of Sec. 10.2.3.A. shall be submitted to and receive approval by the fire marshal of the City before any building permit may be issued or construction started thereon. All such plans and specifications submitted as required in this section shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, payable to the City, and shall bear the seal and state registration number of the drafting architect or engineer, or otherwise have the approval of the fire marshal. A complete set of the approved plans and specifications shall be maintained on the construction site, and construction shall proceed in compliance with the minimum fire safety standards under which such plans and specifications were approved. The owner of any such building or structure, or his authorized representative, shall notify the fire marshal upon completion of approximately 80% of the construction thereof and shall apply for a certificate of occupancy when construction of such building or structure is completed. 
2.  Every building or structure which comes under the classification in Sec. 10.2.3.A. shall have a certificate of occupancy issued by the fire marshal or building official before such building or structure may be occupied. Such certificates of occupancy shall be issued for each business establishment within a building or structure, shall carry a flat rate charge as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges per business establishment, shall state the occupant load for such business establishment or building, shall be posted in a prominent location within such business establishment or building, and shall run the life of the building, except as provided in Sec. 10.2.3.C.3. below. 
3.  For purposes of this article, any existing building or structure coming under the classification of Sec. 10.2.3.A. as of the effective date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives, shall be deemed to be a proposed building if such building or structure is subject to substantial renovation, a fire or other hazard of serious consequence, or a change in the classification of occupancy. For purposes of this article, the term "substantial renovation" shall mean any construction project involving exits or internal features of such building or structure costing more than the building's or structure's assessed value according to City tax records at the time of renovation. 
4.  Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems. Also, plans should indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
D.  Temporary Occupancy Permits   
In existing buildings or structures under the classification of Sec. 10.2.3.A., when substandard conditions are found, a temporary occupancy permit may be issued, such permit carrying a time limit for a time adjusted to meet the amount of time being necessary to make the proper corrections in order to bring the building up to standard. All certificates of occupancy shall be issued against the building and shall not require renewal because of change of ownership unless there is a change of use. The same set of fees for certificates of occupancy as applicable to proposed buildings covered under Sec. 10.2.3.C. shall apply. The fire marshal shall determine the time limit in complying with any of the provisions of this article. 
E.  Compliance with State Rules and Regulations   
1.  Every existing building and structure which comes under the classification of Sec. 10.2.3.A. shall comply with the minimum fire safety standards specified in the state rules and regulations which were in effect at the time such building or structure was constructed, except for those standards pertaining to electrical requirements which shall be the current standards adopted and specified in the state rules and regulations. A less restrictive provision contained in any subsequently adopted minimum fire standard may be applied to any existing building or structure. 
2.  Every proposed building and structure which comes under the classification of Sec. 10.2.3.A. shall comply with the adopted minimum fire safety standards under the state rules and regulations that were in effect on the date that the plans and specifications therefore were received by the fire marshal for review and approval in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 10.2.3.C. 
F.  Right of Entry to Inspect Premises   
The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night to enter in or upon and examine all buildings or premises where a fire is in progress or has occurred and other buildings or premises adjacent or near the same. Likewise, the fire marshal shall have the right to enter in and upon all buildings and premises subject to this article at all reasonable times for the purpose of examination or inspection. 
G.  Notice to Correct Conditions   
Whenever the fire marshal shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repair or by reason of age or dilapidated condition or from any other cause, is especially liable to fire hazard or which is so situated as to endanger other property or the safety of the public; or whenever such officer shall find, in or around any building, combustible or explosive matter, inflammables, or other conditions dangerous to the safety of such building, notice may be given to the owner or agent and occupant of any building coming under the provisions of this section to correct such unsafe condition as may be found. 
H.  Court Order to Correct Conditions   
If any owner, agent, or occupant fails to comply with the notice prescribed in the preceding section, within the time specified in the notice, the fire marshal, upon approval of the City Commission, may petition the court for a rule nisi to show cause why an order should not be issued by the court that the same be removed or remedied. Such court order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant of the premises or building within such time as may be fixed in the court order. Nothing contained in this section, however, shall be deemed to be a waiver of the City's right to cause citation to be issued to the owner or occupant of any building or structure for violation of any applicable ordinance of the City. 
I.  Failure to Comply with Court Order   
If any person fails to comply with the order of the court within the time fixed, then the City shall cause such building or premises to be forthwith repaired, torn down or demolished, the hazardous materials removed, and all dangerous conditions remedied, as the case may be, at the expense of the City. If the owner thereof, within 30 days after notice in writing of the amount of such expense, fails, neglects or refuses to repay the City the expense thereby incurred, the City shall issue a writ of fieri facias (fi. fa.) against the owner of the property for the expense actually incurred. 
J.  Final Authority for Ordering Enforcement   
Sec. 10.2.3.F. through Sec. 10.2.3.F. shall be construed so that the final authority for carrying out and enforcement of such sections shall be by order of the court and not by the fire marshal or City Commission. 
K.  Sovereign Immunity of City   
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to constitute a waiver of the sovereign immunity of the City or any officer or employee thereof in carrying out the provisions of this article. No action shall be maintained against the City or any officer, elected officer, or employee thereof for damages sustained as a result of any fire or related hazard covered by this article by reason of any inspection or other action taken or not taken pursuant to this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve any property owner or lessee thereof from any legal duty, obligation or liability incidental to the ownership, maintenance and use of such property. 
L.  Maintenance and Reporting   
Records of all system inspections, tests and maintenance required by the governing NFPA standard for the systems listed below shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum of three years and shall be provided to the City through an inspection reporting system of the City's choosing. 
1.  Automatic fire sprinkler system. 
2.  Fire alarm system. 
3.  Commercial hood cleaning. 
4.  Commercial hood suppression system. 
5.  Standpipe. 
6.  Active smoke control system. 
7.  Private hydrant system. 
8.  Fire pump. 
9.  Spray paint booth. 
10.  Emergency generator 
M.  Fire Lane Enforcement   
1.  No person shall park any motor vehicle, including a motorcycle, in a fire lane or within 3 feet of a fire hydrant to impede access; provided, however, this Section shall not apply to the parking of an authorized emergency vehicle on official business. 
2.  Enforcement of this Section shall be through fire and police officials by the issuance of a ticket which shall be either left with the vehicle or delivered to the person in possession thereof. For purposes of such civil action, it shall be presumed that the registered owner of said vehicle is in control or possession thereof. 
10.2.4. - Fire Alarm Code 
A.  Title and Purpose of Article   
This article shall be known as the Fire Alarm Code. The purpose of this Code is to provide for a safe, efficient and dependable method of providing uniform fire alarm systems within the City. 
B.  Scope of Article   
The provisions of this Code apply to the selection, installation, alteration, equipment and maintenance of all public and private fire alarm systems installed within the City after the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives. The provisions of this Code based on occupancy also apply to changes of existing buildings and structures or portions thereof from one occupancy classification to another. 
C.  Validity of Other Laws   
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the enforcement of other laws which prescribe more restrictive limitations. 
D.  Penalty for Violation of Article   
Any person failing to comply with this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided. If any building or structure fails to comply with the standards of this article, so as to present a hazard to life and property, all persons shall be prohibited from occupying the structure by orders signed by the fire chief and posted on the premises. 
E.  National Fire Protection Association Standards Adopted   
The following NFPA standards will apply within the City: 
1.  NFPA 72, National Fire Alarm and Signaling Code . 
F.  Wiring   
The installation of wiring and equipment shall be in accordance with Article 760, "Fire P Alarm Systems" of the National Electrical Code, NFPA, as approved for use in the county. 
G.  Occupancy Requirements   
1.  Every structure built, substantially renovated or having its occupancy classification changed shall have smoke detectors, heat detectors, rate of rise heat detectors or a combination thereof installed in the locations identifies below. Such detectors shall be installed in accordance with the NFPA standards described in Sec. 10.2.4.E. 
a.  Workrooms 
b.  Break rooms 
c.  Corridors and hallways 
d.  Waiting rooms 
e.  Conference rooms 
f.  Copy/printing rooms 
2.  Every structure, with the exception of single-family residences, shall have an audible alarm which will alert all occupants of the structure, even though such occupants are not in the same living or working area. Such signals shall consist of horns, bells or sirens. Such signals shall not be used for any other purpose than to signal a fire alarm. 
3.  Every structure with a life hazard exposure of 100 or more persons shall have an approved alarm system which shall also terminate in an Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. (UL) approved monitoring station, which shall immediately contact the City public safety department when notified by the alarm. 
4.  Every new structure containing the following occupancy types shall have a combination fire alarm/voice communication system installed in accordance with NFPA 101 and NFPA 72. 
a.  High rise buildings 
b.  Assembly occupancies 
c.  Mall buildings 
d.  Hotels and dormitories 
H.  Alarm System Monitoring   
1.  All systems required to be monitored in this article shall be monitored by an Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. (UL) approved central monitoring station. 
2.  It shall be unlawful for any person to place the emergency fire, police or public safety telephone number into any automatic device so designed to transmit a recorded message to the City fire, police or public safety departments. 
3.  The City fire department shall be hereby permitted to issue a written warning after the first false alarm transmitted by an automatic signaling device. 
4.  The City fire department, at the discretion of the fire chief, shall be permitted to impose a user fee, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, for every false alarm transmitted from any private alarm system after a written warning has been issued to the owner and/or subscriber of the system. All fees shall become a part of the general funds of the City. 
I.  Special Alarm Systems   
1.  All structures equipped with sprinkler systems which are built, substantially renovated, or upon having their occupancy classification changed shall have an automatic waterflow alarm and tamper detection device installed which shall transmit an immediate alarm to an Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. (UL) approved monitoring station, which shall immediately contact the City public safety department when notified by the alarm. 
2.  All structures equipped with automatic fire suppression systems shall have an activation alarm installed which shall transmit an immediate alarm to an Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. (UL) approved monitoring station, which shall immediately contact the City public safety department when notified by the alarm. 
3.  Exception: This requirement shall not apply to a structure with a life hazard exposure of fewer than 100 persons and in which the only automatic fire suppression system is a grease hood for the protection of a kitchen hood system. 
J.  Maintaining Existing Fire Sprinkler Systems or Shutting Off Fire Sprinkler Systems   
1.  Any existing fire sprinkler system in any structure shall be maintained to the extent recognized by the NFPA (National Fire Protection Association). 
2.  No person shall shut off, disable, or disarm any automatic fire sprinkler system except for the following purposes: 
a.  In order to perform required or necessary service or maintenance to such system. Any such maintenance may be conducted after notice has been given to the fire department. 
b.  In the event of accidental damage to the system that causes undo water flow. 
3.  In the event that a fire sprinkler system must stay off for an extended time due to repair or maintenance a fire watch may be required during that period. If required the fire watch is to remain in effect until such time that the system is returned to its full capacity. 
K.  False alarm definitions and procedures.   
1.  A false alarm shall mean the receipt by the fire department or 911 dispatch center via a private alarm monitoring service, (i.e. Tyco, Wells Fargo, Simplex, etc), or by responsible individuals on site, any audio and or visual alarm or signal from an automatic fire alarm device set off by causes other than the occurrence of smoke or fire, or 
2.  The activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the alarm user by way of failure to properly maintain such system by a qualified technician or company specializing in routine installation and maintenance of an automatic fire alarm system in accordance with NFPA Standard 72, National Fire Alarm Code. 
3.  Once the fire department responds to any fire alarm, it shall be unlawful for the alarm panel to be reset by the owner of the premises or his/her designee until authorized by a fire department official (fire chief, fire marshal, or incident commander). 
4.  It shall be the responsibility of the owner or other responsible party to have his or her alarm system inspected, maintained, and repaired in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and NFPA Standard 72, National Fire Alarm Code. It shall also be the responsibility of the owner or other responsible party to provide satisfactory alternate fire watch for any malfunctioning fire alarm system when that system is required for operation of the facility. 
5.  The City and the City fire department assume no responsibility for alarm system problems or malfunctions between the individuals or businesses and their respective alarm company. 
L.  Solicitation of Voluntary Compliance   
All commercial and residential burglar and fire alarms must register in the designated Decatur Fire and Security Alarm Registry. 
M.  False alarm penalties and fines.   
1.  For any preventable false alarm that occurs at the same location and the same panel three times within a 24-hour period the owner or responsible person(s) of the premises may be assessed according to the fee schedule. No fines shall be assessed to a business or residence for the first three false alarms, at the same alarm panel location responded to by the fire department during period of 12 consecutive calendar months. If the responsible person(s) for the property at which an alarm occurs fail to provide one or more current key holders or key holders refuse to respond when requested by the fire department, the responsible person(s) for the property are liable for any damages and costs, of incidents or emergencies that may occur within or to their property, and/or to any other impacted property. Additionally, if responding firefighters are unable to access the building and have reason to believe that a fire or other emergency is occurring within the premises, they are authorized to use forcible entry at their discretion. The owner or responsible person(s) for the property and/or their insurance companies are also responsible for costs of repair or replacement of property that may be damaged by or due to forcible entry. A key holder is an authorized person designated by the owner or responsible person(s) of the property who has authorization, keys, and/or codes required to access the property and reset the alarm. The fire chief, fire marshal, and senior fire officer on duty are authorized to issue or authorize issuance of appropriate citations. 
2.  The false alarm violations set forth herein shall not apply if the false fire alarms were caused by severe weather, lightning strikes, power surges, or any other potential sources for which the responsible party has no control. The fire officer in charge shall have the responsibility to determine if a false fire alarm was due to foreseeable and preventable conditions or if it was due to extraordinary reasons beyond the control of the responsible party. Additionally, if the property or fire alarm monitoring company from which an alarm is received provides appropriate information to verify that the alarm is false prior to the arrival of the first responding fire unit, the on scene fire officer will confirm the accuracy of the information and the cause of the incident. Absent other infractions, the first two such alarms will be documented but not counted in the incidents that activate citations in accordance with Sec. 10.2.4.M.1. 
10.2.5. - Fireworks 
A.  Purpose of Article   
The purpose of this article is to regulate the use, manufacture, sale and storage of fireworks within the City, in concert with and in a manner that augments state regulation of fireworks, so as to prevent adverse effects on the public health, safety and welfare of the City and to protect its citizens from the danger of fire. 
B.  Fireworks Regulated   
1.  Sale, Manufacture and Storage   
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale at retail or wholesale, or to use or explode or cause to be exploded, or to possess, manufacture, or store any fireworks within Decatur City limits, except as is permitted by Chapter 10 of Title 25 of the Official Code of Georgia and this article. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale at retail or wholesale, or to manufacture any consumer fireworks except within the C-3 heavy commercial zoning district as described and defined by this UDO. 
c.  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell consumer fireworks from a temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand except pursuant to a license issued by the City and only if such temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand meets the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 25-10-2(b)(6)(B). 
d.  A person desiring to sell consumer fireworks from a temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand may apply for a license by filing an application with the City Manager or his or her designee on forms provided by the City. 
i.  Upon a finding that the applicant meets all the requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.1(c)(1) and the receipt of a $500.00 license fee per location, the City Manager or his or her designee shall issue the requested license. 
ii.  The City Manager or his or her designee shall determine whether to issue the requested permit within 30 days of the date the application is filed. 
iii.  Pursuant to the requirement of O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.1(c)(4), all fees for licenses to sell consumer fireworks from a temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand shall be expended for public safety purposes. 
2.  Use of Fireworks on City Property   
a.  Except pursuant to a special use permit as provided for in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to use or ignite or cause to be ignited any fireworks within or on any park, historic site, recreational area, or other property which is owned by or operated by, for or under the custody and control of the City, including but not limited to, all City parks, all City owned greenspaces, the MARTA Plaza, the Decatur Cemetery, the Old Courthouse lawn and the United Methodist Children's Home property. 
b.  A person desiring to use or ignite fireworks on City property may apply for a special use permit by filing an application with the City Manager or his or her designee on forms provided by the City. 
i.  Such application shall be filed not less than 30 days before the date of the proposed use. 
ii.  Upon filing of such application, the City Manager or his or her designee shall consider the application and investigate the effect and suitability of the requested activity. 
iii.  The City Manager or his or her designee shall issue the requested permit within 21 days of the date the application is filed unless it is determined that the requested activity may reasonably be expected to: 
a.  Cause injury to persons or property; 
b.  Interfere with the City's use of the property; 
c.  Conflict with the public purposes for which the property is used; 
d.  Increase the likelihood of disorderly conduct; or 
e.  Otherwise endanger the health, safety, security, good order and welfare of the City and its inhabitants. 
iv.  A special use permit issued pursuant to this section shall not become valid until and unless the applicant tenders the required fee amount of $100.00 to the City. 
3.  Times During Which Fireworks May Be Used   
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or ignite or cause to be ignited any consumer fireworks except during the following time periods: 
a.  On any day beginning at the time of 10:00 a.m. and up to and including the time of 9:00 p.m.; 
b.  On January 1, July 3, July 4, and December 31 of each year after the time of 9:00 p.m. and up to and including the time of 11:59 p.m.; and 
c.  On January 1 of each year beginning at the time of 12:00 midnight and up to and including the time of 1:00 a.m. 
C.  Public Exhibitions or Displays of Fireworks   
Public exhibitions or displays of fireworks, and sale and transportation of fireworks for such use, shall be allowed if properly permitted according to provisions of Article 10 of Chapter 25 of O.C.G.A. 
D.  Penalty for Violation of Article   
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to punishment, upon conviction, as provided for in Section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. O-17-13, § 1, 12-18-17) 
Article 11. - Administration 
Sec. 11.1. - Review Bodies 

11.1.1. - UDO Administrator 
A.  Powers and Duties   
The UDO Administrator has the following powers and duties with regard to this UDO. 
1.  Review   
The UDO Administrator is authorized to review all applications required under Article 7. through Article 10. of this UDO. 
2.  Final Decision   
The UDO Administrator makes final decisions on the following: 
a.  Development permits, including Tree Information, Tree Disturbance and Tree Preservation Permits; 
b.  Demolition Permits, except as otherwise provided in Sec. 5.2. for designated historic properties. 
c.  Percentage of compact car spaces in Sec. 7.2.4. 
3.  Interpretation   
The UDO Administrator is responsible for interpretation of Article 7. through Article 10. of this UDO. 
(Ord. No. O-15-Z-01, § 1.5, 1-20-15) 
11.1.2. - Zoning Administrator 
A.  Powers and Duties   
The Zoning Administrator has the following powers and duties with regard to this UDO. 
1.  Review   
The Zoning Administrator is authorized to review all applications required under Article 1. through Article 6. of this UDO. 
2.  Final Decision   
The Zoning Administrator makes final decisions on the following: 
a.  Certificate of Zoning Compliance; 
b.  Administrative Adjustments; 
c.  Side yard and front yard modifications in Sec. 2.1.5.; 
d.  Classification of uses in Sec. 6.1., accessory uses in Sec. 6.8., and temporary uses in Sec. 6.9.; and 
3.  Interpretation   
The Zoning Administrator is responsible for interpretation of Article 1. through Article 6. and Article 11. through Article 12. of this UDO. 
(Ord. No. O-15-Z-01, § 1.6, 1-20-15) 
11.1.3. - Zoning Board of Appeals 
A.  Constitution and Membership   
1.  A Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby established. The word "Board," when used in this Sec. 11.1.3., shall be construed to mean the Zoning Board of Appeals of the City, Georgia. The Board shall consist of not more than 5 members nor less than 3 members. All members shall be citizens of the City and no member shall be a member of the City Commission or an employee of the City. 
2.  The term of office of each member shall be 3 years except that of the 3 members first appointed, one shall be appointed for a term of 1 year, one for a term of 2 years, and one for a term of 3 years. Thereafter, as each term expires, the appointment shall be for 3 years except that a vacancy occurring in an unexpired term shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of that term. The City Commission shall have the power to remove any member of the Board upon written charges and after public hearing. 
3.  The Board shall elect a chairman and a vice chairman, appoint a secretary, and adopt, subject to approval of the City Commission, rules governing the conduct of its affairs. Copies of the rules shall be made available to the public. The Zoning Administrator shall be in attendance at all meetings as an advisor. 
B.  Meetings, Procedure and Records   
1.  Meetings of the Board shall be held at such times as the Board may determine or upon call of the chairman. Such chairman or, in his absence, the vice-chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. 
2.  The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such facts, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record. 
C.  Powers and Duties   
The Board in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate criteria, conditions and safeguards set forth in this Article shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  Appeals from administrative decisions; 
2.  Variances; and 
3.  Such other powers and duties set forth in this UDO. 
(Ord. No. O-15-Z-01, § 1.7, 1-20-15) 
11.1.4. - Planning Commission 
A.  Established; Authority   
The City Planning Commission, hereinafter referred to in this article as the "Planning Commission," is hereby created and established. 
B.  Composition, Appointment and Term of Members   
The Planning Commission shall consist of 7 members, who shall be residents of the City, appointed by the City Commission. The terms of the members shall be 3 years, and until their successors are appointed and qualify; except that all members serving at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives shall complete the term for which they were appointed and their successors shall be appointed for 3-year terms. All members shall be citizens of the City and no member shall be a member of the City Commission or an employee of the City. 
C.  Filling Vacancies; Removal of Members   
Any vacancy in membership in the Planning Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term by the City Commission who shall also have the authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. 
D.  Organization; Rules of Procedure; Meetings; Records   
The Planning Commission shall elect its chairman and a vice-chairman from among its members. The term of the chairman shall be 1 year with eligibility for reelection. The Planning Commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the municipality. The Planning Commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting; provided, that such Commission shall meet at least once per month. All meetings of the Planning Commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records of the Planning Commission shall be public records. 
E.  Employees and Staff, Contracting and Expenditures   
The Planning Commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with the state Planning Commission, City planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the Planning Commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the City Commission. 
F.  Powers and Duties   
The Planning Commission shall have those powers and duties set forth in this UDO. 
(Ord. No. O-15-Z-01, § 1.8, 1-20-15) 
11.1.5. - City Commission 
A.  Powers and Duties   
The City Commission has the following powers and duties with regard to this UDO. 
1.  Final Decision   
The City Commission makes final decisions on the following: 
a.  Comprehensive Plan amendments; 
b.  UDO text or map amendments, including historic designations; 
c.  Conditional use permits; 
d.  Special exceptions; and 
e.  Such other powers and duties set out in this UDO. 
11.1.6. - Decatur Greenspace Commission 
A.  Findings of Fact and Determinations   
The greenspace, riparian buffers and natural environment of the City are among the City's most valued and important assets, and the preservation of this environment is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the City's residents and visitors. 
B.  Purpose and Intent of Article   
The City Commission hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this article to establish a uniform procedure for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places and landscape features having a special cultural or aesthetic interest or value in order to: 
1.  Enhance aesthetic attractions and recreational opportunities to residents, tourists, and others and thereby promote and stimulate business; and 
2.  Protect the water and air quality of the community and the region benefiting the health of residents. 
C.  Creation; Title   
There is hereby created a Commission whose title shall be "Decatur Greenspace Commission," known in this article as the Greenspace Commission. 
D.  Position within the City   
The Greenspace Commission shall be part of the planning functions of the City. 
E.  Membership; Number; Terms; Compensation   
1.  The Greenspace Commission shall consist of 7 members appointed by the City Commission. All members shall be residents of the City and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in the environment, landscape architecture, urban planning and related disciplines. 
2.  To the extent available in the City, at least 3 members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of environment, landscape architecture, urban planning and related disciplines. 
3.  Members shall serve 3-year terms. Members may not serve more than 2 consecutive 3-year terms except for initial appointments whose first terms are less than a full 3-year term. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: 2 members for 1 year; 2 members for 2 years; and 3 members for 3 years. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
F.  Powers   
The Greenspace Commission shall be authorized to: 
1.  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all greenspace within the City. 
2.  Recommend to the City Commission specific places to be designated by ordinance as greenspace. 
3.  Recommend to the City Commission that the designation of any place or district as a greenspace be revoked or removed. 
4.  Advise the City on the acquisition of interests in any greenspace. 
5.  Promote the acquisition by the City of easements and conservation easements in accordance with the provisions of the O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq. 
6.  Conduct educational programs on greenspace located within the City. 
7.  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to greenspace, including consultation with greenspace experts, as the City Commission or the Greenspace Commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving greenspace. 
8.  Seek out local, state, federal and private funds for greenspace acquisition and maintenance, and make recommendations to the City Commission concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired. 
9.  Assist the City Commission in complying with requirements imposed by the Georgia Greenspace Program of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources including submitting lists of designated greenspace properties. 
10.  Perform greenspace activities as the official agency of the City greenspace program. 
11.  Where such action is authorized by a specific resolution adopted by the City Commission and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique greenspace, negotiate with the owner of such greenspace for the acquisition by the City by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise of the property or any interest therein. 
12.  Participate in private, state and federal greenspace programs and with the consent of the City Commission enter into agreements to do the same. 
G.  Limitation on Powers   
The Greenspace Commission shall not have the power to obligate the City in any way without prior consent of the City Commission. 
H.  Adoption of Rules and Standards; Meetings; Officers; Quorum   
The Greenspace Commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of applications for designations of greenspace, such as bylaws and criteria. The Greenspace Commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this article. The Greenspace Commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The Greenspace Commission shall select such officers, as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
I.  Conflicts of Interest   
At any time the Greenspace Commission reviews a matter in which a member of the Greenspace Commission has an ownership or other vested interest, that member shall not present, vote or discuss the matter, other than to answer a direct question addressed to the member. 
J.  Records of Meetings   
A public record shall be kept of the Greenspace Commission's resolutions, proceedings and actions. 
11.1.7. - Downtown Development Authority and Citywide Development Authority 
A.  Title   
The Downtown Development Authority of the City of Decatur and the Development Authority of the City of Decatur, which were created in accordance with state law O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 and O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 and which share the same Board, are hereafter referred to as the Development Board. 
B.  Position within the City   
The Development Board shall be part of the community and economic development functions of the City. 
C.  Powers   
In addition to all powers of the Development Board granted by law, the Development Board shall have the following specific powers with regard to this UDO: 
1.  The Development Board shall serve as the Decatur Commercial Design Review Board to encourage quality redevelopment of Decatur's commercial districts in support of the Town Center and Strategic Plan and applicable commercial district master plans. 
2.  The Development Board may review projects located within the boundaries of the Special Pedestrian Area and C1, C2 and C3 zoned properties to comment on such projects' compliance with the long-range vision of the City. 
3.  The Development Board shall also have the authority to review and comment on compliance with the applicable design standards in the zoning ordinance related to commercial properties under its review. 
4.  The Development Board serves as advocate and advisor to the City Commission and City staff for quality growth and development in the City. 
D.  Limitation on Powers   
The Development Board shall not have the power to obligate the City in any way without prior consent of the City Commission. 
Sec. 11.2. - Review Process and Procedures 

11.2.1. - Summary of Review Authority 
The following table summarizes the review and approval authority of the various reviews bodies that implement and administer the UDO. 
        REVIEW AND APPROVAL AUTHORITY APPROVAL PROCESS Cross- 
reference Zoning 
Administrator UDO 
Administrator Downtown/ 
Citywide Historic 
Preservation 
Commission Zoning Board 
of Appeals Planning 
Commission City 
Commission Legislative Review  Comprehensive Land Use Plan Amendment 11.2.2 - - R (1) R (2) - R-PH D-PH  Text Amendment 11.2.2 - - R (1) R (2) - R-PH D-PH  Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) 11.2.2 - - R (1) R (2) - R-PH D-PH  Conditional Use Permit 11.2.3 - - R (1) R (2) - R-PH D-PH  Special Exception 11.2.4 - - - R (2) - R-PH D-PH  Planned Unit Development 5.4.5 - - - R (2) - R-PH D-PH  Conservation Subdivision 3.8.5 - - - R (2) - R-PH D-PH Subdivision Review  Preliminary Plat 11.2.5 R R - R (2) - R-PH D-PH  Final Plat 11.2.5 R R - - - - D-PH Historic Review  Historic Designation 5.2.2 - - - R-PH - - D-PH  Certificate of Appropriateness 5.2.3 - - - D-PH - - A-PH Permit Review  Certificate of Zoning Compliance 11.2.6 D - - - A-PH - -  Administrative Adjustment 11.2.7 D - - - A-PH - -  Development Permit 9.1.17 - D - - A-PH - -  Demolition Permit 11.2.8 - D - D-PH (2) A-PH - - Quasi-Judicial Review  Variance 11.2.9 - - - R (2) D-PH - -  Appeal of an Administrative Decision 11.2.10 - - - - D-PH - -  Housing Code Appeal - R - - D-PH - -  
KEY:  R = Review & Recommendation D = Final Decision A = Appeal PH = Public Hearing 
(1)  ;hg;The Downtown Development Authority and Citywide Development Authority provide review when they have jurisdiction over the application. 
(2)  ;hg;The Historic Preservation Commission provides review when it has jurisdiction over the application. 
11.2.2. - Amendments 
A.  Initiation of Amendments   
1.  Amendments to the zoning map or to the Comprehensive Land Use Plan may be initiated by the City Commission, the Planning Commission or by application by the owner of the property which is the subject of the proposed amendment or his authorized agent, such authorization to be notarized and attached to the application. 
2.  Amendments to the text of the UDO may be initiated by the City Commission, the Planning Commission or by application by any citizen of the City. 
3.  When amendments are initiated by the City Commission or the Planning Commission, the required fee shall be waived. 
B.  Order of Amendments   
The permitted order in which amendments may be made to the text of the zoning ordinance, the Comprehensive Land Use Plan and the zoning map is as follows: 
1.  The text of the UDO may be amended without prior or subsequent amendment to Comprehensive Land Use Plan or the zoning map. 
2.  The zoning map may be amended without an amendment to the Comprehensive Land Use Plan if the proposed amendment would permit a use that is permitted by the Comprehensive Land Use Plan. 
3.  If a proposed amendment to the zoning map would permit a use that is not authorized within the land use category of the subject property as shown on the Comprehensive Land Use Plan, then the applicant must obtain an appropriate amendment to the Comprehensive Land Use Plan before applying for the rezoning, or the applicant may apply for an appropriate amendment to the Comprehensive Land Use Plan and at the same time apply for a zoning map amendment. 
4.  The Comprehensive Land Use Plan may be amended regardless of the zoning district in which the subject property is located. 
5.  Where an application to amend the Comprehensive Land Use Plan and an application to amend the zoning map each affect the same property and are scheduled to be heard at the same hearing, the application to amend the Comprehensive Land Use Plan shall be heard first and action authorized by this UDO taken before the application to amend the zoning map is heard and action taken with respect thereto. 
C.  Applications   
Applications to amend this UDO shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator at least 30 days prior to the date on which it is to be heard by the Planning Commission. Applications shall be submitted on forms available from the Zoning Administrator. Such applications shall include all materials and documents required by the Zoning Administrator and shall be in compliance with the following: 
1.  Text amendment applications shall include the following: 
a.  Name and address of applicant. 
b.  Current provisions of the text to be affected by the proposed amendment. 
c.  Proposed wording of the text amendment. 
d.  Statement of reasons for the proposed text amendment. 
2.  Zoning map amendment applications shall include the following: 
a.  The names and addresses of the owners of the property subject to the zoning map amendment and their agents, if any, authorized to apply for the amendment. 
b.  The present and proposed zoning classifications for the subject property. 
c.  The present and proposed uses for the property. 
d.  A plat of the subject property containing the following information: 
i.  All property lines with dimensions. 
ii.  Locations of buildings or other structures, floodplains, drainageways, and easements. 
iii.  Proposed street right-of-way lines. 
iv.  Comprehensive site development plan if application is for commercial, industrial, high-density single-family residential, multiple-family residential or institutional use. 
v.  North arrow, scale, land lot, block and lot numbers. 
e.  A written answer and explanation for each of the following standards: 
i.  Does the zoning proposal permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property? 
ii.  Does the zoning proposal adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property? 
iii.  Does the property to be affected by the zoning proposal have a reasonable economic use as currently zoned? 
iv.  Does the zoning proposal result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools? 
v.  Does the zoning proposal conform with the policy and intent of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan? 
vi.  Are there other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which, because of their impact on the public health, safety, morality and general welfare of the community, give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal? 
3.  Comprehensive Land Use Plan amendment applications shall Include the following: 
a.  A map identifying the geographic area of the City that is to have a revised land use under the applicant's proposal. 
b.  All permitted land uses for the subject area under the existing Comprehensive Land Use Plan. 
c.  All changes to existing land use designations that are proposed by the application. 
d.  All land uses immediately adjacent to the subject area under the existing Comprehensive Land Use Plan. 
e.  All reasons for the proposed amendment. 
f.  Names and addresses of the owners of land affected by the proposed amendment and their agents, if any, authorized to apply for an amendment. 
g.  A written answer and explanation for each of the following standards: 
i.  Does the proposed amendment permit uses that are suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property? 
ii.  Does the proposed amendment adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property? 
iii.  Will the proposed amendment result in uses which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools? 
iv.  Are there other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which, because of their impact on the public health, safety, morality and general welfare of the community, give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the proposed amendment? 
4.  Fees   
Each application for an amendment to the zoning map, to the Comprehensive Land Use Plan, or to the text of the UDO shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. Under no condition shall said fees or any part thereof be refunded for failure of proposed amendments to Plan, map or text to be enacted into law. 
5.  Restrictions on Applications   
An application for an amendment to the zoning map affecting the same property shall not be accepted more than once every 12 months, said interval to begin with the date of a final decision by the City Commission. This 12-month interval shall not apply to applications for amendment to the zoning map affecting the same property that are initiated by the City Commission or the Planning Commission and denied by the City Commission; in such cases, the same property may not again be considered for a zoning map amendment until the expiration of 6 months following the denial of the zoning map amendment. 
6.  Developments of Regional Impact   
An application for amendment or any other development request that meets the threshold requirements for a development of regional impact under state law standards for such projects, as amended, shall meet all Atlanta Regional Commission and Georgia Regional Transportation Authority review and procedural requirements of said state agencies that exist at the time of application. 
D.  Public Hearings and Notice   
Public hearings shall be held regarding proposed amendments to the text of those portions of the UDO that constitute a zoning decision within the meaning of the Zoning Procedures Law, as amended (see UDO Sec. 1.1.4.), which zoning decisions are also referred to herein as zoning ordinance amendments, the Comprehensive Land Use Plan or the zoning map, as follows: 
a.  Prior to decision by the City Commission which results in the adoption of a zoning ordinance amendment, a Comprehensive Land Use Plan, or a zoning map, the adoption of an amendment to the UDO which changes the text of the zoning ordinance, the adoption of an amendment to the Comprehensive Land Use Plan, or the adoption of an amendment to the zoning map which rezones property from one zoning classification to another, the Planning Commission and the City Commission shall hold public hearings on the proposed action. 
b.  At least 15 but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the public hearing by the Planning Commission and the City Commission, a notice of the public hearings shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the City. The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the public hearings. If the zoning decision to be considered is for an amendment to the Comprehensive Land Use Plan or the rezoning of property and such amendment is initiated by a party other than the City, the notice shall also include the location of the property, the present land use category or zoning classification of the property and the proposed land use category or zoning classification of the property. 
c.  If the zoning decision to be considered is for an amendment to the Comprehensive Land Use Plan or the rezoning of property and such amendment or rezoning is initiated by a party other than the City, a sign giving notice of the public hearings shall be placed in a conspicuous location on the property at least 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing by the Planning Commission and City Commission. The sign shall state the time, place and purpose of the public hearings and shall include the present land use category or zoning classification of the property and the proposed land use category or zoning classification of the property. In addition, the Zoning Administrator shall post signs on or within 300 feet as measured along the street right-of-way line of properties affected by such amendments or rezonings, provided that for multiple amendments or rezonings, such additional posting shall not be required. 
d.  If the zoning decision is for property annexed into the City, see Sec. 1.3.3. 
e.  If the zoning decision relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency, then the additional procedural requirements of section 36-66-4(f) of The Zoning Procedures Law, as amended, shall apply. 
E.  Rules of Policy and Procedure   
1.  Public hearings held pursuant to Sec. 11.2.2.C. by the Planning Commission and the City Commission shall afford the applicant or the applicant's designee an opportunity to explain the zoning proposal and interested residents and property owners an opportunity to state their support or opposition to the proposal. 
2.  Proponents of a zoning proposal under consideration shall be provided a period of time of not less than ten minutes for presentation of data, evidence, and opinion. Opponents of a zoning proposal under consideration shall have an equal period of time of not less than ten minutes for presentation. 
3.  Prior to speaking, each speaker shall identify himself/herself and state his/her current address. Each speaker shall limit remarks to data, evidence and opinions relevant to the zoning proposal under consideration. Speakers shall address all remarks to the Chair. 
4.  Following the presentations, the Chair shall close the public hearing with respect to the zoning proposal under consideration and the Commission shall proceed with appropriate action. 
5.  Printed copies of these rules of policy and procedure shall be available for distribution to the general public. 
F.  Standards and Factors   
1.  In reviewing applications for proposed zoning map amendments or zoning ordinance text amendments, the following standards and factors shall be considered by the Planning Commission and the City Commission: 
a.  Whether the zoning proposal permits a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property. 
b.  Whether the zoning proposal adversely affects the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
c.  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned. 
d.  Whether the zoning proposal would result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools. 
e.  Whether the zoning proposal conforms with the policy and intent of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan. 
f.  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which, because of their impact on the public health, safety, morality and general welfare of the community, give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
2.  In reviewing applications for proposed comprehensive land use plan amendments, the following standards and factors shall be considered by the Planning Commission and the City Commission: 
a.  Whether the proposed amendment permit uses that are suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property. 
b.  Whether the proposed amendment adversely affects the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
c.  Whether the proposed amendment results in uses which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools. 
d.  Whether there [are] other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which, because of their impact on the public health, safety, morality and general welfare of the community, give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the proposed amendment. 
3.  The standards and factors set forth in Sec. 11.2.2.E.1. and Sec. 11.2.2.E.2. above shall be printed and copies thereof shall be available for distribution to the general public. 
G.  Review of Applications   
1.  The Zoning Administrator will review all applications for amendments to the zoning map, Comprehensive Land Use Plan, UDO text, and conditional use permits (see Sec. 11.2.3.) for compliance with the criteria applicable to said applications as well as compliance with other applicable City regulations. Staff recommendations may be prepared and presented to the Planning Commission and City Commission prior to their respective action on such applications. 
2.  The Development Board may review and comment on applications for amendments to the zoning map, Comprehensive Land Use Plan, UDO text, and conditional use permits (see Sec. 11.2.3.),and also will have review and comment authority regarding other projects requiring a building permit, for projects located in the City's commercial districts. As a part of the Zoning Administrator's review of such applications, the Zoning Administrator shall provide an electronic copy of site plans, elevations and a written description of the project to the executive director of the Development Board no less than one week prior to the Board meeting next following the application date for such amendments or permits. The written description of the project shall address how the project responds to design requirements of the specific commercial district, how the project responds to the downtown special pedestrian district guidelines if applicable and how the project responds to the Decatur Town Center Plan, Strategic Plan or specific master plans applicable to the commercial district. At the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, a project description meeting these requirements may be made a part of the application requirements for these projects. In cases involving development projects in the C-2 Downtown Commercial district that adjoin R-60 residential zoning districts and requiring authorization by the Board to issue permits, application must be provided no less than two weeks prior to the Board meeting and will require that the property is properly posted. 
H.  Action by Planning Commission   
1.  Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation on each zoning proposal reviewed and submit its report to the City Commission prior to the date of the public hearing on such zoning proposal by the City Commission. If the Planning Commission fails to submit a report within said period, it shall be deemed to have made no recommendation regarding the proposed change. 
2.  Applicants may submit to the Zoning Administrator any conditions, alterations, changes, or amendments to an application for approval of an amendment to the zoning map, the Comprehensive Land Use Plan or to the zoning ordinance text up to 7 days prior to the date at which the application is to be considered by the Planning Commission. If such conditions, alterations, changes or amendments have not been submitted as required by this subsection, the Planning Commission may, at its discretion, defer action on the application until its next regular Meeting. 
I.  Action by the City Commission   
Following the public hearing, the City Commission, after receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission, shall take appropriate action on the application at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission. 
J.  Conditions   
1.  In approving an amendment to the zoning map, the Planning Commission may recommend and the City Commission may impose conditions which it deems necessary in order to mitigate impacts which may be expected without the imposition of those conditions. Such conditions may consist of a variety of requirements, including, but not limited to, setbacks from any lot line; specified or prohibited locations for buildings, parking, loading or storage areas or other land uses; restrictions in the location of driveways and curb cuts; restrictions regarding what land uses or other activities may be permitted; maximum building heights and other dimensions; landscaping requirements which may include location, type and maintenance of plant materials, fences, walls, earth berms or other buffer provisions; screening or other protective measures; preservation of existing trees and other vegetation; special measures to alleviate undesirable views, light, glare, noise, dust or odor; permitted hours of operation; architectural style; a requirement that the existing building(s) be retained; a requirement that development take place according to a site plan; a limitation on exterior modifications to existing buildings; public facility improvements by the owner; a time limit within which the property must either be used as rezoned or revert to the prior or other appropriate zoning status; or any other requirement deemed appropriate and necessary as a condition of rezoning. 
2.  Requirements imposed as a condition to rezoning shall be required of the property owner and all subsequent owners as a condition of the use of the property as rezoned. 
3.  Requirements imposed as a condition to rezoning shall be interpreted and continuously enforced by the Zoning Administrator in the same manner as any other provision of the zoning ordinance. 
4.  A conditional zoning shall be noted on the zoning map by adding the suffix "C" to the zoning district designation for the property so zoned. 
K.  Periodic Review of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan   
The Comprehensive Land Use Plan shall be reviewed periodically, and shall be reviewed annually by the Planning Commission, which shall recommend to the City Commission such changes as may be necessary or appropriate. 
11.2.3. - Conditional Use Permits 
A.  Applicability   
1.  Conditional uses within each zoning district are uses that may be appropriate in a particular zoning district, but because of the increased potential for incompatibility with adjacent uses, require individual review by the City Commission. 
2.  A conditional use permit is required for all conditional uses set forth in this UDO. 
B.  Pre-Application Conference   
Before submitting an application for a conditional use permit, an applicant shall schedule a pre-application conference with the Zoning Administrator to discuss the procedures, standards and regulations required for approval. This requirement may be waived at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator. 
C.  Applications   
Applications for conditional use permits shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator at least 30 days prior to the date on which it is to be heard by the Planning Commission. Applications shall be submitted on forms available from the Zoning Administrator. Said applications shall include all materials and documents required by the Zoning Administrator. 
D.  Fees   
Each application for conditional use permit shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges . Under no condition shall said fees or any part thereof be refunded for failure of proposed conditional use permit to be enacted into law 
E.  Public Hearings and Notice   
Public hearings and notice thereof shall be held regarding each proposed conditional use permit by the Planning Commission and City Commission in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 11.2.2.D. 
F.  Rules of Policy and Procedure   
Public hearings held pursuant to Sec. 11.2.2.E. above shall follow the rules of policy and procedure set forth in Sec. 11.2.2.E. 
G.  Review Standards   
In reviewing applications for a proposed conditional use permit, the following standards and factors shall be considered by the Planning Commission and the City Commission: 
1.  Whether the proposed use is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property. 
2.  Whether the proposed use is consistent with the requirements of the zoning district in which the use is proposed to be located. 
3.  Whether the proposed use adversely affects the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
4.  Whether the proposed use results in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or other public facilities. 
5.  Whether there is adequate ingress and egress to the subject property, including evaluation of the traffic impact of the proposed use relative to street capacity and safety of public streets and nearby pedestrian uses. 
6.  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions which, because of their impact on the public health, safety, morality and general welfare of the community, give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the proposed use. 
H.  Approval Process   
1.  Zoning Administrator Action   
The Zoning Administrator shall review the application for a conditional use permit in light of the requirements and standards of this Section and applicable requirements of Article 6. Staff recommendations may be prepared and presented to the Planning Commission and the City Commission prior to their respective action on such applications. 
2.  Planning Commission Recommendation   
a.  Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation on each proposed conditional use permit reviewed and submit its report to the City Commission prior to the date of the public hearing on such conditional use permit by the City Commission. If the Planning Commission fails to submit a report within said period, it shall be deemed to have made no recommendation regarding the proposed permit. 
b.  Applicants may submit to the Zoning Administrator any conditions, alterations, changes, or amendments to an application for approval of a conditional use permit up to 7 days prior to the date at which the application is to be considered by the Planning Commission. If such conditions, alterations, changes or amendments have not been submitted as required by this subsection, the Planning Commission may, at its discretion, defer action on the application until its next regular meeting. 
3.  City Commission Action   
a.  Following the public hearing, the City Commission, after receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission, shall take appropriate action on the application at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission. 
b.  The decision of the City Commission on each application for conditional use permit shall be based on a discretionary determination as to whether or not the applicant has met the criteria contained in Sec. 11.2.3.G., the use standards contained in Article 6., the consistency of the application with the comprehensive plan, the requirements of the zoning district in which such use is proposed to be located, and any additional conditions deemed necessary to ensure the compatibility of the conditional use with the surrounding properties. 
I.  Conditions   
1.  The proposed conditional use may be approved subject to such conditions as may be imposed in order to mitigate impacts on nearby properties which may be expected without the imposition of conditions. 
2.  Requirements imposed as a condition shall be required of the property owner and all subsequent owners. 
3.  Requirements imposed as a condition shall be interpreted and continuously enforced by the Zoning Administrator in the same manner as any other provision of the UDO. 
J.  Revisions to an Approved Conditional Use Permit   
Once approved, no major amendments to a conditional use permit shall be authorized unless such amendments have been applied for and approved in accordance with all procedural requirements of Sec. 11.2.3. Major amendments are those that impact adjoining or nearby property in an any manner other than incidentally, and shall include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Changes to another use; 
2.  Increase in density or intensity; 
3.  Enlarging, expanding or increasing the size or intensity of the approved use; 
4.  Increase in the requirements for off-street parking spaces; 
5.  Substantial change to the exterior appearance of buildings that is visible from any public right-of-way; or 
6.  The addition of outdoor equipment and machinery. 
11.2.4. - Special Exceptions 
A.  Authority   
The City Commission shall have the authority to authorize upon application in specific cases the following special exceptions to the terms of this UDO, provided that such exceptions shall impose appropriate conditions and safeguards, including a specified period of time for the exception to be permitted as will protect the Decatur Land Use Plan and conserve and protect property and property values in the neighborhood: 
1.  The extension of a district for a distance of not more than 50 feet where the boundary line of a district divides a lot or tract held in single ownership at the time of the passage of this UDO or to divide a lot of excessive depth extending into a district different from that in which the lot frontage is located. 
2.  The interpretation of the provisions of this UDO where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the zoning district map made a part of this UDO. 
3.  The reconstruction of a nonconforming building which has been destroyed, or partially destroyed, by explosion, fire, act of God or the public enemy, where the Board shall find some compelling public necessity requiring a continuance of the nonconforming use. 
4.  The erection and use of a building, or the use of premises, in any location for a public service corporation for public utility purposes which the Board deems reasonably necessary. 
5.  For properties located in R-85 R-60 and R-50 Districts only, employment of no more than 1 person not a resident of the premises for a period not to exceed 10 hours per week. The Board shall consider evidence of the need or hardship justifying the exception, the adequacy of off-street parking, the amount of customer contact, and the suitability and effect of the proposed exception in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby properties. 
6.  Exceptions to the minimum lot area and minimum off-street parking requirements for downtown multiple dwellings subject to such conditions as may be imposed in order to mitigate the impacts which may be expected without the imposition of conditions. 
7.  Any other special exceptions specifically identified in this UDO. 
B.  Application   
1.  An application for a special exception shall be filed with the office of the Zoning Administrator at least 15 days prior to the meeting of the City Commission at which it is to be heard. Each application shall be accompanied by a plat drawn to scale containing the following information in addition to any other pertinent information required by the UDO Administrator: 
a.  All property lines with dimensions. 
b.  Location of buildings and other structures, creeks and easements referenced to property lines. 
c.  North arrow, scale, lot and block numbers and land lot. 
d.  Topographic and drainage information if pertinent. 
2.  Each application for special exception shall be made in 2 copies and shall specify the conditions and the extent of the special exception sought as well as a statement demonstrating compliance with the required criteria for special exception set forth below. 
C.  Fee   
Each application for a special exception shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges to partially cover the cost of advertising, field investigation and other expenses involved in processing the application. 
D.  Resubmittal   
When action is unfavorable on an application for special exception or where the applicant withdraws the application prior to final action by the City Commission, a substantially similar application may not be resubmitted for at least 1 year from the date of denial or withdrawal. This requirement may be waived for good cause by the Zoning Administrator. 
E.  Criteria for Approving a Special Exception   
The following standards shall be considered in determining whether a special exception shall be approved: 
1.  The suitability of the proposed exception in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby properties. 
2.  The impact that the proposed exception will have on the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby properties. 
3.  The impact that the proposed exception will have on the public safety, traffic on the public streets, transportation facilities, utilities and other public services. 
4.  The impact that the proposed exception will have on established property values and on the health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the residents of the City. 
5.  Any additional criteria set forth in the section authorizing the special exception. 
F.  Approval Process   
1.  Zoning Administrator Action   
The Zoning Administrator shall review the application for a special exception in light of the findings of this Section and applicable requirements of this UDO and advise the applicant. 
2.  Notice and Hearing   
Notice and hearing requirements shall be the same as those set forth for variances in Sec. 11.2.9.E. 
3.  Rules of Policy and Procedure   
Hearing procedures for Special Exception review shall be in accordance with Sec. 11.2.2.E. 
4.  Planning Commission Recommendation   
a.  Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation on each proposed special exception reviewed and submit its report to the City Commission prior to the date of the public hearing on such special by the City Commission. If the Planning Commission fails to submit a report within said period, it shall be deemed to have made no recommendation regarding the special exception. 
b.  Applicants may submit to the Zoning Administrator any conditions, alterations, changes, or amendments to an application for approval of the special exception up to days prior to the date at which the application is to be considered by the Planning Commission. If such conditions, alterations, changes or amendments have not been submitted as required by this subsection, the Planning Commission may, at its discretion, defer action on the application until its next regular meeting. 
5.  City Commission Action   
a.  Following the public hearing, the City Commission, after receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission, shall take appropriate action on the application at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission. 
b.  The decision of the City Commission on each application for special exception shall be based on whether or not the applicant has met the criteria contained in Sec. 11.2.4.E., the standards contained in the UDO, the requirements of the zoning district in which such use is proposed to be located, and any additional conditions deemed necessary to ensure the compatibility of the surrounding properties. 
6.  Conditions to Approval   
a.  In approving an application, the City Commission may impose special conditions which it deems necessary in order to mitigate negative impacts upon surrounding properties which may be expected without the imposition of those conditions. Such conditions may consist of a variety of requirements, including, but not limited to: 
i.  Setbacks from any lot line if such setback is a proper part of the application under review; 
ii.  Specified or prohibited locations for buildings, parking, loading or storage areas or other structures; 
iii.  Restrictions in the location of driveways and curb cuts; 
iv.  Maximum building heights and other dimensions; 
v.  Landscaping requirements which may include location, type and maintenance of plant materials, fences, walls, earth berms or other buffer provisions; screening or other protective measures; 
vi.  Preservation of existing trees and other vegetation; 
vii.  Special measures to alleviate undesirable views, light, glare, noise, dust or odor; 
viii.  Permitted hours of operation; 
ix.  Requiring that an existing building be retained; 
x.  Requiring that development take place according to a site plan, development plan and/or building plan; 
xi.  Limitation on exterior modifications to existing buildings; 
xii.  Public facility improvements by the owner; 
xiii.  A time limit within which the property must either be used as allowed by the variance, special exception or other appeal; or 
xiv.  Any other requirement deemed appropriate and necessary as a condition of approval. 
b.  Requirements imposed as a condition of approval shall be required of the property owner and all subsequent owners as a condition of the use of the property and interpreted and continuously enforced by the UDO Administrator. 
7.  Appeals   
Appeals by an aggrieved party from a final decision of the City Commission on such Special Exceptions shall be taken to the Superior Court in accordance with Sec. 11.2.11. 
(Ord. No. O-15-Z-01, § 1.9, 1-20-15) 
11.2.5. - Subdivision Review 
A.  Procedures for All Plats   
1.  Preapplication Conference 
a.  Prior to the preparation of any subdivision plat, the subdivider shall confer with the Zoning Administrator who shall review the sketch plan of the proposed subdivision to determine whether such subdivision meets the requirements of this UDO. This step does not require formal application or filing of the plat. 
b.  After conferring with the Zoning Administrator, the subdivider may then proceed to prepare the preliminary plat for submission. Under no circumstances shall favorable consideration by the Zoning Administrator be construed as preliminary or tentative approval of the subdivision. 
B.  Preapplication Plats and Data   
The following shall be provided by the subdivider at the time of his preliminary conference with the Zoning Administrator: 
1.  Sketch Plan   
Eight copies of a sketch plan prepared at a scale of not less than 100 feet to 1 inch . The sketch plan may be a freehand sketch made directly on a print of the topographic survey, if available. The sketch plan must show the following, as applicable: 
a.  Proposed lot lines; 
b.  Proposed public street rights-of-way. 
c.  Proposed alleys; 
d.  Proposed open space; 
e.  Streetscape and other easements; and 
f.  Other such information as necessary for consideration of the proposed sketch plan. 
2.  General Subdivision Information   
Two copies of general subdivision information which shall describe or outline the existing conditions of the site and the proposed development as necessary to supplement the sketch plan. This information should include data on existing covenants, land characteristics and available community facilities and utilities. It should also include information describing the subdivision proposal, such as the number of residential lots, typical lot width and depth, price range, minimum floor area in structures, business areas, open space areas, state waters and required stream buffers, proposed protective covenants and proposed utilities and street improvements. 
C.  Drawing Requirements   
All site plans and preliminary and final subdivision plats, but not sketch plans, must conform to the following standards: 
1.  Drawings may be submitted either on paper or in digital files. 
2.  All drawings must contain the dates of preparation and any revisions 
3.  All drawings must be at be at a scale of not less than 100 feet to 1 inch. 
4.  Drawing sheets may not be larger than 24 inches by 36 inches and must be uniform in size for a submittal. 
5.  All drawings must contain a graphic and written scale and a north arrow. 
6.  All drawings must contain the name, address, and telephone number of the preparer(s), property owner(s) and developer(s). 
7.  All drawings shall contain the seal and signature of the licensed professional preparing the drawings and computations. 
D.  Digital Requirements   
Digital final plans shall include the following 
1.  All drawings shall be geo-referenced to the US State Plane coordinate system, NAD 83, GA West Zone, US Survey Feet. 
2.  Digital Final plat shall include the following feature geometry types: 
a.  Polygons, including lots, street rights-of-way, and easements. 
b.  Lines, including street centerline and utility lines 
3.  The Zoning Administrator will provide template (or seed) drawing files upon request. 
E.  Preliminary Plat   
1.  Application Requirements   
Each application shall be accompanied by plans which include the following information: 
a.  Written Description   
A written description of the proposed development, including number and size of proposed dwellings, amount of commercial, recreational and/or other spaces, and all other information necessary to show that the proposed development complies with the standards described in Sec. 6.3.1.C. 
b.  Site Plan   
A site plan prepared showing, at a minimum: 
i.  Existing buildings to be retained 
ii.  New buildings and the location of their pedestrian entrances. 
iii.  Location and width of required buffers and landscaping. 
iv.  Location and width of sidewalks, location and species of street trees. 
v.  Location and number of on-site parking spaces. 
vi.  Location and size of open spaces. 
vii.  Location of required parking lot screening. 
viii.  Proposed lot lines. 
ix.  Proposed public streets. 
x.  Proposed alleys. 
xi.  Streetscape and other easements. 
xii.  Location of site utilities. 
c.  Plat Requirements   
Eight printed copies of the preliminary plat Preliminary plats must show all existing conditions required in Sec. 11.2.5.E.1. below and shall show all proposals including the following: 
i.  Street names, right-of-way widths, central angles of street intersections, dimensions or radii or chords, appropriate grades and similar data for alleys, if any. 
ii.  Lot lines, lot numbers and block numbers. 
iii.  Sites, if any, to be dedicated or reserved for parks, playgrounds or other public uses, together with the purpose and the conditions or limitations of such dedication, if any. 
iv.  Sites, if any, for multiple-family dwellings, shopping centers, churches, industry, or other nonpublic uses exclusive of single-family dwellings. 
v.  Minimum building setback lines. 
vi.  Portions of the site to be used for storm drainage and/or stormwater detention. 
d.  Existing Conditions and Other Data   
Data required as a basis for the preliminary plat which shall include the following information relating to existing conditions and other pertinent data as required to support the preliminary design of the proposed development: 
i.  Boundary Lines   
A boundary plat of the property to be subdivided showing bearings and distances. 
ii.  Easements   
Location, width and purpose. 
iii.  Streets on and Adjacent to Tract   
Name, right-of-way width and location. 
iv.  Contour Data   
Significant contour data at a maximum of not more than 10-foot elevation intervals to determine preliminary design of the proposed improvements and other dependent features. 
v.  Other Conditions on Tract   
Watercourses, identification of all areas included within the 100-year floodplain, existing structures and other significant features. 
vi.  Title and Certificates   
Title under which proposed subdivision is to be recorded, if known, with name of owner and name of designer. 
vii.  Vicinity Map   
A vicinity map showing the relationship of the subdivision site to the surrounding area. The vicinity map shall indicate the nearest shopping center, recreational facilities and other such improvements. 
viii.  Geographical Data   
Scale, datum, north arrow, date of survey, date of plat and land lot and district number. 
ix.  Storm Drainage   
A conceptual plan which indicates how requirements of Sec. 9.3. will be met. 
e.  Draft of Protective Covenants   
A draft of protective covenants whereby the subdivider proposes to regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed development shall be submitted. 
f.  Application Forms   
Two copies of written application containing essentially the same descriptive information specified in Sec. 11.2.5.B. shall be submitted with the preliminary plat. 
2.  Conditional Approval of Preliminary Plat   
a.  On reaching conclusions informally, as provided in Sec. 11.2.5.B., regarding their general program and objectives, the subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat, together with other supplementary material as deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator and as specified in Sec. 11.2.5.E.2.a. 
b.  Eight copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary material specified, together with 2 copies of a written application for conditional approval of the preliminary plat, shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator at least 30 days prior to the meeting of the Planning Commission at which it is to be considered. 
c.  Within 30 days after the submission of the preliminary plat and other material submitted for conformity thereof to this UDO and negotiations with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by him, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application and shall express its recommendations regarding approval as conditional approval and state the conditions of such approval, if any, or if disapproval, shall express its disapproval and its reasons therefor. 
d.  The action of the Planning Commission shall be noted on 3 copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions determined. One copy shall be retained by the Planning Commission and 2 copies returned to the Zoning Administrator, who will keep one for the City Commission and return the other to the subdivider. Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat. Rather, it shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final plat. The final plat will be submitted for approval and, if accepted, will be approved by the City Commission for recording upon fulfillment of the requirements of this chapter and the conditions of the conditional approval, if any. 
e.  An application fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall be paid at the time the application for approval of the preliminary plat is filed. 
F.  Final Plat   
1.  Applicability   
a.  A minor plat shall be considered a final plat for the purposes of subdivision, and no preliminary plat shall be required. A minor plat is a subdivision of four or fewer lots which does not involve the construction of a new street. Any improvements to an existing public street abutting the tract proposed for minor subdivision, or the installation of utilities along said existing public road, as may be required to comply with this UDO, shall be done according to this UDO, but said requirements shall not subject the minor plat to the requirements for a major subdivision as specified in this UDO. 
b.  A final plat based on an approved preliminary plat for a major subdivision shall also be considered according to this Section. 
2.  Final Plat and Fee   
Eight printed copies shall be submitted. A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for each lot contained in the subdivision shall be submitted at the time of final plat submittal. The final plat shall show the following: 
a.  Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line and building line whether curved or straight. This shall include, but not be limited to, the radius, length of arc, internal angles and tangent distance for the centerline of curved streets and curved property lines that are not the boundary of curved streets. 
b.  Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other rights-of-way and property lines of residential lots and other sites. 
c.  All dimensions shall be accurate to the nearest 1/10 of a foot and all angles accurate to the nearest minute. 
d.  Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way. 
e.  House numbers. 
f.  Title, name and location of subdivision, north arrow, date, scale and land lot and district numbers. 
g.  Location, dimensions and purpose of any easements and any areas to be dedicated to public use or sites for other than residential use with notes stating their purpose and limitations. 
h.  Lots or sites numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. 
i.  Accurate location, material and description of monuments and markers. 
j.  Certification showing that applicant is the landowner and dedicates streets, rights-of-way and any sites for public use. 
k.  Certification by the appropriate authorities for roads, water, sewers and health that the subdivider has complied with one of the following alternates: 
i.  All improvements have been installed in accordance with their requirements. 
ii.  A performance bond has been posted in an amount sufficient to ensure completion of all required improvements. 
iii.  Any other guarantees of satisfactory completion of required improvements acceptable to the various departments. 
l.  Owner's acknowledgment, in the following form: 
State of Georgia 
  
DeKalb County 
  
City 
  The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, and in person or through a duty authorized agent, acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey and dedicates to the use of the public forever all streets, alleys, parks, other public improvements, easements, and public places thereon shown for the purposes and considerations therein expressed.   
______________, Owner  
m.  Approval of the City Planning Commission, in the following form: 
This Plat has been submitted to and considered by the Decatur Planning Commission and is approved by such Commission. Dated this day of  / /  The Decatur Planning Commission 
  
By _____________, Chairman 
  
By _____________, Zoning Administrator  
n.  A covenant for private storm drainage facilities stating: 
"The storm drainage facilities shown hereon or required by the City in Sec. 9.3., including but not limited to storm drainage detention basins, water quality treatment systems, pipes, swales, ditches, and similar facilities are private facilities for the subdivision. The City assumes no responsibility or liability for the operation or maintenance of such facilities." 
o.  Approval of the City Commission, in the following form: 
This Plat has been submitted to and considered by the City Commission of the City, Georgia, and is approved, subject to the protective covenants shown hereon. 
  Dated this day of  / /  
    
By _____________, City Manager  
p.  Protective Covenants   
Protective covenants, if any, which shall be shown on the final plat shall be provided. 
q.  Hydrology Study   
A hydrology study shall be provided which describes and documents how the requirements of Sec. 9.3. will be met. 
r.  Other Data   
A final engineering design report on proposed improvements and such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or deductions as may be required by the City Commission in the enforcement of this chapter shall be provided. 
3.  Townhouse Developments in RS-17 Zoning Districts   
The subdivision of an established townhouse development in a RS-17 zoning district may be approved by the Zoning Administrator in the name of the Planning Commission and by the chairman of the City Commission. 
4.  Approval of Final Plat   
a.  The final plat, prepared as specified above shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat, as approved, and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and develop at the time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of this chapter. 
b.  All performance bonds shall be submitted to the appropriate regulating departments prior to approval of final plat by the City Commission. 
c.  The final plat and other supplementary material required for approval shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator at least 30 days prior to the meeting of the Planning Commission at which it is to be considered. It shall also be required that such material be submitted to the Planning Commission within 6 months after approval of the preliminary plat, otherwise such approval shall become null and void unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the Planning Commission. 
d.  Within 30 days after the submission of the final plat and supplementary material required for approval, the Planning Commission shall express its recommendation. 
e.  Not later than 3 days after a recommendation by the Planning Commission, the final plat and other supplementary material will be transmitted by the Zoning Administrator on behalf of the Planning Commission to the City Commission for final action. 
f.  The subdivider shall be responsible for recording the approved final plat in the office of the clerk of the superior court. 
g.  Eight copies of the final recorded plat shall be delivered to the Zoning Administrator for distribution to the various City departments concerned, including 1 copy for the City Commission and 1 for the Planning Commission. 
h.  A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for each lot contained in the subdivision shall be paid at the time of the filing of the final plat. 
G.  Approval of Subdivisions   
The following standards shall be considered by the Planning Commission in preparing a recommendation and by the City Commission in determining whether a subdivision shall be approved: 
1.  Is the proposed subdivision suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property? 
2.  Does the proposed subdivision adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent and nearby property? 
3.  Does the proposed subdivision result in a development which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools? 
4.  Are there other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which, because of their impact on the public health, safety, morality and general welfare of the community, give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the proposed subdivision? 
5.  Does the proposed subdivision conform to the existing layout, patterns and design of existing adjacent and nearby lots, including orientation to streets? 
H.  Conditions   
1.  In approving a subdivision, the City Commission may impose special conditions which it deems necessary in order to mitigate impacts which may be expected without those conditions. Such conditions may consist of a variety of requirements including, but not limited to: 
a.  Restrictions in the location of driveways and curb cuts; 
b.  Setbacks from any lot line; 
c.  Specified or prohibited locations for buildings, parking, loading, storage areas or other land uses; 
d.  Preservation of existing trees and other vegetation; 
e.  Landscaping requirements which may include location, type and maintenance of plant materials, fences, walls, earth berms and other buffers; 
f.  Screening and other protective measures, special measures to alleviate undesirable views, light, glare, noise, traffic, dust and odors; 
g.  Limitations on exterior modifications to existing buildings; 
h.  Public facility improvements by the owner; 
i.  Requirements that development take place according to a site plan; or 
j.  Any other requirement deemed appropriate and necessary as a condition of the approval of the subdivision. 
2.  Requirements imposed as a condition of approval of a subdivision shall be required of the property owners and all subsequent owners as a condition of the development of the property as subdivided. 
3.  Requirements imposed as a condition of approval of a subdivision shall be interpreted and continuously enforced by the Zoning Administrator. 
I.  Dedicated Streets and Other Public Lands   
Acceptance of dedicated streets and other public lands will be certified by the City Commission after completion of work by the subdivider or developer and after all work has been approved by the appropriate City departments. 
J.  Restriction on Names   
The proposed name of a subdivision and proposed street names shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically, the name of any other subdivision or street in the City, the county or the City of Atlanta, Georgia. 
K.  Building Permit Applications   
In addition to the requirements stated above, plats and drawings accompanying an application for a building permit for construction or alteration in RS-17 Districts shall show location, dimensions and identification of all existing and proposed structures, recreation areas, common open areas, landscaping, buffer areas, walls; walkways and similar features; location, layout, dimensions and turning radii of all streets, driveways, maneuver areas and parking areas; and any other information necessary to adequately portray proposed vehicular circulation, parking and other significant features of the development. 
(Ord. No. O-17-09, § 6.1-6.5, 6-19-17) 
11.2.6. - Certificate of Zoning Compliance 
A.  No building permit shall be issued for any construction, reconstruction or alteration of a structure unless the Zoning Administrator has issued a certificate of zoning compliance for such construction, reconstruction or alteration. Such certificate shall be issued only when such use complies with all provisions of this UDO. 
B.  No existing structure or land may be used or occupied for any purpose or use for which it is not presently being used unless a certificate of compliance shall have been applied for and issued by the Zoning Administrator. Such certificate shall be issued only when such proposed change of use complies with all provisions of this UDO. 
C.  No fee shall be charged for an original certificate of zoning compliance as required herein. Fees for copies of certificates of zoning compliance are contained in the City's adopted fee schedule. 
11.2.7. - Administrative Adjustment 
A.  Applicability   
The Zoning Administrator may modify the following standards during development review. Any other modification beyond those listed below must be considered by the Board of Zoning Appeals as a variance. 
1.  Setbacks. A reduction of up to 10% of the numeric standard for a minimum building setback. 
2.  Lot Coverage. An increase of up to 1% beyond the numeric standard for lot coverage. 
3.  Parking. A reduction in the minimum required vehicle parking spaces by up to 10%. 
B.  Criteria for Approval   
The applicant shall demonstrate, and the Zoning Administrator shall find that all of the following criteria are present when approving a request for an adjustment: 
1.  There are clear and compelling reasons that are not purely financial demonstrating that the required standard cannot be met; 
2.  The modification is the minimum amount necessary to meet the objectives identified above; and 
3.  The requested adjustment will not contravene the public interests or negatively impact adjoining properties. 
(Ord. No. O-15-Z-01, § 1.10, 1-20-15) 
11.2.8. - Demolition Permit 
A.  Applicability   
1.  A demolition permit is required prior to demolition of any residential structure in the City. 
2.  Within a designated Historic District, the Historic Preservation Commission has the authority for review of a demolition permit. 
3.  Outside a designated Historic District, the UDO Administrator shall have the authority to delay demolition for a period not to exceed 15 days in order to provide notice to the community, allowing investigation into alternative opportunities for the preservation of the residential structure. 
B.  Pre-Application Conference   
Before submitting an application for residential demolition, an applicant must schedule a pre-application conference with the UDO Administrator to discuss the procedures, standards and regulations required for approval. This requirement may be waived at the discretion of the UDO Administrator. 
C.  Public Notice   
Within 7 days of the submittal of a complete application for demolition of a residential structure, a sign giving notice shall be placed in a conspicuous location on the property. The sign shall state the location of the proposed demolition, and the deadline for comments on the demolition application. 
D.  Application   
1.  Post-demolition Plan   
The UDO Administrator shall not grant a permit for demolition without reviewing at the same time the post-demolition plan for the site. 
E.  Approval Process   
1.  UDO Administrator Action   
a.  The UDO Administrator shall review the application for demolition. 
b.  Where demolition is deemed necessary by the Building Official for public health or safety reasons, a demolition permit shall be issued without any demolition delay. 
c.  In all other cases, the UDO Administrator shall set a demolition delay period of not to exceed 15 days from the acceptance of a complete application. Upon expiration of the established demolition delay period, the UDO Administrator shall issue the demolition permit. 
(Ord. No. O-15-Z-01, § 1.11, 1-20-15) 
11.2.9. - Variances 
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the authority to authorize upon application in specific cases a variance from the terms of this UDO in accordance with this Section. 
A.  Application   
1.  An application for a variance shall be filed with the office of the Zoning Administrator at least 20 days prior to the meeting of the Zoning Board of Appeals at which it is to be heard. Each application shall be accompanied by a plat drawn to scale containing the following information, in addition to any other pertinent information required by the Zoning Administrator: 
a.  All property lines with dimensions. 
b.  Location of buildings and other structures, creeks and easements referenced to property lines. 
c.  North arrow, scale, lot and block numbers and land lot. 
d.  Topographic and drainage information if pertinent. 
2.  Each application for variance shall be made in 2 copies and shall specify the conditions and the extent of the variance sought as well as a statement demonstrating compliance with the required criteria for variance set forth below. 
B.  Fee   
Each application for a variance shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges to partially cover the cost of advertising, field investigation and other expenses involved in processing the application. 
C.  Resubmittal   
When action is unfavorable on an application for variance or where the applicant withdraws the application prior to final action by the Board, a substantially similar application may not be resubmitted for at least 1 year from the date of denial or withdrawal. This requirement may be waived for good cause by the Zoning Administrator. 
D.  Criteria for Approval   
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the authority to authorize upon application in specific cases a variance from the terms of this UDO such as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this UDO will result in unnecessary hardship, but where the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done. Such special conditions shall be limited to exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property existing at the time of the enactment of this UDO, or exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property as would result in peculiar, extraordinary and practical difficulties. No variance shall be authorized unless the Board finds that all of the following conditions exist: 
1.  That the special circumstances or conditions applying to the building or land in question are peculiar to such premises and do not apply generally to other land or buildings in the vicinity. 
2.  That the granting of the application is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a property right and not merely to serve as a convenience to the applicant. 
3.  That the condition from which relief or a variance is sought did not result from action by the applicant. 
4.  That the authorizing of the variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property or unreasonably increase the congestion in public streets, or increase the danger of fire, or imperil the public safety, or unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding areas, or in any other respect impair the health, safety, comfort, morals or general welfare of the inhabitants of the City. 
5.  That the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the Decatur Land Use Plan. 
6.  That the granting of the variance will not allow a structure or use in a district restricted against such structure or use. 
E.  Notice and Hearing   
1.  The Board shall fix a date for the hearing of a variance application within the time specified by its rules but not to exceed 30 days from the date of a completed application is filed unless said time period is mutually extended by the applicant and the Zoning Administrator. The Board shall give public notice thereof, and decide the same in accordance with the procedures set forth herein and in its rules. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to post notices of the time and place of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation and by placard on or within 300 feet of the property as measured along the street right-of-way line. 
2.  At the hearing, any party may appear in person, or by agent or attorney. The applicant shall be allowed no less than 10 minutes for presentation of data, evidence and opinion concerning the application. Any remaining time may be reserved for rebuttal. Those in opposition to the application shall also be allowed no less than 10 minutes for presentation of data, evidence and opinion. The presentation times may not be reduced but may be extended, provided they are expanded equally for each side. 
F.  Conditions to Approval   
1.  In approving an application, the Zoning Board of Appeals may impose special conditions which it deems necessary in order to mitigate negative impacts upon surrounding properties which may be expected without the imposition of those conditions. Such conditions may consist of a variety of requirements, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Setbacks from any lot line if such setback is a proper part of the application under review; 
b.  Specified or prohibited locations for buildings, parking, loading or storage areas or other structures; 
c.  Restrictions in the location of driveways and curb cuts; 
d.  Maximum building heights and other dimensions; 
e.  Landscaping requirements which may include location, type and maintenance of plant materials, fences, walls, earth berms or other buffer provisions; screening or other protective measures; 
f.  Preservation of existing trees and other vegetation; 
g.  Special measures to alleviate undesirable views, light, glare, noise, dust or odor; 
h.  Permitted hours of operation; 
i.  Requiring that an existing building be retained; 
j.  Requiring that development take place according to a site plan, development plan and/or building plan; 
k.  Limitation on exterior modifications to existing buildings; 
l.  Public facility improvements by the owner; 
m.  A time limit within which the property must either be used as allowed by the variance, special exception or other appeal; or 
n.  Any other requirement deemed appropriate and necessary as a condition of approval. 
2.  Requirements imposed as a condition of approval shall be required of the property owner and all subsequent owners as a condition of the use of the property and interpreted and continuously enforced by the Zoning Administrator. 
11.2.10. - Appeal of Administrator's Decision 
A.  Who may appeal   
An appeal from a final written decision of the UDO Administrator or Zoning Administrator regarding this UDO may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals (Board) by any person aggrieved by such decision, or by any officer, department, board or agency of the City affected by such decision. 
B.  Time for filing appeal; contents of notice   
Such appeal shall be taken within 10 calendar days from the date of a final written decision of the UDO Administrator or Zoning Administrator by filing with the Zoning Administrator a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The notice of appeal shall be submitted on forms available from the Zoning Administrator. 
C.  Transmission of record to Board   
Upon receipt of a complete notice of appeal, the Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
D.  Stay of Proceedings   
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the UDO Administrator or Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with the Zoning Administrator, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the UDO Administrator's or Zoning Administrator's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board or by a court of record on application with notice to the UDO Administrator or Zoning Administrator and on due cause shown. 
E.  Fee   
Each notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges to partially cover the cost of advertising, field investigation and other expenses involved in processing the appeal. 
F.  Notice and Hearing   
1.  The Zoning Administrator shall fix a date for the hearing of an appeal from a decision of the UDO Administrator or Zoning Administrator within 30 days from the date a complete notice of appeal is filed unless said time period is mutually extended by the appealing party and the Zoning Administrator in writing. The Zoning Administrator shall give written notice of the hearing to the appealing party at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. The Board shall decide the appeal in accordance with the procedures set forth herein and in its rules. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to post notices of the time and place of the hearing by placard on or within 300 feet of the property as measured along the street right-of-way line. 
2.  At the hearing, any party may appear in person, or by agent or attorney. The appealing party shall be allowed no less than 10 minutes for presentation of data, evidence and opinion concerning the appeal. Any remaining time may be reserved for rebuttal. Those in opposition to the appeal shall also be allowed no less than 10 minutes for presentation of data, evidence and opinion. The presentation times may not be reduced but may be extended, provided they are expanded equally for each side. 
G.  Decisions   
Following the consideration of all testimony, documentary evidence, and matters of record, the Board shall make a determination on each appeal at the conclusion of the hearing on the appeal unless an extension of time is agreed to in writing by the appealing party and the Board. The Board shall reverse, defer, affirm, or modify any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the UDO Administrator or Zoning Administrator and to that end shall have all the powers of the UDO Administrator or Zoning Administrator from whom the appeal was taken. An appeal shall be sustained or the decision below modified only upon an expressed finding by the Board that the UDO Administrator's or Zoning Administrator's action below was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact, or that said official's action was arbitrary. The action of the Board on an administrative appeal shall be final. 
(Ord. No. O-15-Z-01, § 1.12(Exh. A), 1-20-15) 
11.2.11. - Appeals from Final Decisions of the Board 
A.  Appeal to Superior Court   
Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals (Board), or any officer, department or agency of the City affected by such decision, may appeal from such decision to the Superior Court of DeKalb County by writ of certiorari. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days after decision of the Board is rendered. 
B.  Transmitting Record   
Within the time prescribed by and pursuant to applicable state law, the Zoning Administrator shall cause to be filed with the clerk of Superior Court a certified copy of the proceedings had before the Board, including a transcript of the evidence heard before it, if any, and the decision of the Board. 
(Ord. No. O-15-Z-01, § 1.13(Exh. B), 1-20-15) 
Sec. 11.3. - Nonconformities 

11.3.1. - Nonconforming Uses 
A.  Continuance   
A nonconforming use or building shall not be: 
1.  Changed to another nonconforming use; 
2.  Reestablished after discontinuance for 1 year; 
3.  Extended except in conformity with this UDO; 
4.  Rebuilt, altered or repaired after damage by fire, windstorm or other disaster when damage exceeds 75% of the fair market sales value of the building immediately prior to the damage. 
B.  Intermittent or Illegal Use   
The casual, intermittent, temporary or illegal use of land or buildings shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconforming use, and the existence of a nonconforming use on part of a lot or tract shall not be construed to establish a nonconforming use on the entire lot or tract. 
C.  Existence of a Nonconforming Use   
In case of doubt, and on a specific question raised, whether a nonconforming use exists shall be a question of fact and shall be decided by the Zoning Board of Appeals after public notice and hearing and in accordance with the rules of the Board. 
D.  Buildings Nonconforming   
A building nonconforming only as to height, area or bulk requirements may be altered or extended, provided such alteration or extension does not increase the degree of nonconformity in any respect. 
E.  Nonconforming Uses Not Validated   
A nonconforming use in violation of a provision of the ordinance, which this UDO amends or replaces, shall not be validated by the adoption of this UDO. 
F.  Discontinuance of a Nonconforming Use   
All nonconforming signs, billboards, junkyards; all nonconforming uses of land where no buildings are employed in connection with such use; or where the only buildings employed are accessory or incidental to such use shall be discontinued and such nonconforming buildings or structures torn down, altered or otherwise made to conform within 2 years of the date of the adoption of this UDO. 
G.  Historic Structure Damage and Rebuilding   
Notwithstanding the limits established in Sec. 11.3.1. above, a nonconforming use or building which is designated as a local historic property or which is listed as a contributing structure in a local Historic District may be rebuilt after damage by fire, windstorm or other disaster regardless of the extent of damage. 
11.3.2. - Area Modifications for Lots of Record 
A.  Lot Exceptions   
Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of this UDO had less area or less width than herein required for the district in which it is located, said lot may nonetheless be used for a single-family dwelling, provided that all yard and other requirements of the district are complied with. 
B.  Ownership of Multiple Lots   
If 2 or more adjoining and vacant lots with continuous frontage are in a single ownership at any time after the adoption of this UDO and such lots individually are less than the lot width requirements for the district in which they are located, such groups of lots shall be considered as a single lot or several lots of minimum permitted size and the lot or lots in one ownership shall be subject to the requirements of this UDO. 
Sec. 11.4. - Enforcement 

11.4.1. - Enforcement 
The duties related to administration and enforcement of this UDO are hereby conferred upon the UDO Administrator. It shall also be the duty and responsibility of each officer and employee of the City and especially of each member of the police and fire departments to assist to the UDO Administrator by reporting to him new construction and reconstruction of buildings, new land uses and apparent violations of this UDO. 
11.4.2. - Violation 
Any firm, person or corporation who shall do anything prohibited by these regulations as the same exist or as they may hereafter be amended or who shall fail to do anything required by these regulations as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended is hereby declared to be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided by law. 
11.4.3. - Remedies 
A.  In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of this UDO, the UDO Administrator, City attorney or other appropriate authority of the City or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be especially damaged by such violation may, in addition to other remedy, institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use or to correct or abate such violation, or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. 
B.  Where a violation of these regulations exists with respect to a structure or land, the Planning Commission may, in addition to other remedies, notify all public utilities and City service departments of such violation and request that service be withheld therefrom until such time as the structure or premises are no longer in violation of these regulations. 
11.4.4. - Cumulative Remedy 
The remedies herein provided shall not be exclusive but shall be cumulative of all other remedies provided by law. 
11.4.5. - Penalty for Violation of Chapter 
Any person guilty of a violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in Section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances. 
Article 12. - Definitions 
Sec. 12.1. - Defined Terms 

12.1.1. - Generally 
For the purpose of this UDO, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular; the word "building" shall include the word "structure" and the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory. Any words not herein defined shall be construed as defined in the general City Code and where definitions in the general City Code are in conflict with those herein, the definitions herein shall prevail. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
A 
Accessory buildings and uses. A subordinate building or a portion of the main building, the use of which is incidental to that of the main use of the premises. Accessory buildings shall share utility services and meters with the main building. Accessory buildings may have a half bath or a kitchen, but shall not contain both a bathroom and a kitchen. Habitation is not permitted in an accessory building unless it is identified as an accessory dwelling unit. 
In residential zoning districts, accessory buildings and uses shall be limited to the following: 
1) Private garages, greenhouses, garden sheds and similar buildings; 
2) Home offices and studios; 
3) Swimming pools and tennis courts; 
4) Home occupations as defined herein. 
5) Accessory buildings in R-85, R-60, R-50 and RS-17 zoning districts shall not exceed 1,000 square feet of total floor area, including garages and other enclosed storage areas. Such buildings shall not exceed 25 feet in height and 2 stories. 
Accessory dwelling unit. See Sec. 6.8.3.A. 
Accessory sign. A separate unit displaying information related to the principal business conducted on the premises, which is attached to or supported from any other sign and not made a part thereof. 
Accessory structure or facility (floodplain). A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the primary structure. 
Addition (floodplain). Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of building. 
Addition (to an existing building). Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Adjacent. The official term that refers to habitable structure which lies outside the limits of the one-percent annual chance (100-year) floodplain where the Lowest Floor is less than three (3) feet above the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) of a FEMA floodplain designated waterway (shown on the FIRM) within the City of Decatur. The BFE for such a structure shall be established my measuring perpendicular from the subject waterway's centerline to the most upstream rear corner of the structure in question. 
Administrative standards. A set of standards for administering the tree ordinance that are a part of the tree ordinance by reference. 
Administrator, UDO. The City Manager or his/her designee. 
Administrator, Zoning. The City Manager or his/her designee. 
Adult day care center. A facility, whether operated for profit or not, that undertakes through its ownership or management to provide for less than 24-hour per day, basic adult day care or adult day health services to 3 or more adults, not related by blood or marriage, who require basic services. Includes any establishment that regularly provides adult custodial services. 
Adult entertainment. Any performance, act, show or contest, either live or electronically reproduced, where any person appears unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, or any portion of a person's pubic hair, anus, cleft of buttocks, vulva or genitals. 
Adult entertainment establishment. A business or establishment where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities including, but not limited to: adult bookstores, adult businesses, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult motion picture arcades, adult video stores, erotic entertainment/dance establishments, escort bureaus, and introduction services. Advertising structure. Any structure or device erected for the purpose of supporting any sign or other advertising or informational media and the framework of the sign. 
A-frame sign. Any double-faced sign having a metal or wooden frame adequately braced so as to be freestanding on but not permanently attached to the ground. 
Agricultural. See Sec. 6.7.1. 
Alley. A public or private way which affords only a secondary means of access to property abutting thereon. 
Alternative telecommunication tower structure. Man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures, that are compatible with the natural setting and surrounding structures, and effectively camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
Amenity space. See Sec. 2.1.3. 
Animal care. A facility designed or arranged for the care of animals without any outdoor activity. No outdoor activity associated with care of animals is allowed. Includes animal grooming, animal hospital, veterinary clinic, pet clinic, animal boarding, animal shelter, cattery, commercial kennel (11 or more dogs) and doggy day care. Includes veterinary hospital, clinic, kennel, animal grooming and doggy day care. 
Animated sign. Any sign with action or motion with moving characters or changing colors which requires electrical energy, but not including wind actuated elements such as flags or banners. This definition includes electronic signs with lights and other elements which change copy and other characters. 
ANSI. American National Standards Institute; organization that publishes national standards for tree care maintenance operations, safety standards, and nursery stock. 
Antenna. See Telecommunications Antenna. 
Apartment house. See dwelling, multiple. 
Applicant. A person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Applicable codes. Applicable codes are as follows: 
1) Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated ("O.C.G.A.") as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
2) Any fire or life safety code as provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 25 of O.C.G.A.; and 
3) Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of O.C.G.A. after October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Area of future-conditions hazard. The land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual-chance flood based on future-conditions hydrology (100-year-future-conditions flood). 
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater chance of flooding to an average depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard. The land subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in a given year. This includes all floodplain and floodprone areas or below the base flood elevation (designated as Zones A, A1, 30, A-99, AE, OA, AH, and AR on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). 
Art gallery, public. A public facility where works of art are displayed on a regular basis. 
Assisted living facility. A personal care home as defined in this Article, but having 25 or more beds and which offers a range of accommodations from independent residential housing options to housing options with personal services. A residential use, which could otherwise be classified as multifamily, is to be considered an Assisted Living Facility if it is registered with or licensed by the State of Georgia as an assisted living home. Any facility licensed by the State of Georgia as a facility offering a contract to provide an individual of retirement status, other than an individual related by consanguinity or affinity to the provider furnishing the care, with board and lodging, licensed nursing facility care and medical or other health related services is a subtype of assisted living facility to be described as a Continuing Care Retirement Community (CCRC). The inclusion of skilled nursing care in a CCRC under a certificate of need issued by the State of Georgia shall be considered part of the assisted living facility and shall not be deemed to be a separate use. Any dwelling, facility or structure which for any reason is not required to be licensed by the State of Georgia as an assisted living home, or fails to be licensed by or registered with the State of Georgia as an assisted living home but, which through its ownership or management undertakes for a fee or accepts a grant or utilizes its own funding to provide or arrange for the provision of housing, food service, and one or more personal services for any person and which also provides beds for 25 or more persons, who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood, marriage or adoption, shall also be considered an assisted living facility for the purpose of this definition. This definition shall apply without regard to whether any fee charged is paid by the individual to whom the services are provided or by another person, the source of the grant, or the funding source for the operational costs and without regard to whether the facility is operated for profit or not for profit. Personal services include but are not limited to individual assistance with or supervision of self-administered medication, and essential activities of daily living such as bathing, grooming, dressing and toileting. For the purposes of this ordinance, a "child caring institution" or "group-care facility" as defined in O.C.G.A. § 49-5-3, as amended, with 25 or more beds shall also be considered an assisted living facility. 
Awning. Any structure made of cloth or metal with a metal frame attached to a building and projecting over a thoroughfare, when the same is so erected as to permit its being raised to a position flat against the building when not in use, as opposed to a canopy. 
Awning sign. Any sign attached to, affixed to, or hung from an awning. 
B 
Banner. A temporary sign made of cloth, paper, plastic or similar material, but not cut into ribbons, streamers, strips or pennants. 
Base flood. The flood having a chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100 year flood. 
Base flood elevation. The highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Basement (floodplain). Any area of a building having its floor subgrade below ground level on all sides. 
Basement. That portion of a building having 50% or more of its exterior wall height below grade. A basement is not counted as a story for the purpose of height regulation. The entire wall area of each basement wall will be calculated and 50% or more of the cumulative area must be below grade. 

Bathroom. A room having the following minimum facilities: 
1) Water Closet (Toilet) 
2) Lavatory 
3) Bathtub or Shower 
Bed and breakfast. An owner occupied single-family dwelling where, for compensation, overnight lodging or overnight lodging and a breakfast meal is provided to guests, pursuant to a permit issued in accordance with applicable State law. No more than 3 guest rooms may be rented per night and no guest may lodge for more than 14 consecutive nights. 
Best Management Practices (BMPs). Sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Billboard. Any off-site or off-premises board, fence, sign or structure not located on the premises of the business or entity indicated or advertised by such sign which is erected for advertising purposes or upon which any advertisement is shown, or whereupon any poster, bill, printing, painting, device or other advertising matter of any kind may be placed, stuck, tacked, posted, printed, painted, pasted or fastened. This definition shall not be held to include any board sign or surface used to display official notices issued by any court or public officer, or posted by any public officer in the performance of a public duty. 
Block. A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets (or private streets built to public standards), other than alleys. In cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected, the UDO Administrator may determine the outline of the block. 
Boardinghouse. A dwelling other than a hotel where, for compensation and by prearrangement for a definite period, meals or lodging and meals are provided for 3 or more persons. 
Boat. A vessel or craft designed or constructed for use on the water, usually moved by sail, oars, paddles or motive-type power. 
Boat trailer. A portable-type structure designed or constructed for the purpose of transporting a boat upon the highways or City streets and which may be used as a storage platform for such boat when it is not in use. 
Boundary tree. A tree growing on a property boundary line between 2 lots resulting in joint ownership by the adjacent property owners when the trunk exists on each property, or a tree that has 20% or more of its critical root zone extending across a property boundary and into an adjacent property. 
Buffer, stream. The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat as defined in Sec. 9.2. 
Buffer or buffer area. An area or portion of a lot set aside for open space and visual screening purposes, to separate different zoning districts or to separate uses on one property from uses on another property of the same zoning district or a different zoning district. 
Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattel or property of any kind. 
Building (floodplain). The same meaning as "Structure (floodplain)." 
Building codes. Any of the building, electrical, and similar construction codes adopted for use within the City. 
Building, height of. The vertical distance from the mean finished ground level at the front of the building to the highest point of a roof. 

Building line. A line established by yard or setback requirements in district regulations between which and the street line no building or part thereof may be erected except as may be provided in the regulations. 
Building setback line. The minimum horizontal distance between the street right-of-way line or the street centerline where appropriate and the building or any projection thereof except: 
1) Steps, terraces and open fire escapes. 
2) Balconies, canopies or cornices project not more than 3 feet beyond the main building wall. 
3) Offset or overlapping portions of the second floor of the building that do not extend more than 3 feet beyond the main wall of the building. 
4) Signs. 

Bulletin board. Any sign which primarily displays the name of an organization and the upcoming events of that organization. 
Business identification sign. Any sign which directs attention to a business, profession, product, service, activity or entertainment conducted, sold or offered on the premises upon which the sign is located. 
Business occupancy buildings. All medical, dental and general offices, courthouses, outpatient clinics, town and city halls, college and university instructional buildings (including classrooms for less than 50 persons and instructional laboratories), and similar buildings. 
Business or professional office. Including, but not limited to lawyer, accountant, auditor, bookkeeper, engineer, architect, sales office, travel agency, interior decorator or security system sales. 
C 
Caliper. The diameter of the trunk of nursery stock measured in inches at 6 inches above the ground for up to and including 4 inch caliper size, and 12 inches above the ground for larger sizes. 
Call center. A facility used for the purpose of receiving or transmitting a large volume of telephone calls. 
Canopy. Any structure made of cloth or metal with a metal frame attached to a building and erected so as to permanently project over a thoroughfare, as opposed to an awning. 
Canopy sign. Any sign attached to, affixed to, or hung from a canopy. 
Canopy tree. A large or medium tree with a crown size and shape that will typically provide at maturity significant shade, substantial environmental services, and measurable benefits on temperature, air quality, water quality, and other environmental conditions; sometimes referred to as a shade tree. 
Carport. A roofed structure for the storage of vehicles with no more than two walls. 
Cellar. That portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is wholly below grade or having more than 1/2 of its height below grade. A cellar is not counted as a story for the purpose of height regulation. 
Cemetery. The use of property as a burial place. 
Certificate of Appropriateness. A document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Certificate of Exemption. A document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission or its authorized designee of an application to make a change other than a material change as defined by the design guidelines adopted as part of the ordinance designating the specific local historic property or local historic district. 
Certified Arborist. An arborist certified by the International Society of Arboriculture as possessing a minimum level of competency required to practice arboriculture. 
Certified Personnel. A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Changeable Copy Panel. A sign or sign device consisting of or incorporating a panel designed specifically to allow the frequent changing of the copy thereon. 
Channel. A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
City Arborist. An individual authorized by the City Manager to act as the City Arborist; to advise the City on the administration of the tree ordinance; to advise the City in the management of public trees; and, to develop and implement programs for community forest management. 
City. The City of Decatur. 
City Engineer. The City Engineer of the City or his/her designee. 
Civic. See Sec. 6.4.1. 
Clean Water Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Cleaning establishment. Including carpet cleaning service, dry-cleaning or laundry drop-off, laundromat, washeteria. 
Clinic. A clinic is an establishment where patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians or dentists practicing together. 
Clock Sign. Any timepiece erected outside of any building for the purpose of advertising the business on the premises on which it is located. 
Closing. Causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Club, private. Buildings and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, person or persons for a social, educational or recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
Club, lodge. A facility used for associations or organizations of an educational, fraternal or social character, not operated or maintained for profit. Representative organizations include Elks, Veterans of Foreign Wars and Lions. 
College, university, seminary. An institution of higher learning that includes seminaries, and related professional offices and businesses. 
Co-location of telecommunication antennas. The placement of telecommunication antennas of 2 or more service providers on the same tower or accessory structure. 
Commercial building. Any type of building other than residential. 
Commercial message. Any sign, wording, logo, or other visual representation that directly or indirectly names, advertises, or directs attention to a business operated for profit, or to a product, commodity or service for sale or lease, or to any other commercial interest or activity. 
Commercial parking. A facility that provides parking as a principal use on the site. A fee may or may not be charged. 
Common area or common open area. That land provided for common use and enjoyment of all the residents of a development, provided that such land shall be usable as defined under paragraph 75, total area. 
Community garden. An area of land used by 2 or more individuals for the cultivation of herbs, fruits, flowers, or vegetables, including the cultivation and tillage of soil and the production, cultivation, growing, and harvesting of any agricultural, floricultural or horticultural product for personal use. The area of land may be divided into separate plots, each cultivated individually, or remain as a single plot to be cultivated collectively by a group of individuals. 
Comprehensive Plan. The comprehensive land use plan is the official policy of the City, Georgia, concerning proposed land uses and how land in the City should be used. 
Conditional zoning. The granting or adoption of zoning for a property subject to compliance with restrictions as to use, size, design or other conditions required by the City Commission to mitigate impacts which may be expected without the imposition of conditions. 
Conservation easement. An agreement between a land owner and the City or other designated government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Construction. The erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building, and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
Construction activity. Activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES General Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. Illicit Discharge means any director indirect non-stormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in Sec. 9.6.4.A. 
Construction buildings. A manufactured home, travel trailer, truck, trailer or other structure used as an office in conjunction with a construction project. 
Construction sign. Any non-illuminated sign located on the property where construction or development is taking place and which identifies contractors, architects, engineers, financial institutions and other parties associated with the construction or development project. 
Consumer fireworks. Any small fireworks devices containing restricted amounts of pyrotechnic composition, designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, that comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission as provided for in Parts 1500 and 1507 of Title 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations, the United States Department of Transportation as provided for in Part 172 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and the American Pyrotechnics Association as provided for in the 2001 American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1, and additionally shall mean Roman candles. 
1) The term "consumer fireworks" shall not include model rockets and model rocket engines, designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models, toy pistol paper caps in which the explosive content averages 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture per paper cap or toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices using such paper caps, nor shall the term "consumer fireworks" include ammunition consumed by weapons used for sporting and hunting purposes, or "sparklers" as further defined. 
Consumer fireworks retail sales stand. A consumer fireworks retail sales stand as that term is defined by NFPA 1124. 
CPESC. A certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Craft distillery. A building or group of buildings where distilled spirits are manufactured (distilled, rectified or blended), bottled, packaged, and distributed for wholesale and/or retail distribution, at a rate of production that does not exceed 60,000 gallons annually. 
Credits. Credit shall mean a conditional reduction in the amount of a stormwater service fee or other fees, rates, rentals, charges, fines and penalties to an individual property based on the provision and continuing presence of an effectively maintained and operational on-site stormwater system or facility, or continuing provision of a service or activity that reduces the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management systems and facilities. 
Critical root zone. The minimum rooting area of a tree necessary to sustain the tree's life, generally defined by the tree's dripline or the area within a radius around the trunk of 1.25 feet for every 1 inch DBH, whichever is greater, and extending to a depth of 3 feet below the surface; for a newly planted tree the critical root zone is a minimum 6 foot radius around the tree. 
Crown. The scaffold limbs, branches, twigs, buds and leaves of a tree. 
Cul-de-sac. A street having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated within the plat by a vehicular turnaround. 
Curb break. Any interruption, or break, in the line of a street curb in order to connect a driveway to a street, or otherwise to provide vehicular access to abutting property. 
Customers of the stormwater utility. Customers of the stormwater utility shall include all persons, properties and entities served by and/or benefiting from the utility's acquisition, management, maintenance, extension, regulation and improvement of the stormwater management programs, systems and facilities and regulation of public and private stormwater systems, facilities and activities related thereto, and persons, properties and entities which will ultimately be served or benefited as a result of the stormwater management program. 
Cut. A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
D 
Damage. For the purposes of Sec. 9.1., harmful injury to a tree or any of its parts, including the roots, trunk, scaffold limbs, branches, twigs, buds or leaves; to cause such injury. 
Day care. See Sec. 6.5.1. 
DBH. Diameter at breast height; the diameter in inches of the trunk of an existing tree measured at 4.5 feet above the ground line for single-trunked tree that is not forked below 4.5 feet; measured at the smallest diameter of the trunk below a fork located below 4.5 feet; the diameter of the largest stem of a multi-stemmed tree measured as described above for non-forked and forked trunks. 
DDA. The Decatur Downtown Development Authority. 
Demolition. Demolition means the complete removal of structure or a scope of construction (alteration, addition, renovation or reconstruction) of a structure where only the foundation of the original structure remains. 
Design professional. A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc. 
Destroy. For the purposes of Sec. 9.1., to remove a tree without a required permit or damage a tree to the point where the tree's survival beyond 3 full growing seasons is questionable as determined by the City Arborist. 
Detention. The temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility. A detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developed land. Developed land shall mean property altered from its natural state by construction or installation of more than 200 square feet of impervious surfaces as defined in this chapter. 
Developer. A person (as defined herein) who undertakes land development activities. 
Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Digital Changeable Copy. Changeable copy on a sign with a display or message composed of a series of lights that may be changed through electronic means. 
Directional sign. Any sign utilized for the purpose of indicating the location or direction of any object, place or area. For example, such signs include, but are not limited to, entrance and exit signs, no parking signs, drive through signs, restroom signs, etc. 
Directly illuminated sign. Any sign designed to give forth artificial light directly (or through transparent or translucent material) from a source of light within such sign including, but not limited to, neon and exposed lamp signs. 
Distilled spirits. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21% alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
District. Any section of the City within which the zoning regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, the height of buildings, the size of yards and intensity of use are uniform. 
Division. The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Double-faced sign. Any sign which has 2 display surfaces backed against each other or against the same background, 1 face of which is designed to be seen from 1 direction and the other from the opposite direction, the overall total height of which does not exceed 25 feet above ground level. 
Downtown multiple dwelling. A multi-storied, multi-family structure located in the downtown commercial district (C-2). 
Drainage easement. An easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge or convey stormwater runoff onto or through the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Drainage structure. A device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Drug crime. An act which is a violation of Article 2 of Chapter 13 of Title 16 of O.C.G.A., known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Duplexes. Duplexes shall mean developed land containing 2 (duplex) residential dwelling units located within the same building on 1 or more parcels of land. 
Dwelling. Any building or portion thereof which is designed for or used for residential purposes. 
Dwelling, single-family. A building designed for or occupied exclusively by 1 family. 
1) Dwelling, high-density, single-family, residential A type of single-family dwelling unit, either detached or attached to similar units, which is so constructed and arranged that no dwelling unit is above or below any other dwelling unit, and that each dwelling unit is: 
a) Separated from any and every other attached dwelling unit by a firewall; 
b) Self-contained within defined limits with individual heating or air conditioning systems and separately metered utilities; 
c) Served by a private entrance; and 
d) Otherwise so arranged as to facilitate independent use and individual ownership or rental of each dwelling unit and the lot or parcel on which each dwelling unit is constructed. 
Dwelling, attached (townhouse). A type of single dwelling unit connected to similar units. 
Dwelling, multiple-family. A building designed for or occupied exclusively by 3 or more families. 
Dwelling, 2-family. A building designed for or occupied exclusively by 2 families. 
Dwelling unit. One or more rooms located within a building and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating purposes. 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures. Any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term dwellings, buildings or structures shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
E 
EarthCraft. A green building certification program designed by the Greater Atlanta Homebuilders Association and Southface Energy Institute to address climate, energy and water issues unique to the Southeastern United States. 
Easement. A grant by the property owner for the use by the public, a corporation, or persons of a strip of land for specified purposes. 
Eating and drinking. See Sec. 6.5.9. 
Elevated building. An non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above the ground level by foundation walls, shear walls posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Equivalent residential unit. For the purposes of this article, an equivalent residential unit shall mean 2,900 square feet of impervious surfaces. The equivalent residential unit shall be used as the basis for determining stormwater service fees to single-family dwelling unit properties or classes of single-family dwelling unit properties and to other developed lands. 
Erosion. The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan. A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Ch. 12-7, that includes, as minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in Sec. 9.4. 
Establishment period. The first 3 growing seasons after a tree is planted. The establishment period typically applies to trees planted as part of a tree conservation plan. 
Existing construction. Any structure for which the start of construction commenced before May 5, 1992. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before May 5, 1992. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Extended detention. The detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Exterior architectural features. The architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure including, but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Exterior environmental features. All those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historical character of the property. 
Extreme flood protection. Measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
F 
Family. A person living alone, or any of the following groups living together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit and sharing common living, sleeping, cooking, and eating facilities: 
1) Any number of persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, guardianship, foster or other duly-authorized custodial relationship; or 
2) A maximum of 4 unrelated person; or 
3) Two unrelated persons and any parents or children related to either. 
Family Day Care Home. A private residence operated by any person who received therein for pay for supervision and care fewer than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, three but not more than six children under 18 years of age who are not related to such persons and whose parents or guardians are not residents in the same private residence. 
FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Fill. A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground or an excavation. 
Final plat. A finished drawing of a subdivision showing completely and accurately all legal and engineering information and certification necessary for recording. 
Final stabilization. All soil-disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100% of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70% or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of riprap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Financial services. Lender, Investment or Brokerage house, Bank, Call Center, Bail Bonds, Insurance Adjuster, Real Estate or Insurance Agent, Mortgage Agent, or Collection Agency. 
Finished grade. The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Fire lane. An area designated by the fire official which provides access to fire department connections and fire hydrants and provides access for fire department vehicles to buildings. This includes all alleys, including private alleys, private ways or driveways, where parking of motor vehicles or other obstructions can interfere with ingress or egress of fire department vehicles and equipment. 
Fire official. A fire officer or other designated authority or the fire officer's authorized as a representative charged with the administration and enforcement of the fire prevention code adopted in this UDO. 
Firewall. A type of wall as described in 1967 edition of "National Building Code," article VIII, section 800, paragraphs 800.2 and 800.3. 
Fire watch (per NFPA 101). The assignment of a person or persons to an area for the express purpose of notifying the fire department, the building occupants, or both of an emergency; preventing a fire from occurring; extinguishing small fires; or protecting the public from fire or life safety dangers. 
Fireworks. Any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, including blank cartridges, balloons requiring fire underneath to propel them, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs, and other combustibles and explosives of like construction, as well as articles containing any explosive or flammable compound and tablets and other devices containing an explosive substance. 
1) The term "fireworks" shall not include model rockets and model rocket engines, designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models, toy pistol paper caps in which the explosive content averages 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture per paper cap or toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices using such paper caps, nor shall the term "fireworks" include ammunition consumed by weapons used for sporting and hunting purposes, or "sparklers" as further defined. 
Flashing sign. Any sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use, and which exhibits sudden or marked changes in lighting effects. 
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map or FIRM. An official map of a community, issued by FEMA, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood Insurance Study or FIS. The official report by FEMA providing an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and corresponding flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area. Any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway. The channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Floor area. Floor Area is calculated as follows: 
1) Commercial, business and industrial. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings, but not including: 
a) Attic space providing headroom of less than 7 feet. 
b) Cellar space not used for retailing. 
c) Uncovered steps or fire escapes. 
d) Accessory water towers or cooling towers. 
e) Accessory off-street parking spaces. 
f) Accessory off-street loading berths. 
1) Residential. In a main dwelling, the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a dwelling including: 
a) Attics with a headroom or vertical height between floor and ceiling of 7 feet or greater and served by a permanent stair, 
b) Attached garages, 
c) Garages located in basements, and 
d) Other enclosed areas. 
3) Main Dwelling. In a main dwelling, basements, cellars, open porches, balconies and decks do not count towards the floor area maximum. Floor area shall be measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls. 
4) Accessory Buildings. In accessory buildings and structures the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of an accessory building and other enclosed areas. Floor area shall be measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls. 
Floor Area Ratio (FAR). A number which, when multiplied by the total area of any lot, establishes the total amount of floor area which may be built on that lot. 
Freestanding sign. A sign securely affixed to a substantial support structure of columns, uprights or braces which is permanently attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support, the total height of which is less than 8 feet. 
Frontage, lot. The distance for which the front boundary line of a lot and the street line are coincident. 

Frontage, street. The distance along a street line from one intersecting street to another or from one intersecting street to the end of a dead-end street. 
Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Future conditions flood. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation. The highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain. Any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology. The flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of stormwater management (flood detention) structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
G 
Garage, private. An accessory building designed or used for the storage of vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory. 
Garage, repair. A building or portion thereof, other than a private, storage or parking garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring or selling of motor-driven vehicles, but not including the storage of wrecked or junked vehicles. 
Golf driving range. A facility used primarily practicing long golf shots with rentable clubs and balls. 
Governing authority. The City Commissioners of the City, Georgia. 
Grade. The average level of the finished ground surface adjacent to the exterior walls of a building. 
Grading. Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Green Globes. A green building rating and certification tool developed by ECD Energy and Environment Canada, an arms-length division of JLL. 
Greenspace. Permanently protected land, including agricultural and forestry land, that is in its undeveloped natural state or that has been developed only to the extent consistent with the following: 
1)  Water quality protection for streams and lakes; 
2)  Flood protection; 
3)  Wetlands protection; 
4)  Reduction of erosion through protection of steep slopes, areas with erodible soils, and stream banks; 
5)  Protection of riparian buffers and other areas that serve as natural habitat and corridors for native plant and animal species; 
6)  Scenic protection; 
7)  Protection of archaeological and historic resources; and/or 
8)  Provision of recreation in the form of hiking, camping, fishing, hunting and similar outdoor activities. 
Ground elevation. The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Ground sign. A sign which is supported on 1 or more uprights or braces on the ground, the overall total height of which does not exceed 6 feet above the grade. 
Group living. See Sec. 6.3.2. 
Gym, health spa, yoga studio. An establishment which for profit or gain provides as one of its primary purposes, services or facilities which are purported to assist patrons improve their physical condition or appearance. Not included within this definition are facilities operated by nonprofit organizations, facilities wholly owned and operated by a licensed physician at which such physician is engaged in the practice of medicine, or any establishment operated by a health care facility, hospital, intermediate care facility, or skilled nursing care facility. 
H 
Healthy tree. A tree in fair or better condition with a life expectancy of at least 15 years; a relatively sound and solid trunk with no extensive decay or hollow; less than 20% radial trunk dieback; no more than 1 major and several minor dead limbs; and no major insect or pathological problems. 
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Highrise business occupancy buildings. All medical, dental and general offices, courthouses, outpatient clinics, town and city halls, college and university instructional buildings, including classrooms for less than 50 persons and instructional laboratories, and similar buildings over 75 feet (23M) in height measured from the lowest level of fire department access to the floor of the highest occupied story. 
Highrise residential occupancy buildings. All hotels, dormitories, apartments, lodginghouses or rooming-houses, board and care facilities over 75 feet (23M) in height, measured from the lowest level of fire department access to the floor of the highest occupied story. 
Historic district. A geographically definable area designated by City Commission as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in Sec. 5.2.2.B. 
Historic property. An individual building, structure, site, object or work of art, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof, designated by City Commission as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in Sec. 5.2.2.C. 
Historic structure. Any structure that is: 
1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a)  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b)  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Home for the elderly. Facilities designed and constructed for housing ambulatory persons or couples over 62 years of age in which ground and floor space may be limited to peculiar needs of such elderly persons. 
Home occupation. Any occupation within a dwelling or accessory building and clearly incidental, carried on by a member of the family residing on the premises (see also Sec. 6.8.3.B.). 
Hospital, infirmary, sanitarium. A building or group of buildings, having room facilities for 1 or more abiding patients, used for providing services for the inpatient medical or surgical care of sick or injured humans, and which may include related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, central service facilities, and staff offices; provided, however, that such related facility must be incidental and subordinate to the main use and must be an integral part of the hospital operations. 
Hotel and motel. A building in which separate sleeping rooms are rented which provide sleeping accommodations for a total of more than 15 persons on either a transient or permanent basis, with or without meals, whether designated as a hotel, inn, club, motel or by any other name. 
Hotspot. An area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Household. See Sec. 6.3.1. 
Household living. See Sec. 6.3.1. 
Hydrologic response. The hydrologic response of a property is the manner whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates and is conveyed from a property. It is dependent on several factors including but not limited to the presence of impervious area, the size, shape, topographic, vegetative and geologic conditions of a property, antecedent moisture conditions and groundwater conditions on a property. 
Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG). A Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into 4 runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
I 
Illegal connection. Any of the items listed in either of the following: 
1) Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
2) Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the municipal separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Impervious cover. A surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, drives, parking spaces, walkways, decks, tennis courts, swimming pools and similar structures, compacted gravel, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Indoor recreation. See Sec. 6.5.2.. 
Industrial activity. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, section 122.26(B)(14). 
Industrial stormwater permit. A national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Industrialized Building. A structure meeting the definition of "industrialized building" set forth in O.C.G.A. section 8-2-111, as amended, and that bears a valid insignia of approval issued by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs pursuant to the Georgia Industrialized Building Act, as amended. Infiltration. The process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Infirmary. See Hospital. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement. A written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Institution. A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or a nonprofit establishment for public use. 
Interested parties (substandard building). Interested parties are as follows: 
1)  Owner; 
2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
3)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
4)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner of records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of the court. Interested parties shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded, which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
5)  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
ISA. International Society of Arboriculture; an organization that promotes the professional practice of arboriculture and fosters an awareness of the benefits of trees through research, technology and education. 
J 
Jurisdictional wetland. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
K 
Kennel. A building or establishment where the principal service is the boarding of animals. 
L 
Land development. Any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity. Those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project. A discrete land development undertaking. 
Land disturbance. Any land or vegetation change including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, and transporting and filling of land, and that does not include construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land-disturbing activity. Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in Sec. 9.4.3. 
Landscaping. Planting of grass or other ground cover and ornamental trees and shrubs for beautification and screening purposes. 
Larger common plan of development or sale. A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
LEED. The Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design green building rating systems which are nationally accepted standards for green buildings developed by the USGBC. 
Library, museum, public. A facility having public significance by reason of its architecture or former use or occupancy, or a building serving as a repository for a collection of books, natural, scientific, literary curiosities or objects of interest, or works of art, and arranged, intended, and designed to be viewed by members of the public, with or without an admission fee, and which may include as an accessory use the sale of goods to the public as gifts or for their own use. 
Lifecycle dwelling. A type of dwelling which is designated so that the rent or purchase price is affordable by a family whose income is a percentage of the area median income (AMI) for families in the Atlanta metropolitan statistical area, as established by the U.S. Department of housing and urban development. Lifecycle dwellings are intended to providing housing opportunities for persons and families of moderate income, the elderly, employees of public agencies and local business and similar classes. Such designation shall be through the use of deed restrictions, project agreements, conditional zoning or other effective means. 
Light industrial. See Sec. 6.6.1. 
Light manufacturing. See Sec. 6.6.2. 
Loading space. A space having minimum dimensions of 13 by 45 feet and a vertical clearance of at least 141/2 feet within the main building or on the same lot, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks. 

Local issuing authority. The governing authority of the City, Georgia which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(A). 
Lodginghouse or roominghouse. A residential building in which no more than 8 separate sleeping rooms are rented which provide sleeping accommodations for a total of 15 or less persons, with or without meals, but without separate cooking facilities for individual occupants. No guest may lodge for more than 30 consecutive nights. 
Lot. A portion of a subdivision intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development, or both. In determining the area and dimensions of a lot, no part of the right-of-way of a road or crosswalk may be included 
Lot, corner. A lot abutting upon 2 or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot coverage. A percentage factor which, when multiplied by the total area of any lot, establishes the total area of impervious cover which may be built on said lot. Where used in the zoning ordinance, the term coverage shall mean lot coverage. 

Lot, double frontage. A through lot having a frontage on 2 nonintersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot. 

Lot frontage. The linear distance measured in feet along which the lot fronts a public right-of-way. 
Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of DeKalb county or a parcel of land, the deed of which was recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of DeKalb county. 
Lot width. The width of a lot at the building line measured parallel to the street right-of-way line. 
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this UDO. 
M 
Major automobile repair. The term "major repair" shall include such activities as painting or spray painting; repair to body, fender, bumper, clutch, transmission, differential, axle, spring, or similar part; overhaul or repair of engine requiring removal of cylinder head or crankcase pan; repair of radiator requiring removal from vehicle; recapping and retreading of tires; or similar activities. 
Major utilities. Public or private infrastructure, including but not limited to water, sewer, gas, electric, telephone, internet, cable and other similar services serving the general community and possibly having on-site personnel. 
Manufactured (mobile) home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet in floor area, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; or a structure that otherwise comes within the definition of a "manufactured home" under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5401-5445). 
Manufactured home (floodplain). A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. The term does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
Market garden, small. A parcel less than 5,000 S.F. That is managed and maintained by an individual, group of individuals or organization for urban agriculture. All livestock shall be prohibited. Animal facilities shall be setback a minimum of 75 feet from the property lines. 
Market garden, medium. A parcel greater than or equal to 5,000 S.F. But no greater than 2 acres that is managed and maintained by an individual, group of individuals or organization for urban agriculture. Animals used in food production shall be permitted with the exception of roosters. Animal facilities shall be setback a minimum of 75 feet from the property lines. 
Market garden, large. An area of land greater than 2 acres that is managed and maintained by an individual, group of individuals or organization for urban agriculture. Animals used in food production shall be permitted with the exception of roosters. Animal facilities shall be setback a minimum of 75 feet from the property lines. 
Marquee. Any roofed structure attached to and supported by a building and projecting over public or private sidewalks or right-of-way. 
Marquee sign. Any sign painted on, attached to, or hung from a marquee. 
Master plan. A comprehensive plan, which may consist of several maps, data and other descriptive matter, for the physical development of the City, or any portion thereof, including any amendments, extensions or additions thereto approved by the City Commission, indicating the general location for major roads, parks or other public open spaces, public building sites, routes for public utilities, zoning districts or other similar information. 
Material change in appearance. A change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, landscape feature or work of art within a historic district, such as: 
1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from a public right-of-way; or 
5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features. 
Mature canopy size. The potential amount of canopy that can be expected for a species at maturity, categorized as very small, small, medium and large. 
Mean sea level. The datum to which based flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are referenced. For purposes of this UDO, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
Medical. See Sec. 6.5.3. 
Minor automobile repair. The term "minor repair" shall include such activities as engine tune-up; servicing of spark plugs, batteries, distributors and similar items; replacement of mufflers, tail pipes, water hose, fan belts, brake fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat belts, seat covers, windshield wipers and blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors and similar items; cleaning and flushing of radiators; repair or replacement of fuel pumps and lines; minor servicing or repair of carburetors; minor repairs to electrical system; minor adjustment of motors not involving removal of head or crankcase or racing motors; or similar activities. 
Minor utilities. Public or private infrastructure, including but not limited to water, sewer, gas, electric, telephone, internet, cable and other similar services serving a limited area with no on-site personnel. 
Monastery, convent. A place of residence providing group living accommodations to a community of persons living in seclusion under religious vows. 
Motel. A building or group of buildings used for the temporary occupancy of transient motorists and containing no facilities for cooking in the individual units. Ingress or egress to rooms need not be through a lobby or office. 
Motorized home. A portable dwelling designed and constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle. 
Multiple-family dwelling. A building containing 3 or more living units with independent cooking and bathroom facilities, whether designated as apartment house, tenement, garden apartment, or by any other name. 
Multiple-family dwelling unit residential properties. Multiple-family dwelling unit residential properties shall mean developed land whereon more than 1 residential dwelling unit is located, and shall include, but not be limited to apartment houses, structures containing multiple residential condominiums located on a single parcel of property, boarding houses, group homes, hotels and motels, personal care homes, homes for the elderly, retirement and nursing homes, and other structures in which more than 1 family group commonly and normally reside or could reside. In the application of stormwater service fees, multiple-family dwelling unit residential properties shall be treated as other developed lands as defined in this article. 
Municipal separate stormwater system. Any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, municipal streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
1)  Owned or maintained by the City; 
2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
3)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
N 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929. A vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
National Green Building Standard. A rating and certification system jointly developed by the National Association of Home Builders (NAHB), building science society ASHRAE, and the International Code Council (ICC), developers of the ICC Family of Codes, to encourage increased environmental and health performance in residences and residential portions of buildings. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit. A permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
National Register of Historic Places. The United States' official list of cultural resources worthy of preservation. Authorized under the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (Public Law 89-665; 16 U.S.C. 470 et seq.), the National Register is part of a national program to coordinate and support public and private efforts to identify, evaluate, and protect our historic and archaeological resources. Properties listed in the Register include districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that are significant in American history, architecture, archeology, engineering, and culture. The National Register is administered by the National Park Service, which is part of the U.S. Department of the Interior. 
Natural ground surface. The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU). Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
New construction. Any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after May 5, 1992, flood damage prevention, and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
Net development area. The area determined by subtracting any areas set aside for street right-of-way, drainage facilities or areas, churches and schools from the total area of the development. Any area set aside for common open areas or passive recreational uses shall be included in the net development area. 
New development. A land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after May 5, 1992. 
NFPA 1124. The National Fire Protection Association Standard 1124, Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage, and Retail Sales of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles, 2006 Edition. 
NOI. A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
Noncommercial message. Any sign, wording, logo or other visual representation that does not directly or indirectly constitute or include a commercial message, but instead conveys an opinion, idea or concept, or similar noncommercial speech. 
Nonconforming sign. Any lawfully erected sign which, on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
Nonconforming use. Any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the time of passage of the ordinance or amendment thereto which does not conform after the passage of this UDO or amendment thereto with the use regulations of the district in which it is situated. Existing improvements which do not meet required parking and loading regulations, height regulations, area regulations, and residential floor area regulations for the district in which they are located are not nonconforming uses as defined above. 
Nonpoint source pollution. A form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Non-profit. An organization organized and operated exclusively for exempt purposes set forth in section 501(c) (3) of the Internal Revenue Service Code, and none of its earnings may inure to any private shareholder or individual. In addition, it may not be an action organization, for example, it may not attempt to influence legislation as a substantial part of its activities and it may not participate in any campaign activity for or against political candidates. 
Non-stormwater discharge. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice. A means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. A vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
NOT. A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Nursery school. Any premises or portion thereof used for educational work or parental care of children of less than 6 years of age. 
Nursing home. A facility which admits patients on medical referral only and for whom arrangements have been made for continuous medical supervision and which maintains the services and facilities for skilled or rehabilitative nursing care, and has a satisfactory agreement with a physician and dentist who will be available for any medical and/or dental emergency and who will be responsible for the general medical and dental supervision of the home in accordance with the definition of nursing home set forth in the Georgia Administrative Code 290-5-8-.01, as amended. No personal care home, assisted living facility, rehabilitation center or any other type of facility may be permitted under this definition as a nursing home unless it meets the definition of nursing home set forth in the Georgia Administrative Code and is licensed by the State of Georgia as a nursing home. 
O 
Occupancy classification. The use to which the structure is put. The various classifications shall be: 
1)  Single-family residential; 
2)  Multifamily residential; 
3)  Commercial; 
4)  Industrial; 
5)  Office; 
6)  Institutional; and 
7)  Governmental. 
Off-premises sign. Any sign not located on the same premises as the person, business, commodity, service, entertainment or any other thing which it advertises or to which it relates, including any structure designed primarily for the display of off-site signs or advertising structures. 
Off-site facility. A stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
Office. See Sec. 6.5.4. 
Office-type business. A business or professional office which does not have frontage on a public street. For example, a business located in an office building or similar facility and which is entered from a hallway or corridor connected to a common building entrance. 
Open space. Uses focusing on natural areas consisting mostly of vegetation, passive or active outdoor recreation areas, and having few structures. 
Operator. The party or parties that have: 
1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Other developed lands. Other developed lands shall mean, but not be limited to, multiple-family dwelling unit residential unit properties, manufactured home and mobile home parks, commercial, retail and office buildings, public buildings and structures, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas covered with impervious surfaces, railroad stations and other transportation facilities covered by impervious surfaces, parking lots and decks, parks and other recreational properties, public and private schools and universities, research facilities and stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, agricultural uses covered by impervious surfaces, and water and wastewater treatment plants and all other types of developed land except single-family dwelling units. 
Outdoor advertising. Advertising on any board, fence or structure or the placing thereon of any poster, bill, printing, painting, device or any advertising matter of any kind, and the pasting, posting, painting, printing, nailing or tacking or otherwise fastening of any handbill, card, banner, sign, poster, advertising or notice of any kind upon any property or place. 
Outdoor recreation. See Sec. 6.5.5. 
Outfall. The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Overbank flood protection. Measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and flow on to adjacent land and/or enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the 2-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Overnight lodging. See Sec. 6.5.6. 
Owner. The legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
P 
Parcel. Any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Parks and Recreation. See Sec. 6.4.2. 
Parking. See Sec. 6.5.7. 
Parking lot. A lot used exclusively for the temporary storage of motor vehicles. 
Parking space. A space, enclosed or unenclosed, for vehicle storage space exclusive of driveways, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of a vehicle and directly connected with a street or alley by a driveway. 
Pedestrian walk. A right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use, 10 feet or more in width, intended primarily for pedestrians and from which motor propelled vehicles are excluded, and which is designed to improve or provide access to adjacent roads or lots. 
Permit. The permit issued by the UDO Administrator to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any land development activity. 
Permitted use. The purpose or function that a lot serves or is supposed to serve that is permitted within the zoning districts described in the zoning ordinance. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Personal care facility. A personal care home, assisted living facility or nursing home. 
Personal care home. A dwelling, facility or structure required to be licensed or registered with the State of Georgia as a personal care home. Any dwelling, facility or structure which for any reason is not required to be licensed or registered with the State of Georgia as a personal care home, or fails to be licensed or registered with the State of Georgia as a personal care home but which, through its ownership or management undertakes for a fee or accepts a grant or utilizes its own funding to provide or arrange for the provision of housing, food service, and one or more personal services for two or more persons who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood, marriage or adoption shall also be considered a personal care home for the purpose of this definition. No use defined as a personal care home may be permitted as a home occupation. This definition shall apply without regard to whether any fee is paid by the individual to whom the services are provided or by another person, the source of the grant, or the funding source for the operational costs and without regard to whether the facility is operated for profit or not for profit. Personal services include but are not limited to individual assistance with or supervision of self-administered medication, and essential activities of daily living such as bathing, grooming, dressing and toileting. For the purposes of this ordinance, a "child caring institution" or "group-care facility" as defined in O.C.G.A. § 49-5-3, as amended, shall also be considered a personal care home. 
Personal service. See Sec. 6.5.8. 
Pickup coach. A structure designed primarily to be mounted on a pickup truck or truck chassis and with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses. 
Place of worship, including church, mosque, synagogue, temple. A building or structure that by design and construction is primarily intended for conducting organized religious services. Associated accessory uses include, but are not limited to, schools, meeting halls, indoor and outdoor recreational facilities, clergy house, day care, counseling and kitchens. 
Planned Unit Development. A parcel of land of at least 1 acre in area, under single, corporation, firm, partnership, or association ownership, planned and developed as an integral unit, in a single development operation or a definitively programmed series of development operations and according to a development plan approved this UDO. 
Planning Commission. The City Planning Commission. 
Plat. A map indicating the subdivision or resubdivision of lands, intended to be filed for record. 
Plumbing fixtures. Any toilet, urinal, showerhead, bathroom, lavatory and kitchen faucet and replacement aerators. 
Pole sign. Any sign erected on 1 or more uprights supported from the ground, the height of which is greater than 8 feet, and which is not a part of any building or structure, other than a structure erected solely for the purpose of supporting the sign. The overall total height of a pole sign shall not exceed 25 feet above ground level. A pole sign may include an accessory sign or changeable copy panel, the areas of which shall be included in the total area of the pole sign. 
Political sign. A sign informing the public of an election issue, political issue, candidate for public office, or similar noncommercial campaign. 
Pollutant. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution. The contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Portable sign. Any sign which is designed to be transported by any means, including by trailer or on its own wheels, even though the wheels of such sign may be removed and the remaining chassis or support constructed without wheels is attached temporarily or permanently to the ground, or any movable sign structure designed for transport, which is placed, parked or maintained at a particular location for the express purpose of promotion or conveying an advertising message. It is typical of such signs that the space provided for advertising matter consists of a changeable copy panel. 
Post-development. The time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development. The time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority, provided however that the runoff coefficient to be used for purposes of computation of the stormwater quality or detention requirement for the pre-developed condition of an existing impervious area that is removed shall revert to the coefficient for such area in its natural undeveloped state. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Preengineered metal building. A structure which includes a preengineered and shop-fabricated structural steel building frame, metal wall and sloped roof system, and exterior doors and windows, which has been manufactured so as to facilitate erection at a location other than where it was fabricated. This term does not include greenhouses, garden sheds and similar structures not exceeding 150 square feet of floor area. 
Preliminary plat. A drawing which shows the proposed layout of a subdivision in sufficient detail to indicate unquestionably its workability, but is not in final form for recording, pursuant to this UDO. 
Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Price pane. Any sign or panel incorporated into a sign or sign device and having changeable numerals used for the purpose of displaying variable price information. 
Professional engineer. A professional engineer registered in the State of Georgia. 
Project. The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Projecting sign. Any sign mounted on the face or vertical surface of a building or structure, the display surfaces of which are not parallel to the supporting surfaces. 
Proper identification. Any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth, and includes without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, drivers license, or an identification card authorized under O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-100 through 40-5-104. 
Properly designed. Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the manual for erosion and sediment control in Georgia (manual) published by the Georgia soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Protected tree. Any tree that is 6 inches DBH or greater that is healthy and structurally sound; any tree that has been conserved or planted to meet tree ordinance requirements regardless of size; any tree growing on any public property. 
Protection area, or stream protection area. With respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream which are required around the area of the stream itself. 
Public. The term "public," when used as a modifier for such words as building, school, facility, community building, library, art gallery, utility and similar words, shall mean "government-owned" or "government-operated." 
Public authority. Any member of the City Commission of the City, Georgia, any officer of the Decatur housing authority, and any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the City or the state of Georgia relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings or structures in the City, specifically including the City fire marshal, the City fire chief, the City police chief, and the City codes enforcement officers. 
Public facility. Public museums, art galleries, libraries, buildings, government buildings office, and structures. 
Public officer. The officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7, 41-2-8 and §§ 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 and by this article to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer or officers. 
Public property. Property which is owned, leased or controlled by the city, county, or state or any public board, commission, or authority. 
Public tree. Any tree whose trunk is located either wholly or partially on public property. 
Public utilities. See Sec. 6.4.3. 
Q 
Qualified professional. An individual possessing a degree in forestry, urban forestry, landscape architecture or horticulture and certified or registered by the state or a professional board, or a certified arborist. 
R 
Radio, television studio. A facility in which video, radio or sound production takes place, either for live broadcasting or for the acquisition of raw footage for post-production. 
Real estate sign. Any temporary sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of the property on which the sign is located. 
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is: 
1)  Built on a single chassis; 
2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and 
4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Redevelopment. A land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings not involving a substantial improvement or an addition, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or stormwater facility. Stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for individual on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Remote parking. A facility that provides parking as a principal use that is used to meet the off-site parking provisions of Sec. 4.6.7.A. 
Repair. Altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated, which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Repair of appliances. Including bicycles, canvas product clocks, computers, jewelry, musical instruments, office equipment, radios, shoes, televisions, watch, or similar items. 
Repair shops. Shops specializing in the repair of appliances, bicycles, canvas product clocks, computers, jewelry, musical instruments, office equipment, radios, shoes, televisions, watch, or similar items. 
Repetitive loss. Flood related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Research and development. See Sec. 6.6.3. 
Resident. Any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
Residential building. Any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
Residential real estate sign. Any temporary sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of the residential property on which the sign is located. 
Restaurant with drive-though. A restaurant designed so that at least part of the customers can be served while remaining in their vehicles. 
Retail sales. See Sec. 6.5.10. 
Riparian. Belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Roadway drainage structure. A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on 1 side of a traveled roadway consisting of 1 or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Roof sign. Any sign which is fastened to and supported by or on the roof of a building or which extends above the roof of a building. 
Roominghouse, boardinghouse. A building other than a hotel where lodging for 3 or more persons not of the immediate family is provided for definite periods and for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods. 
Roots. The system of large, woody structural roots that physically support a tree and fine, fibrous feeder roots that absorb water and nutrients for tree growth and survival. 
Rotating sign. Any sign which is designed to revolve or rotate. 
Row house. A type of multiple dwelling connected to other units at end walls. 
Runoff. Stormwater runoff. 
S 
Sanitarium. See Hospital. 
Satellite dish antenna. A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh or bar-configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn or cornucopia. Such device is used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses. This definition is meant to include, but not be limited to, what are commonly referred to as satellite earth stations and/or satellite microwave antennas. 
Scaffold limbs. The main structural limbs that support the remainder of the tree's crown. 
School, private (k-12). An educational facility for students in grades pre-kindergarten through 12 not operated by the City of Decatur that has a curriculum at least equal to a public school with regard to the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools of the state of Georgia. 
School, public (k-12). An educational facility for students in grades pre-kindergarten through 12 operated by the City of Decatur Board of Education. Includes charter schools. 
Sediment. Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation. The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Self-service storage. See Sec. 6.6.4. 
Service station. Any building or land used for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail of any automobile fuels, oils or accessories and in connection with which is performed general automotive servicing as distinguished from automotive repairs. 
Setback. 
1)  See Yard. 
2)  With respect to a stream, the area established by Sec. 9.2.5.A. extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
Site development permit. Any permit issued for land disturbance or land development. 
Sign. Any writing, pictorial presentation, illustration, decoration, flag, banner, display, spectacle, statuary or other device or visual medium, including its structure and component parts, which: 
1)  Is used or intended to be used to announce, attract attention to, identify, advertise, or otherwise make anything known; and 
2)  Is visible from any public street, public road, public right-of-way or adjoining property. 
3)  The term "sign" shall not be deemed to include the terms "building" or "landscaping," or any architectural embellishment of a building not designed to communicate information. 
Sign Area. The area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed, excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed; provided, however, that any open space contained within the outer limits of the display face of a sign or between any component, panel, strip, or figure of any kind composing the display face shall be included in the computation of the area of the sign, whether such open space be enclosed or not by a frame or border. For projecting or double-faced signs, only 1 display face shall be measured in computing sign area where the sign faces are parallel or where the interior angle formed by the faces is 60 degrees or less. If the 2 faces of a double-faced sign are of unequal area, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of the larger face. 
Sign official. Any person charged with the administration and enforcement of appropriate provisions of this chapter. 
Sign structure. The supports, uprights, braces and framework of the sign. 
Single-family dwelling unit. Single-family dwelling unit shall mean developed land upon which is located one principal structure that contains 1 dwelling unit designed for occupancy by one family, with a bathroom and kitchen facilities. Single-family dwelling units may include houses, duplexes, triplexes, manufactured homes, mobile homes located on one or more individual lots or parcels of land, and fee-simple ownership or condominium townhomes and attached single-family residential structures located on individual lots or parcels of land and such single units located on more than 1 individual lot or parcel of land. For the purposes of this article, developed land may be classified as a single-family dwelling unit despite the presence of incidental and/or accessory structures associated with residential uses such as garages, carports or small storage buildings, accessory dwellings or the presence of a commercial use within the dwelling unit so long as such use does not result in additional areas of impervious surfaces such as parking spaces, playgrounds or structures or additions to the building which are used as offices, storage facilities, meeting rooms, classrooms, houses of worship or similar nonresidential uses. Single-family dwelling units shall not include developed land containing structures used primarily for nonresidential purposes, manufactured homes and mobile homes located within manufactured home or mobile home parks where the land is owned by others than the owners of the manufactured homes or mobile homes, or multiple-family residential units that are individually owned but are located on a single parcel of developed land, such as condominiums and cooperatively-owned apartments. 
Site. The parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan. An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the DeKalb county soil and water conservation district. 
Sparklers. Wire or wood sparklers of 100 grams or less of mixture per item; other sparkling items which are non-explosive and non-aerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical compound per tube or a total of 500 grams or less for multiple tubes; snake and glow worms; trick noise makers which include paper streamers, party poppers, string poppers, snappers, and drop pops each consisting of 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture. 
Specimen tree. Any protected tree that is a dogwood or redbud that is 10 DBH or greater, a hardwood that is 27 DBH or greater or a pine that is 30 DBH or greater. 
Social Services. See Sec. 6.3.3. 
Solar panels, wind turbines, rainwater collection systems. Renewable energy systems such as solar panels and wind turbines, along with rainwater collection systems such as rain barrels and cisterns. 
Stabilization. The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Standard tree canopy value. A dollar value per square foot of tree canopy cover established in the fee schedule adopted by the City Commission for use in calculating payments to the Decatur tree bank. 
Start of construction. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of the structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
State general permit. The national pollution discharge elimination system (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the federal water pollution control act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(F). 
State water. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Storefront or street-facing business. A business which has an entrance and its principal frontage located on and/or facing a public street. In a shopping center, such business may face a mall or other private vehicular or pedestrian thoroughfare or private parking area. 
Stormwater better site design. Nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management. The collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility. Any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure. Any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management permit. The permit required by these regulations in order to conduct development activity in the City. 
Stormwater management plan. A document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this UDO. 
Stormwater management policy guidelines. A document prepared by the UDO Administrator that contains additional application, technical or procedural requirements related to stormwater management permits that are applicable in the City. 
Stormwater management system. The entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater management systems and facilities. Stormwater management systems and facilities are those natural and man-made channels, swales, ditches, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainage ways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, head walls, storm sewers, lakes and other physical works, properties and improvements which transfer, control, convey or otherwise influence the movement of stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater retrofit. A stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the current stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater or stormwater runoff. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Stormwater service fees. Stormwater service fees shall mean the periodic service fee imposed pursuant to this article by the City for the purpose of recovering and/or funding costs related to stormwater management systems and facilities. The use of the area of impervious surface on each property as a measure to determine the stormwater service fee rate shall not preclude the use of other measures, or of grouping of properties having similar characteristics into classes or categories, grouping of properties having similar characteristics through the use of ranges or rounding up or down to a consistent numerical interval, or the use of flat-rate charges for 1 or more classes of similarly-situated properties whose impact on the City's cost of providing stormwater management systems and facilities is relatively consistent. Stormwater service fees may also include certain special charges to individual properties or persons for stormwater management systems and facilities or services related to stormwater management, including but not limited to charges for development plan review, inspection of development projects and on-site stormwater control systems, and enhanced levels of stormwater service above and beyond the service levels normally provided by City. 
Story. That portion of a building other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
Story, half. A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than 3 feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds of the floor area is finished off for use. A half-story containing independent apartment or living quarters shall be counted as a full story. 

Stream. Any stream, beginning at 
1)  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; or 
2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more; or where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 25 acres, the UDO Administrator may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Stream bank. The sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream channel. The portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Street. A thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Street, private. A street that is open to the public, but that is not owned or maintained by the City or another governmental entity. 
Street, public. A street that is open to the public, that has been dedicated and accepted for public use, and for which operation and maintenance is the responsibility of the City or another governmental entity. 
Street line. A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street. 
Streets and alleys. A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or however otherwise designated, as follows: 
1)  Arterial streets and highways are those which are used primarily for fast or heavy traffic. 
2)  Collector streets are those which carry traffic from minor neighborhood streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a development. 
3)  Minor streets are those which are used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
4)  Marginal access streets are minor streets which are parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways, and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
5)  Alleys are minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground, including, but not limited to, manufactured homes, gas or liquid storage tanks, signs, billboards, backstops for tennis courts, fences or radio towers. 
Structure (floodplain). A walled and roofed building, (including a gas or liquid storage tank) that is principally above ground, or a manufactured home. 
Structural alterations. Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial changes in the roofs or exterior walls. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices. Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication manual for erosion and sediment control in Georgia. 
Structural stormwater control. A structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivider. Any person who undertakes the subdivision of land. 
Subdivision. The division, development or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land, regardless of how it is to be used, into two or more lots either by plat or by metes and bounds description, or the division or redivision of land involving the dedication of a new park, playground, street, or other public right-of-way or facility; or the vacation or closing, realignment or any other change in existing streets, alleys, easements, recreational areas, water areas or other public improvements or facilities, and when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the act or process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. Subdivisions shall be defined as minor or major subdivisions. For the purpose of this UDO, the following are excepted: 
1)  The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining properties; provided, that additional lots are not thereby created and that the new dimensions of the lots are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by the zoning district. 
2)  The transfer of unsubdivided land or a lot or parcel of land established by deed or plat recorded among the land records of the County prior to February 17, 1959. 
3)  The division or sale of land by judicial decree. 
4)  The re-establishment of historic lots of record in their original, platted form. Historic lots of record must be developed in accordance with the requirements of the UDO. 
Subdivision (floodplain). The division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer or ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Subdivision, major. The division of a tract or parcel of land into four or more lots which may or may not involve the construction of a new street; or any subdivision that involves the construction of a new street. Construction plans and development permits are required for major subdivisions. Major subdivisions are therefore processed in multiple steps, including preliminary plat approval (unless specifically exempted). 
Subdivision, minor. A subdivision of three or fewer lots, which does not involve the construction of a new street. Minor subdivisions are processed administratively by the Zoning Administrator as final plat applications that do not require preliminary plat approval. Any improvements to an existing public street abutting the tract proposed for minor subdivision, or the installation of utilities along said existing public road, as may be required to comply with this ordinance, shall be done according to plans and permit requirements of this UDO, but said requirements shall not subject the minor subdivision to the requirements for a major subdivision as specified in this UDO. 
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. This term also includes Repetitive Loss. 
Substantial improvement (zoning). For the purposes of zoning, substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration or improvements to a building where the cost of the construction exceeds 50% of the fair market value of the structure prior to the improvement. Determination of fair market value is based on the applicant's submittal of either the existing records of the DeKalb County tax assessor or a current appraisal of the structure's value. The cost of the proposed construction shall be determined by the applicant using detailed, complete (turnkey) contracts from a qualified state licensed contractor or by using published standardized construction value data published by the International Code Council (ICC). Values for the purpose of this definition are exclusive of land values. 
Substantial improvement (floodplain). Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other alteration, or improvements to a structure building, taking place during a 10-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means: (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a structure building required to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been identified by the Code Enforcement Official. The term does also not include any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure. 
Substantial renovation. Repairs and alterations to a structure the total cost of which exceeds 30% of the fair market value of the property as shown on the then current property tax records of the City. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision. Where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Swimming pool. A structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that can hold water over 24 inches deep. This includes in-ground, above-ground, and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas. 
T 
Telecommunication Antenna. Any exterior transmitting or receiving devices mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio, wireless telecommunications signals or other communications signals. Such definition does not include, for purposes of this Article, radar antennas, amateur radio antennas, satellite earth stations, MMDS antennas, television receiving antennas and direct broadcast satellite dishes. 
Telecommunication Tower. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supported or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, and cellular telephone or PCS towers. 
Temporary sign. Any non-illuminated sign, banner, or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light materials, with or without frames and intended to be displayed for a brief and limited period of time, not to exceed 30 days. Construction signs, real estate and residential real estate signs are not considered temporary signs within this definition. 
Thermal envelope. The physical separator between the conditioned and unconditioned environment of a structure including the resistance to air, water, moisture, heat, light, and noise transfer. The thermal envelope in a structure with an unconditioned attic shall be considered the floor-ceiling. 
Toilet. Any fixture consisting of a water flushed bowl with a seat, used for the disposal of human waste. 
Total area. The horizontal plane area described in square feet (or acres) determined by accurate boundary survey and exclusive of that area within the boundaries of any given lot or lot of record, wherein the surface condition of the land is unusable. Unusable under the meaning of this UDO shall include: 
1)  Land sloping steeper than 30 degrees from the horizontal; 
2)  Land so separated as to be unreachable by normal pedestrian access; and 
3)  Land subject to flooding. 
Tower Height. Distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna. 
Trade, vocation, business school. An educational use not operated by the DeKalb County Board of Education and having a curriculum devoted primarily to business (including barbers and beauticians), industry, trade or other vocational-technical instruction. 
Transparency. See Sec. 2.1.8. 
Travel trailer. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses, permanently identified as a travel trailer by the manufacturer of the trailer, and, when equipped for the road, having a body width not exceeding 8 feet, provided its gross weight does not exceed 4,500 pounds, provided its body length does not exceed 30 feet. 
Tree. A woody plant, usually single-stemmed (but may be multi-stemmed), with the potential to grow to a mature size of at least 3 inches DBH and 15 feet in height. 
Tree canopy cover. The amount of ground area directly beneath a tree's crown or the combined crowns of a stand of trees, measured in square feet. 
Tree conservation plan. A plan submitted with any application for a tree disturbance or site development permit which shall include all information appropriate to the situation and as described in the administrative standards. A plan may include but is not limited to; documenting the location of all protected trees, existing and proposed structures and utility infrastructure, site grading and construction proposals, methods of tree protection, tree canopy cover including proposed conserved and planted trees, and associated details as required by the tree ordinance 
Tree disturbance. Any land disturbance activity that has the potential to change the characteristics of the soil, vegetation, growing space or environment within a tree protection zone or any activity that has the potential to damage a protected tree's roots, trunk or crown. 
Tree disturbance permit. A permit granted to disturb the soil, vegetation, growing space or environment within the tree protection zone or damage a tree's roots, trunk or crown. 
Tree impact. Any tree disturbance that proposes or has the potential to affect 20% or more of the tree protection zone. 
Tree information permit. An informational permit that is filed with the City when an individual tree is removed from residential property. The informational permit will track the reason for removal and the amount of tree canopy removed. 
Tree ordinance. Sec. 9.1. of this UDO was formerly known as the Tree Ordinance. 
Tree protection zone. The area encompassing the entirety of a protected tree, including the soil to a depth of 3 feet within the critical root zone and the tree's trunk and crown. 
Tree removal permit. A permit required to remove a protected tree. 
Trout streams. All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia water quality control act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, In the rules and regulations for water quality control, chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Trunk. The woody stem of a tree that extends from the root flare into the crown, supports the crown, and functions in the transport of water and nutrients to the limbs and leaves. 
Two-family dwelling. 2 dwelling units in a single principal structure. 
U 
UDO Administrator. The City Manager or his/her designee. 
Unenclosed. Located entirely outside of a building or structure, or includes a barrier on two sides or less, with or without a solid roof cover, or includes a barrier on three sides without a solid roof cover. 
Urban agriculture. The use of a lot for the cultivation of food and/or horticultural crops, beekeeping, composting, animal husbandry, and/or aquaculture. Such use may include on-site sales where retail uses are allowed, and is not intended to include cultivation for personal consumption or use. 
Urinal. Any fixture consisting of a water flushed bowl used for the disposal of human waste. 
USGBC. The U.S. Green Building Council, a nonprofit organization comprised of leaders from the building industry formed to encourage sustainability by promoting buildings that are environmentally responsible, profitable, and healthy places to live and work. 
Utility trailer. A trailer so designed or constructed to permit the hauling of various type items, goods, materials or other objects. 
V 
Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this UDO which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this UDO. 
Variance (floodplain). A grant of relief from the requirements of the UDO. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures. Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication manual for erosion and sediment control in Georgia. 
Vehicle rental. A facility that rents motor vehicles for short periods of time (generally ranging from a few hours up to 2 weeks) for a fee. 
Vehicle sales. See Sec. 6.5.13. 
Vehicle sales or leasing. A facility where a manufacturer-authorized business or dealer engages in the sale or lease of new and used motor vehicles. 
Vehicle service, repair. See Sec. 6.5.12.B. 
Vehicular business. A business that, due to the nature of the product or service offered is oriented toward persons using vehicular transportation. Such businesses may include automotive service stations and repair shops, motor or drive-in banks, drive-in eating establishments, automobile dealers, drive-in laundries and dry cleaning establishments, motels, grocery and convenience stores, and similar establishments, but do not include general business offices, professional offices, contractor's offices, printer's shops, real estate or insurance offices, retail and other business without drive-in, drive-through or dedicated customer parking facilities, or similar establishments. 
Veterinary hospital. A building or establishment where the principal service is the medical treatment of animals. For the purposes of this UDO, this definition does not include a kennel. 
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the requirements of this UDO. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certification, or other evidence of compliance required in this UDO is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
W 
Wall, Exterior. The external wall of a unit. 
Wall, Interior. An external or internal wall of a unit that lies between two attached units (such as an attached house or townhouse). 
Wall plate. A horizontal member situated along the top of a wall at the level of the eaves for bearing the ends of joists or rafters. 
Wall plate height. Height, as measured to the top of the wall plate. 
Wall sign. A sign applied to or mounted on the wall or surface of a building or structure, the display surface of which is parallel to the supporting surface or perpendicular to the supporting surface. 
Warehouse and distribution. See Sec. 6.6.5. 
Watercourse. Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Watershed. The land area that drains into a particular stream. 
Weekend directional sign. A temporary directional sign used to direct motorists and others to a property for sale or lease, community event, yard or garage sale, or similar place or event. Such signs are allowed on weekends only between the hours of 5:00 P.M. On Friday to 11:59 P.M. on Sunday. 
Wetlands. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and other similar areas. 
Window sign. A sign painted on, applied to or hung on the inside of a window. 
Wireless transmission facilities. The buildings, cabinets, equipment and property, including but not limited to, generating and switching stations, repeaters, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennas, towers, alternative tower structures, electronics and other appurtenances used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer low-power mobile voice transmission, data transmission or other wireless communications by linking a wireless network of radio wave transmitting devices through a series of short range, contiguous cells that are part of an evolving cell grid. 
Y 
Yard. An open space between a building or use and the joining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in Sec. 2.1.5. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the minimum distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
Yard, front. A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines. On corner lots the front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. 
Yard, rear. A yard extending across the rear of a lot between the side lot lines. On all lots the rear yard shall be in the rear of the front yard. 
Yard, side interior. A yard between the main building and the side lot line and extending from the required front yard to the required rear yard. 


Z 
Zoning Administrator. The City Manager or his/her designee. 
Zoning district. The use classification of parcels or tracts of land as described and defined by the City zoning ordinance. 
Zoning ordinance. The zoning and land use regulations adopted for use within the City that constitute a zoning ordinance within the meaning of O.C.G.A. §§ 36-66-1 et seq., as specified in Sec. 1.1.4. 
(Ord. No. O-15-Z-01, §§ 1.14, 1.15, 1-20-15; Ord. No. O-16-Z-09, § 2.1, 6-20-16; Ord. No. O-17-02, § II, 3-20-17; Ord. No. O-17-09, §§ 7.1, 7.2, 6-19-17; Ord. No. O-17-13, § 2, 12-18-17) 
Appendix 1. - Historic Properties 
1. - National Register Criteria for Evaluation 
Criteria for Evaluation 
The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, engineering, and culture is present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and: 
A.  That are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history; or 
B.  That are associated with the lives of significant persons in or past; or 
C.  That embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction, or that represent the work of a master, or that possess high artistic values, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or 
D.  That have yielded or may be likely to yield, information important in history or prehistory. 
Criteria Considerations 
Ordinarily cemeteries, birthplaces, graves of historical figures, properties owned by religious institutions or used for religious purposes, structures that have been moved from their original locations, reconstructed historic buildings, properties primarily commemorative in nature, and properties that have achieved significance within the past 50 years shall not be considered eligible for the National Register. However, such properties will qualify if they are integral parts of districts that do meet the criteria or if they fall within the following categories: 
A.  A religious property deriving primary significance from architectural or artistic distinction or historical importance; or 
B.  A building or structure removed from its original location but which is primarily significant for architectural value, or which is the surviving structure most importantly associated with a historic person or event; or 
C.  A birthplace or grave of a historical figure of outstanding importance if there is no appropriate site or building associated with his or her productive life; or 
D.  A cemetery that derives its primary importance from graves of persons of transcendent importance, from age, from distinctive design features, or from association with historic events; or 
E.  A reconstructed building when accurately executed in a suitable environment and presented in a dignified manner as part of a restoration master plan, and when no other building or structure with the same association has survived; or 
F.  A property primarily commemorative in intent if design, age, tradition, or symbolic value has invested it with its own exceptional significance; or 
G.  A property achieving significance within the past 50 years if it is of exceptional importance. 
http://www.nps.gov/nr/publications/bulletins/nrb15/nrb15_2.htm 
2. - McDonough-Adams-Kings Highway District 
Plat Lot Owner Address See Note 15-235C 2-1 (142 Adams St.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 2-17(128 Adams St.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave. Decatur, GA 30030 * 15-235C 2-4 (132 Adams St.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave. Decatur, GA 30030 * 15-235C 2-18 (120 Adams St.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 2-7 (137 S. McDonough St.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave. Decatur, GA 30030 * 15-235C 2-19 (108 Adams St.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 2-8 (145 S. McDonough St.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave. Decatur, GA 30030 * 15-235C 2-20 (119 S. McDonough St.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 2-12 (121 Ansley St.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave. Decatur, GA 30030 * 15-235C 2-21 (115 S. McDonough St.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 2-15 (146 Adams St.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 2-22 (149 S. McDonough St.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 2-16 (123 Ansley St.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave. Decatur, GA 30030 * 15-235C 3-1 (204 Adams St.) First Church of the Nazarene 2716 Kings Park Circle Decatur, Georgia 30034-1916 15-235C 3-2 (212 Ansley St.) First Church of the Nazarene 2716 Kings Park Circle Decatur, Georgia 30034-1916 15-235C 4-1 (301 S. McDonough St.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 3-3 (128 Ansley St.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 4-2 (307 S. McDonough St.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 3-4 (120 Ansley St.) Carol Adams-Conner 120 Ansley St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 4-3 (309 S. McDonough St.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 3-5 (207 S. McDonough St.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 4-4 (315 S. McDonough St.) Jeffrey Rogers 315 S. McDonough St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 3-6 (215 S. McDonough St.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 4-6 (321 S. McDonough St.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 3-9 (212 Ansley St.) First Church of the Nazarene 2716 Kings Park Circle Decatur, GA 30034-1916 15-235C 4-7 (325 S. McDonough St.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 3-10 (231 S. McDonough St.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 4-8 (329 S. McDonough St.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 3-11 (227 S. McDonough St.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 4-10 (343 S. McDonough St.) Don Lake 343 S. McDonough St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 4-11 (347 S. McDonough St.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 4-24 (314 Adams St.) J. L. Kennedy 314 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 4-12 (351 S. McDonough St.) Kwai Sing Chang 351 S. McDonough St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 4-25 (310 Adams St.) Adam S. Levy 310 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 4-18 (350 Adams St.) John Turner 350 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 4-26 (304 Adams St.) Lyman C. Wray 304 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 4-19 (340 Adams St.) Gerard Carty 340 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 4-27 (135 W. Hancock St.) Edwin Clark, Jr. 135 W. Hancock St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 4-20 (338 Adams St.) William Choate 338 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 4-28 (356 Adams St.) Kim Wallen 356 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 4-21 (334 Adams St.) Martha Clinkscales 334 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 4-29 (364 Adams St.) Patricia M. Gilsdorf 364 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 4-22 (326 Adams St.) Roberta E. Bayles 326 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 4-30 (355 S. McDonough St.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 4-23 (322 Adams St.) Miriam K. Mathura 322 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 5-1 (205 Adams St.) John P. Ridley 205 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 5-2 (216 Ansley St.) Linda A. Hollingsworth 216 Ansley St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 5-10 (339 Adams St.) Dorothea L. Russell 215 W. Benson St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 5-3 (213 Adams St.) W. David Harrell 213 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 5-11 (343 Adams St.) William Kelly Morris 1813 Indiana Ave Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 5-4 (303 Adams St.) Leigh C. Vanderels 303 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 5-12 (349 Adams St.) Linda A. Bell 349 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 5-5 (309 Adams St.) Patrick Hogan 309 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 5-13 (355 Adams St.) Richard D. Parry 355 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 5-6 (315 Adams St.) William H. Denton 315 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 5-14 (359 Adams St.) Kenneth L. Baer 359 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 5-7 (321 Adams St.) Christopher R. Smith 321 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 5-15 (252 Kings Highway) Patrick L. Parker 150-20 59th Ave Flushing, NY 11355 15-235C 5-8 (327 Adams St.) Edward D. Buckley, III 327 Adams St 15-235C 5-16 (248 Kings Highway) Mary Joe White 248 Kings Highway 15-235C 5-9 (333 Adams St.) Gail K. Centini 333 Adams St 15-235C 5-17 (242 Kings Highway) Annie Lou Simms 242 Kings Highway 15-235C 5-18 (240 Kings Highway) J. Wynn Bowman 240 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 5-26 (204 Kings Highway) Brian Frentress 204 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 5-19 (234 Kings Highway) Alma A Zachery 234 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 5-27 (206 Kings Highway) Wendy Holmes 202 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 5-20 (230 Kings Highway) Mary Nell Visscher 317 Oakland St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 5-28 (230 Ansley St.) Ivana Markivic 230 Ansley St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 5-21 (226 Kings Highway) Thomas K. Bond 226 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 6-1 (205 Kings Highway) Lucille Stills Avary 205 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 5-22 (224 Kings Highway) Crawford M. Kennedy, Jr. 224 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 6-2 (211 Kings Highway) Lolita M. Burns 211 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 5-23 (220 Kings Highway) William H. Bolling 220 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 6-3 (219 Kings Highway) Mattie Howard 219 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 5-24 (212 Kings Highway) Sara M. Putzell-Shoemaker Rosemary Ragrella 212 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 6-4 (223 Kings Highway) Rosemary Ragrella 223 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 5-25 (208 Kings Highway) June G. McNaughton 208 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 6-5 (225 Kings Highway) James Conroy Doig 225 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 6-6 (227 Kings Highway) Callie Mae Thomas 227 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 7-4 (147 Kings Highway) Rebecca Marie Gurholt 147 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 6-7 (233 Kings Highway) William C. Harkness 233 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 7-5 (153 Kings Highway) Patricia Maric Bricker 153 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 6-8 (237 Kings Highway) George Hedrick 237 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 7-6 (307 Ansley St.) Maher Razick 307 Ansley St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 6-9 (239 Kings Highway) William A. Kugel 239 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 7-7 (311 Ansley St.) David Harrell 213 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-235C 6-10 (243 Kings Highway) Charlene Ross 243 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-235D 5-2 (144 W. College Ave) Phyllis Arogeti, Trustee 1332 Jody Lane Atlanta, GA 30329-3522 15-235C 6-11 (247 Kings Highway) Edward George Lalor 247 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-235D 5-3 (138 W. College Ave) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave Decatur, GA 30030 * 15-235C 6-12 (251 Kings Highway) Robert A. Buckley 251 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-235D 5-4 (132 W. College Ave) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave Decatur, GA 30030 * 15-235C 7-1 (135 Kings Highway) Rufus Lowe Mitchell, St. 135 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-235D 5-5 (124 W. College Ave.) Agnes Scott College 141 E. College Ave Decatur, GA 30030 * 15-214D 3-1 (403 S. McDonough St.) Rex T. Kaney 403 S. McDonough St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 3-10 (416 Adams St.) Karen S. Guarino 416 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 3-2 (411 S. McDonough St.) James Currie Burris, Jr. 411 S. McDonough St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 3-11 (414 Adams St.) Sheila A. Hunt 414 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 3-3 (415 S. McDonough St.) David Norman Barrows 415 S. McDonough St 15-214D 3-12 (412 Adams St.) Sheila A. Hunt 412 Adams Street 15-214D 3-4 (419 S. McDonough St.) Elizabeth P. Sheley 419 S. McDonough St 15-214D 3-13 (408 Adams St.) Regina A. Pyke 408 Adams St 15-214D 3-5 (423 S. McDonough St.) Carter Wilson 423 S. McDonough St 15-214D 3-14 (433 S. McDonough St.) Linda Hilsenrad 433 S. McDonough St 15-214D 3-7 (129 W. Davis St.) Michael T. Kepenick 129 W. Davis St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 6-2 (136 W. Davis St.) Vyette Smith Addy 703 Pin Oak Rd Severna, MD 21146 15-214D 3-8 (430 Adams St.) Lifestyle Designs 587 Virginia Ave, NE Atlanta, GA 30306 15-214D 6-3 (132 W. Davis) James S. Van Duys 132 W. Davis St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 3-9 (428 Adams St.) Robin A. Rowell 428 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 6-15 (128 W. Davis) 128 W. Davis St 128 W. Davis St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 6-4 (124 W. Davis St.) Douglas D. Solomon 124 W. Davis St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 1-12 (230 W. Davis St.) Thomas W. Warren 230 W. Davis St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 6-5 (116 W. Davis St.) Lois Summerville 116 W. Davis St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 1-13 (228 W. Davis St.) Larry Moore 207 W. Davis St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 6-6 (112 W. Davis St.) Connie Sosnoff 112 W. Davis St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 6-6 (112 W. Davis St.) Richard L. Cohen 220 W. Davis St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 6-6 (112 W. Davis St.) Viviane M. Haight 507 S. McDonough St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 1 6-6 (112 W. Davis St.) Walter Parker 218 W. Davis St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 6-14 (108 W. Davis St.) Steve M. Miller 108 W. Davis St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 1-16 (503 Adams St.) Bridget Cunningham 503 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 1-9 (312 W. Davis St.) Peter T. Boos 312 W. Davis St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 2-1 (401 Adams St.) Frank Manley 401 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 1-10 (308 W. Davis) Sara B. Allen 308 W. Davis St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 2-2 (407 Adams St.) Kathy I. Badonsky 407 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 1-11 (234 W. Davis St.) Gail A Smith 234 W. Davis St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 2-3 (413 Adams St.) Bruce A Leffingwell, Jr. 413 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 2-4 (417 Adams St.) W. Jason Uchitel 417 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 2-12 (316 Kings Highway) Isabel M. Brown 316 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 2-5 (423 Adams St.) Mary F. Thompson 423 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 2-13 (312 Kings Highway) Willie R. Watson 312 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 2-6 (429 Adams St.) Jeffrey L. Von Hoene 429 Adams St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 2-14 (308 Kings Highway) Stephen G. Weizenecker 308 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 2-7 (219 W. Davis St.) Mrs. John Matthews Smith 219 W. Davis St. Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 2-15 (304 Kings Highway) Joe Glenn 304 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 2-8 (332 Kings Highway) Jeffrey L. Reed 332 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 15-1 (305 Kings Highway) Daniel C. Lee 305 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 2-9 (328 Kings Highway) Susan G. Smith 328 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 15-2 (309 Kings Highway) Anna Lou Davis 309 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 2-10 (324 Kings Highway) Walter Randall 324 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 15-3 (311 Kings Highway) Donald Alexander 311 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 2-11 (320 Kings Highway) Russell T. Griffin 320 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 15-4 (315 Kings Highway) Phillip Coventry 315 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 15-5 (319 Kings Highway) James Everett West 319 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-236B 5-24 (123 Kings Highway) Timothy A. Reed 123 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 15-6 (323 Kings Highway) Anthony Joseph Pepsoski 323 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-236B 5-25 (127 Kings Highway) Charmaine Martin-Millar 127 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 15-7 (327 Kings Highway) Douglas W. Teague 327 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-236B 5-26 (131 Kings Highway) William P. Sumpter 131 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-214D 15-8 (331 Kings Highway) Brian T. DeVinck 331 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 150236B 5-19 (103 Kings Highway) Daniel N. Jolivet 103 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-236B 5-20 (107 Kings Highway) Michael F. Hinson 107 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 15-236B 5-22 (115 Kings Highway) Kim S. Manson 115 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 12-236B 5-23 (119 Kings Highway) Robert L. Holland 119 Kings Highway Decatur, GA 30030 * = Excluding that part zoned Institutional The following properties as indicated by the tax parcel numbers below are also included within the boundaries of the McDonough-Adams-Kings Highway Local Historic District: 

15214D06007, 15214D06009, 15214D06010, 15214D06011, 15214D06016, 15214D01019, 15214D01028.  
3. - Clairemont Avenue Historic District 
18-005A-01  18-005A-01-009 915 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-01-010 923 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-01-012 941 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-01-013 945 Clairemont Avenue 18-005A-02  18-005A-02-010 825 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-02-011 737 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-02-012 729 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-02-013 721 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-02-014 717 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-02-015 715 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-02-016 711 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-02-017 703 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-02-018 657 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-02-019 655 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-02-020 651 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-02-025 831 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-02-026 836 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-02-027 839 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-02-028 843 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-02-029 847 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-02-030 851 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-02-031 855 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-02-032 859 Clairemont Avenue 18-005A-03  18-005A-03-003 810 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-03-004 804 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-03-005 734 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-03-006 728 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-03-007 722 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-03-008 716 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-03-009 710 Clairemont Avenue  18-005A-03-010 704 Clairemont Avenue 18-005A-04  18-005A-04-002 920 Clairemont Avenue 18-005B-01  18-005B-01-001 643 Clairemont Avenue  18-005B-01-002 637 Clairemont Avenue  18-005B-01-003 631 Clairemont Avenue  18-005B-01-004 619 Clairemont Avenue  18-005B-01-005 615 Clairemont Avenue  18-005B-01-006 607 Clairemont Avenue 18-005B-04  18-005B-04-001 658 Clairemont Avenue  18-005B-04-002 650 Clairemont Avenue  18-005B-04-003 640 Clairemont Avenue  18-005B-04-004 634 Clairemont Avenue  18-005B-04-005 626 Clairemont Avenue 18-005B-06  18-005B-06-001 618 Clairemont Avenue  18-005B-06-002 614 Clairemont Avenue  18-005B-06-003 608 Clairemont Avenue  18-005B-06-005 604 Clairemont Avenue 18-005D-05  18-005D-05-001 1024 Clairemont Avenue  18-005D-05-002 1020 Clairemont Avenue  18-005D-05-003 1014 Clairemont Avenue  18-005D-05-004 1010 Clairemont Avenue  18-005D-05-005 1004 Clairemont Avenue  18-005D-05-006 950 Clairemont Avenue 18-005D-06  18-005D-06-005 1027 Clairemont Avenue  18-005D-06-006 1025 Clairemont Avenue  18-005D-06-007 1017 Clairemont Avenue  18-005D-06-008 1003 Clairemont Avenue 18-005G-01  18-005G-01-020 1105-A Clairemont Avenue  18-005G-01-019 1105-B Clairemont Avenue  18-005G-01-018 1105-C Clairemont Avenue  18-005G-01-017 1105-D Clairemont Avenue  18-005G-01-016 1105-E Clairemont Avenue  18-005G-01-015 1105-F Clairemont Avenue  18-005G-01-014 1105-G Clairemont Avenue  18-005G-01-013 1105-H Clairemont Avenue  18-005G-01-012 1105-I Clairemont Avenue  18-005G-01-011 1105-J Clairemont Avenue  18-005G-01-010 1105-K Clairemont Avenue  18-005G-01-009 1105-L Clairemont Avenue  18-005G-01-008 1105-M Clairemont Avenue  18-005G-01-007 1105-N Clairemont Avenue  18-005G-01-006 1105-O Clairemont Avenue  18-005G-01-005 1105-P Clairemont Avenue  18-005G-01-004 1105-Q Clairemont Avenue  18-005G-01-003 1105-R Clairemont Avenue 18-005J-01  18-005J-01-002 102 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-003 202 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-004 302 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-005 301 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-006 201 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-007 101 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-008 104 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-009 204 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-010 304 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-011 303 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-012 203 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-013 103 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-014 106 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-015 206 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-016 306 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-017 305 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-018 205 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-019 105 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-020 108 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-021 208 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-022 308 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-023 307 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-024 207 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-025 107 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-026 110 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-027 210 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-028 310 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-029 309 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-030 209 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-031 109 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-032 112 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-033 212 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-034 312 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-035 311 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-036 211 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-037 111 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-038 114 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-039 214 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-040 314 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-041 313 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-042 213 Ridley Howard Ct.  18-005J-01-043 113 Ridley Howard Ct. 18-006C-01  18-006C-01-008 603 Clairemont Avenue  18-006C-01-009 605 Clairemont Avenue 18-006C-03  18-006C-03-015 517 Clairemont Avenue  18-006C-03-016 519 Clairemont Avenue  18-006C-03-017 521 Clairemont Avenue  18-006C-03-018 523 Clairemont Avenue  18-006C-03-019 525 Clairemont Avenue 18-006C-04  18-006C-04-001 530 Clairemont Avenue  18-006C-04-002 524 Clairemont Avenue  18-006C-04-003 522 Clairemont Avenue  18-006C-04-004 516 Clairemont Avenue  18-006C-04-005 512 Clairemont Avenue  18-006C-04-006 510 Clairemont Avenue  18-006C-04-007 506 Clairemont Avenue  18-006C-04-015 540 Clairemont Avenue 18-006C-05  18-006C-05-001 450 Clairemont Avenue  18-006C-05-002 448 Clairemont Avenue  18-006C-05-003 446 Clairemont Avenue 18-006C-06  18-006C-06-019 124 Hunter Avenue  18-006C-06-020 401 Clairemont Avenue  18-006C-06-021 409 Clairemont Avenue  18-006C-06-022 417 Clairemont Avenue  18-006C-06-023 423 Clairemont Avenue  18-006C-06-025 441 Clairemont Avenue 
431 Clairemont Avenue  18-006C-06-027 449 Clairemont Avenue  18-006C-06-029 119 Erie Avenue 
(Lutheran Church)  18-006C-06-037 455 Clairemont Avenue 15-246D-01  15-246D-01-001 308 Clairemont Avenue  
4. - Ponce de Leon Court Historic District 
Parcel Number Owner Address 246A02-058 Augustus B. Cochran III 117 Ponce de Leon Ct. 246A02-057 Isabel and Mamad Mohtaj 121 Ponce de Leon Ct. 246A02-058 Dave and Valerie Quam 125 Ponce de Leon Ct. 246A02-055 Frances and Dave Moriarty (1994) 129 Ponce de Leon Ct. 246A02-054 Rafael Ocasio (1995) 133 Ponce de Leon Ct. 246A02-053 Richard W. & Donnie M. Trustee Bell 137 Ponce de Leon Ct. 246A02-052 Abraham L. Doctor 141 Ponce de Leon Ct. 246A02-051 Julie Stogner 145 Ponce de Leon Ct. 246A02-050 John & Maria Wallace 149 Ponce de Leon Ct. 246A02-049 Joel & Marie-Claire Webber 153 Ponce de Leon Ct. 246A02-048 Ponce Properties LP 155/157/159/161 Ponce de Leon Ct. 246A02-046 Ponce Properties 205 Ponce de Leon Ct. 246A02-034 John Henry and Andrea Minton 116 Ponce de Leon Ct. 246A02-035 Marjorie Price 120 Ponce de Leon Ct. 246A02-036 Leah Efstathion 124 Ponce de Leon Ct. 246A02-037 Linda McDaniel 128 Ponce de Leon Ct. 246A02-038 James and Gayle Toney 132 Ponce de Leon Ct. 246A02-039 Frank and Jennifer Burdette 136 Ponce de Leon Ct. 246A02-040 David Woodward 140 Ponce de Leon Ct. 246A02-041 Frances I. Hawkins 144 Ponce de Leon Ct. 246A02-042 Donna Stenger 148 Ponce de Leon Ct. 246A02-043 John and Allison Baxley 152 Ponce de Leon Ct. 246A02-044 Matthew Mitchell 156 Ponce de Leon Ct. 246A02-045 John Womack 164 Ponce de Leon Ct.  
5. - Old Decatur Historic District 
Parcel Number Owner Street Address 15246B06-009 Mary J. Karwoski 119 Barry Street 15246B06-010 Scott & Dabney Ketner 121 Barry Street 15246B06-011 Phillip & Kathy Raines 125 Barry Street 15246B06-012 Jon & Lisa Rembert 129 Barry Street 15246B06-013 Crain Hammond 133 Barry Street 15246B06-014 Charles King 143 Barry Street 15246B06-015 Thomas A. & John L. Adams 141 Barry Street 15246B09-001 Martin A. Coles 217 Barry Street 15246B04-013 Lightfoot Properties, LLC 118 Barry Street 15246B04-012 Kent & Juanita Davis 122 Barry Street 15246B04-011 James Carter III 126 Barry Street 15246B04-010 William L. Krause 130 Barry Street 15246B04-009 Kelley Sharkey 136 Barry Street 15246B03-011 JoAnne & Howard Holden 204 Barry Street 15246B03-010 Fred & Pat Enloe 214 Barry Street 15246B03-009 Jay Beard & Martin Coles 218 Barry Street 15246B03-008 Dallin T. Randolf 224 Barry Street 15246B04-015 J. A. Mason 0 Barry Street 15246B04-014 DeKalb County 0 Barry Street 15246B09-002 John L. Adams & Thomas Adams 425 Commerce Drive 15246B09-003 John L. Adams 419 Commerce Drive 15246B09-004 John L. Adams 415 Commerce Drive 15246B09-005 John L. Adams 401 Commerce Drive 15246B05-012 Hillyer Manor Condominium Association 206 Commerce Drive 15247C02-004 Fellinis Pizza Inc. 333 Commerce Drive 15247C03-032 Angeline Holcombe 240 Commerce Drive 15247C03-031 Angeline Holcombe 244 Commerce Drive 15247C03-030 Wiley Holcombe, Jr. 248 Commerce Drive 15247C03-029 Wiley Holcombe, Jr. 252 Commerce Drive 15247C03-028 Mary R. Holcombe 256 Commerce Drive 15246B01-001 Decatur Presbyterian Church 207 Sycamore Street 15246B01-002 Maude Buress Library/DeKalb County 215 Sycamore Street 15246B01-003 City Recreation Center 231 Sycamore Street 15246B03-005 High House Corporation 309 Sycamore Street 15246B03-006 Thomas A. Adams 317 Sycamore Street 15246B03-007 Martha Clinkscales & Eliz. Fairleigh 321 Sycamore Street 15246B05-005 Jeffery St. John 431 Sycamore Street 15246B07-001 Anne & James Evans 503 Sycamore Street 15246B07-002 George & Heather Hamby 511 Sycamore Street 15246A05-005 Decatur First United Methodist Church 304 Sycamore 15246A05-003 Decatur First United Methodist Church 318 Sycamore Street 15246A06-015 MARTA 404 Sycamore Street 15247C03-012 MARTA 729 Sycamore Street 15247B01-001 MARTA 0 Sycamore Street 15247B01-004 MARTA 0 Sycamore Street 15247B01-005 MARTA 0 Sycamore Street 15247B01-007 MARTA 0 Sycamore Street 15247B01-008 MARTA 0 Sycamore Street 15247B01-011 MARTA 0 Sycamore Street 15247C03-020 MARTA 0 Sycamore Street 15247C03-006 City 635 Sycamore Street 15247C03-007 City 645 Sycamore Street 15247C03-008 City 703 Sycamore Street 15247C03-009 City 707 Sycamore Street 15247C03-010 City 0 Sycamore Street 15247C03-011 City 719 Sycamore Street 15246A06-024 Debra Rogers and Lois Kellog 414 Sycamore Street 15246A06-013 Debra Matheson Rogers 414 Sycamore Street 15246A06-012 John & Beverly Herbert 420 Sycamore Street 15246A06-011 William & Leslie Mayer 428 Sycamore Street 15246A06-010 Gary & Etal Martin 506 Sycamore Street 15246A06-009 Thomas & Valerie Maier 510 Sycamore Street 15247D05-029 James F. & Kathy P. Culpepper 618 Sycamore Street 15247D05-028 Sycamore House, LLC 624 Sycamore Street 15247D05-027 Evelyn G. Elizabeth Norman 630 Sycamore Street 15247D05-026 Elizabeth Tipton 636 Sycamore Street 15247D05-025 Joccole Burton 640 Sycamore Street 15247D05-024 Cheryl Sampson 690 Sycamore Street 15247D05-023 Margaret M. or Christopher P. Bussert 704 Sycamore Street 15247D05-022 D. Beth or J. Richard Mahaffey 710 Sycamore Street 15247D05-021 Jean B. Lacey 714 Sycamore Street 15247D05-020 Thomas H. or Dana M. Curtis 716 Sycamore Street 15247D05-019 Michael & Jennifer Leavey 718 Sycamore Street 15247D05-018 William Mealor 724 Sycamore Street 15247D05-017 Alexandria Palmer Parker 730 Sycamore Street 15247D05-016 Richard C. or Jane M. Brown, Trustees 750 Sycamore Street 15247A02-007 Dana Cole 108 Glenn Street 15247A02-006 H. Joanne Freeman or James V. Jucker 830 Sycamore Street 15247A02-005 Daniel Lee or Helga Cuthbert 836 Sycamore Street 15247A03-015 Ellin F. Maxson 103 Mountain View Street 15247A03-006 P. Andrew or Jenny M. Rutledge 924 Sycamore Street 15247B01-003 Janie Margaret Thompson 813 Sycamore Street 15247B01-010 Janie Margaret Thompson 813 Sycamore Street (rear) 15247B01-002 Janie Margaret Thompson 817 Sycamore Street 15247B01-006 Robert C. or Marguerite K. Means 805 Sycamore Street 15247C03-019 John David Lambeth 737 Sycamore Street 15247C03-041 Charles L. or Valerie D. Martin 627 Sycamore Street 15247C03-040 Jerry K. Hise 619 Sycamore Street 15247C03-003 Bruce N. or Karen S. Miller 615 Sycamore Street 15247C03-002 Martin H. Lamb or Rebecca Farmer 609 Sycamore Street 15246A05 001 J-Mar Properties, LLC 305 E Ponce de Leon Avenue 15246A05-002 Decatur First United Methodist Church 317 E Ponce de Leon Avenue 15247D05-001 (portion) Holy Trinity Episcopal Church (This district includes the southwestern portion of the parcel used as a parking lot as of February 5, 2007) 515 E Ponce de Leon Avenue 15246B01-004 Scott Candler Exc. Annie S. Cooper Vance & Kay Cheatham 220 North Candler Street 15246B01-005 Vance & Kay Cheatham 216 North Candler Street 15246B01-006 Woodrow & Peggy Sharkey 210 North Candler Street 15246B01-007 Sue & LeRoy Leonard 204 North Candler Street 15246B04-005 Ruth Feemster 119 North Candler Street 15246B04-006 Thomas & Jo Sedlack 125 North Candler Street 15246B01-007 J. Warner Ragsdale 129 North Candler Street 15246B03-001 Sara & Jerry Artopoeus 203 North Candler Street 15246B03-002 Lee Beth & Milton Burge 209 North Candler Street 15246B03-003 Jay A. Beard or Etal 215 North Candler Street 15246B03-005 North Candler Properties, LLP c/o William Mealor 221 North Candler Street 15246B03-002 John Kools 115 Pate Street 15246B06-017 Phyllis E. Muller 119 Pate Street 15246B04-016 Robert & Adlaide Cloyd 11 Pate Street 15246B04-017 James Weatherby 15 Pate Street 15246B04-018 Paul Vignos 19 Pate Street 15246B04-019 Barbara Gifford 23 Pate Street 15246B06-004 Rorhig Investments, LP 432 East Howard Avenue 15246B06-005 Rorhig Investments, LP 427 East Howard Avenue 15246B06-006 Merrill Draluck 416 East Howard Avenue 15246B06-007 Marci Pine Draluck 410 East Howard Avenue 15246B06-008 Benjamine H. Spencer 402 East Howard Avenue 15246B04-001 BNW Properties, LLC 318 East Howard Avenue 15246B04-002 Bruce Cohen 314 East Howard Avenue 15246B04-003 Bruce Cohen 310 East Howard Avenue 15246B04-004 Bruce Cohen 308 East Howard Avenue Train Depot/City 301 East Howard Avenue 15247C02-007 Elaine P. Mclure 508 East Howard Avenue 15247C02-008 Walter T. Austin Spec 506 East Howard Avenue 15246B07-004 Barbara & Brian Sherman 213 Hillyer Place 15247C11 001 Eilers Andrews 137 Hillyer Place 15246B06-001 Eliers Andrews 130 Hillyer Place 15246B06-002 Design Coup, Inc. 124 Hillyer Place 15246B06-003 Rohrig Investments, LP 118 Hillyer Place 15246E01-001 Beverly S. Forman 210 Hillyer Place 15246E01-002 Davies F. Barry 212 Hillyer Place 15246E01-003 Sonya Youngblood 214 Hillyer Place 15246E01-004 Teresa Watts 16 Hillyer Place 15246E01-005 Bill & Deborah Waugh 218 Hillyer Place 15247C10-001 Ice House Partners, LLC 105 Sycamore Place 15247C02-005 Troy F Howell 120 Sycamore Place 15247C02-006 One Zero Four Sycamore Place, LLC 104 Sycamore Place 15246B07-003 Richard Davis, Jr. 206 Sycamore Place 15247C03-027 Joyce Coney 229 Sycamore Place 15247C03-026 Mary E. Rowell 233 Sycamore Place 15247C03-025 Pamela C. Pryor 237 Sycamore Place 15247C03-024 Rodney & Ann Hunter 241 Sycamore Place 15247C03-023 William Chamberlain 245 Sycamore Place 15247C03-022 Eunice Smith 249 Sycamore Place 15247C03-021 Kathy & David Dorough 253 Sycamore Place 15246B01-012 Carolyn and Earl Glenn 250 East Trinity Place 15246B05-040 Daniel Marin 1 Sycamore Square 15246B05-039 Kathleen Kelly & Robert Katz 2 Sycamore Square 15246B05-038 Ruby Bussey 3 Sycamore Square 15246B05-037 William Reid Jr. 4 Sycamore Square 15246B05-016 Shirley Trussell 5 Sycamore Square 15246B05-017 George & Lynne Gillespie 6 Sycamore Square 15246B05-018 Ann Pittman 7 Sycamore Square 15246B05-019 Maureen & James Golden 8 Sycamore Square 15246B05-020 Shaina Oliphant 9 Sycamore Square 15246B05-021 Rebecca Adams 10 Sycamore Square 15246B05-022 Aleksandra & Dusanke Mandic 11 Sycamore Square 15246B05-023 Billie Greene 12 Sycamore Square 15246B05-024 Selma Morris 13 Sycamore Square 15246B05-025 Walter & Ellen Winn 14 Sycamore Square 15246B05-026 Ari Levine or Tsang Reliang 15 Sycamore Square 15246B05-027 William Steiden 16 Sycamore Square 15246B05-028 Kristian Mihalek 17 Sycamore Square 15246B05-029 Clifford Carrubba 18 Sycamore Square 15246B05-030 Marcia Stiles 19 Sycamore Square 15246B05-031 Marjorie Wynn 20 Sycamore Square 15246B05-032 Derek Spransy 21 Sycamore Square 15246B05-033 Robert Amis, Jr. 22 Sycamore Square 15246B05-034 Eric R. Mickley 23 Sycamore Square 15246B05-035 Jerry Stephenson 24 Sycamore Square 15246B05-036 Jane McLendon 25 Sycamore Square 15246B05-041 Mary & Paul Valente 26 Sycamore Square  
6. - Parkwood Historic District 
Parcel Number Owner Street Address 15 237 08 013 Qamruddin Mansoor 130 E Parkwood Rd 15 237 08 012 Stewart Robert G 136 E Parkwood Rd 15 237 08 011 Brown Bobby C 140 E Parkwood Rd 15 237 08 004 Brown Bobby C 146 E Parkwood Rd 15 237 08 005 Nardin Frederic W III 150 E Parkwood Rd 15 237 07 001 Garner Mary B 154 E Parkwood Rd 15 237 07 002 Gramling Vernon R 158 E Parkwood Rd 15 237 07 003 Pruett Sean K 160 E Parkwood Rd 15 237 07 004 Kennedy James P 164 E Parkwood Rd 15 237 07 005 Weinzierl Timothy J 168 E Parkwood Rd 15 237 07 006 Bliss Charles R 176 E Parkwood Rd 15 237 06 019 Gilmore William Joel 177 E Parkwood Rd 15 237 07 007 Perry Alicia M 184 E Parkwood Rd 15 237 06 018 Beck Corey Allen 185 E Parkwood Rd 15 237 07 008 Dicks Anne H 192 E Parkwood Rd 15 237 07 009 Gordon J Scott 198 E Parkwood Rd 15 237 06 017 Godfrey James Michael 201 E Parkwood Rd 15 237 06 016 Hill Thomas R 207 E Parkwood Rd 15 237 06 015 Thigpen Cynthia M 209 E Parkwood Rd 15 237 06 023 Potts, Dean Or 231 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 06 012 Woodring Larry D 237 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 06 011 Roesel Elizabeth R 241 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 06 010 Fallon Michael T 245 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 06 008 Leake John M Jr. 255 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 05 030 Dorage Stephen J 264 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 05 028 Crum David L 268 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 06 007 Bell Bryan David 271 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 05 027 Ordway Mark D 276 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 05 026 Harvey Prentiss A 284 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 06 006 Day Stephen D 285 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 05 025 Rodriguez Sherry W 292 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 05 024 Clifford Loy Lutton Revocable 300 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 05 023 Lohmeier Gregory L 308 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 05 022 Thompson Paul K 316 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 06 005 Kerimbaev Bolot 317 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 05 021 Trapkin Philip H 324 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 06 004 Shuman Emily 327 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 05 020 Elmore Steven Timothy 328 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 05 019 Willis Richard A 342 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 06 003 Federal National Mortgage Assoc. 349 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 06 002 Arko Robert J 351 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 05 018 Thomas Jefferson Fountain III 352 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 05 017 Downey Robert Emmett 364 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 06 001 Vocarie Andrew 371 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 05 016 Margiasso Nicholas E 374 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 05 015 Hill Carol M 388 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 05 014 Wichmann Thomas 400 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 05 013 Sovine Melanie L 416 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 05 012 Foley Joseph B Jr. 430 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 05 011 Baez Santiago Madelyn A 440 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 05 010 Jarboe James M 452 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 05 009 Benton Stephanie 462 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 05 008 Powell James B III 464 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 05 007 Galifianakis Manuel III 471 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 05 006 Carter Chad 498 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 10 001 Parkwood Garden Club 500 W Parkwood Rd 15 237 07 010 Landow Eden J 120 Parkwood Ln 15 237 07 013 Green Shuli L 124 Parkwood Ln 15 237 08 007 Henrich Christopher C 125 Parkwood Ln 15 237 08 006 Demille Harry L 127 Parkwood Ln 15 37 07 012 Kuhner Timothy 128 Parkwood Ln  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1967 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1967 Code, as updated through August 1990, which are included herein. Sections of the 1967 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1967 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-6 1-1-1-6 1-7 1-12 1-8 70-6 2-3.1, 2-3.2 2-1, 2-2 2-5 2-3 2-10 62-1 2-11 2-4 2-12-2-17 2-31-2-36 2-31-2-49 2-76-2-94 3-1 78-1 3-2-3-4 70-2-70-4 3-5-3-10 78-4-78-9 3-11 78-2 3-12-3-21 78-10-78-19 3-22 78-3 4-1, 4-2 6-1, 6-2 4-3-4-19 6-4-6-20 4-21-4-24 6-21-6-24 4-25 6-3 4-31 6-51 4-32-4-37 6-53-6-58 4-51-4-60 6-81-6-90 4-71-4-78 6-111-6-118 4-91-4-98 6-136-6-143 5-1-5-6 14-2-14-7 5-8-5-13 14-8-14-13 5-15, 5-16 14-14, 14-15 5-17 14-1 5-18, 5-19 14-31, 14-32 5-20 14-2 5-21, 5-22 14-33, 14-34 5-24-5-32 14-35-14-43 51/2-1-51/2-13 22-46-22-56 6-1 18-56 6-2, 6-3 18-2, 18-3 6-5 18-4 6-10 18-5 6-12-6-23 18-201-18-212 6-25-6-27 18-146-18-148 7-1, 7-2 26-2, 26-3 7-4 26-4 7-6-7-13 26-5-26-12 7-14 26-1 71/2-1 34-1 9-4 46-1 9-5-9-8 46-3-46-6 9-9 46-2 9-21-9-24 46-101-46-104 9-25-9-30 46-106-46-111 9-31 46-105 9-40 46-66 9-41-9-49 46-68-46-76 9-50 46-67 10-2, 10-3 82-1, 82-2 10-4-10-7 82-31-82-34 10-7.1 82-35 10-8-10-11 82-36-82-39 10-12 82-3 11-1-11-4 18-76-18-79 11-5 18-1 12-1-12-4 18-101-18-104 121/2-61 22-101, 22-102 121/2-71-121/2-76 22-131-22-136 121/2-91 94-51 121/2-92-121/2-99 94-54-94-61 121/2-100, 121/2-101 94-52, 94-53 14-14 98-11 14-18 98-12 14-26-14-28 98-6-98-8 14-93.2 98-9 14-98 98-4 14-103-14-112 98-46-98-55 14-130, 14-131 98-13, 98-14 14-133 98-15 14-147, 14-148 98-2, 98-3 14-191 98-10 15-1-15-4 42-57-42-60 15-5 42-56 16-4 70-23 16-6.1-16-6.3 70-10-70-12 16-7 70-13 16-14, 16-15 70-14, 70-15 16-16.1 70-22 16-17 70-16 16-24 22-2 16-25 70-5 16-25.1 70-17 16-27 10-31 16-29 22-1 16-35(a)-16-35(d) 54-56-54-59 16-35(e), (f) 54-60 16-35(g)-16-35(i) 54-61-54-63 16-36 70-1 16-38 70-18 16-40 70-8 16-41 54-1 16-43, 16-44 70-19, 70-20 161/2-1, 161/2-2 74-1, 74-2 17-1 18-126 17-1.1 18-127 17-2(a)-17-2(f) 18-171-18-176 171/2-1 62-2 171/2-21 62-32 171/2-22-171/2-28 62-32-62-38 171/2-30 62-31 18-1 70-7 20-1-20-10 86-2-86-11 20-10.1 86-12 20-11, 20-12 86-13, 86-14 20-13-20-18 86-14-86-19 20-19 86-1 20-20-20-25 86-47-86-52 20-26 86-46 20-37-20-40 86-101-86-104 21-1-21-6 90-1-90-6 21-7-21-9 90-31-90-33 21-10-21-22 90-76-90-88 21-23 90-88 21-24 90-90 21-25, 21-26 90-111, 90-112 21-27-21-30 90-131-90-134 21-31-21-36 90-151-90-156 21-37-21-40 90-176-90-179 21-41 90-201 21-41.1 90-202 21-42 90-203 21-43, 21-44 90-231, 90-232 21-45-21-47 90-251-90-253 21-48-21-52 90-291-90-295 21-53, 21-54 90-321, 90-322 21-55 90-341 21-56, 21-57 90-361, 90-362 21-58 90-381 21-59-21-61 90-401-90-403 23-11 66-31 23-12-23-14 66-33-66-35 23-15 66-32  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1967 Code, as updated through August 1990, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1967 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since August 1990, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code  3-17-86(Ord.) App. A, § 8.1- 
App. A, § 8.4 App. A, § 13.5  8- 4-86(Ord.) App. A, § 7.5  8-18-86(Ord.) App. A, § 10.10- 
App. A, § 10.12 App. A, § 11.3  2-16-87(Ord.) App. A, § 8.1  6- 1-87(Ord.) App. A, § 4.1 App. A, § 7.1- 
App. A, § 7.4 App. A, § 9.5 App. A, § 10.9 App. A, § 11.3 App. A, § 13.6  9-21-87(Ord.) App. A, § 7.1, 
App. A, § 7.2 10-19-87(Ord.) App. A, § 4.1 App. A, § 7.1 App. A, § 7.3, App. A, § 7.4 App. A, § 7.6 App. A, § 7.8 App. A, § 8.2 App. A, § 10.13 O-88-02  2-15-88 2 App. A, § 4.1 App. A, § 5.1 App. A, § 5.5- 
App. A, § 5.10 App. A, § 7.6 App. A, § 7.10 App. A, § 13.1, 
App. A, § 13.2 App. A, § 13.6- 
App. A, § 13.8 O-88-05  3-21-88 App. A, § 9.5 App. A, § 13.1, 
App. A, § 13.2 O-88-17  6-20-88 App. A, § 4.1 App. A, § 6.5 App. A, § 7.8- 
App. A, § 7.10 App. A, § 8.1 App. A, § 10.3 App. A, § 10.7 App. A, § 10.10- 
App. A, § 10.13 O-88-21  9-19-88 App. A, § 7.3, 
App. A, § 7.4 App. A, § 7.10 App. A, § 8.1 App. A, § 10.7 App. A, § 10.12 O-89-04  2-20-89 App. A, § 4.1 App. A, § 5.1 App. A, § 5.9 App. A, § 6.12 App. A, § 7.1- 
App. A, § 7.3 App. A, § 7.5 App. A, § 7.7 App. A, § 7.9 App. A, § 8.2 App. A, § 9.4 App. A, § 10.10 App. A, § 11.3 O-89-06  3- 6-89 App. A, § 11.3 O-89-24 11-20-89 98-9 O-89-26 12- 4-89 20-31, 20-32 86-76, 86-77 20-33, 20-34 86-79, 86-80 20-35(A), 20-35(B) 86-81, 86-82 20-36, 20-37 86-83, 86-84 20-39, 20-40 86-85, 86-86 20-41 86-78 O-89-27 12- 4-89 193/4-2, 193/4-3 42-81, 42-82 193/4-4-193/4-6 42-86-42-88 193/4-7-193/4-9 42-83-42-85 O-89-28 12-18-89 1 18-2 O-89-29 12-18-89 1 18-77 O-89-30 12-18-89 1 18-127 O-90-04  4-16-90 78-19 O-90-06  5- 7-90 16-71 22-161 22-187 16-71(a), 16-71(b) 22-189, 22-190 16-71(c), (d) 22-191 16-71(e)-16-71(g) 22-192-22-194 16-71(h), (i) 22-195 16-71(j), 16-71(k) 22-196, 22-197 16-71(l) 22-186 22-198 16-71(m) 22-188 16-72-16-76 22-162-22-166 O-90-05  5-21-90 78-19 O-90-07  6- 4-90 111/2-1 
111/2-2 58-1, 58-2 
58-3 111/2-3(a)-111/2-3(i) 58-31-58-39 111/2-4(a)-111/2-4(d) 58-61-58-64 111/2-5(a)-111/2-5(p) 58-86-58-101 111/2-6(a)-111/2-6(d) 58-131-58-134 111/2-7(a), 111/2-7(b) 58-156, 58-157 111/2-7(c) 58-5 111/2-8 58-4 O-90-08  6- 4-90 1, 2 86-14 3 86-15 O-90-09  6-18-90 art. I, § 1, 78-6, 78-7 art. I, § 2 art. II, § 1 78-2 art. II, § 2 78-15 art. II, § 3 78-19 O-90-10  9-17-90 42-59 O-90-13 12- 3-90 App. A, § 9.5 App. A, § 13.3 O-90-14 12- 3-90 191/2-1-191/2-8 42-111-42-118 O-90-16 12-17-90 70-9 O-91-02  3- 4-91 14-149-14-153 98-111-98-115 14-155 98-116 O-91-03  3- 4-91 98-5 O-91-05 78-17 O-91-06  4-15-91 App. A, § 4.1 App. A, § 7.10 O-91-08  5- 8-91 98-9 O-91-07  5-20-91 74-1 O-91-12  8- 5-91 18-171-18-176 O-91-13  8- 5-91 74-3 O-91-20  9- 3-91 1(121/2-72)-1(121/2-74) 98-81-98-83 O-91-15  9-16-91 1 18-56 O-91-18  9-16-91 18-76 O-91-19  9-16-91 1 18-126 O-91-21 11- 4-91 54-56-54-63 O-92-03  2-17-92 App. A, § 7.1 App. A, § 7.3 App. A, § 7.5, 
App. A, § 7.6 App. A, § 7.8- 
App. A, § 7.10 App. A, § 10.13, 
App. A, § 10.14 O-92-04  3-16-92 74-4 O-92-06  3-16-92 54-56-54-63 O-92-07  4- 6-92 1 18-56 O-92-09  4- 6-92 22-1, 22-2 102-1 22-3-22-7 102-2-102-6 22-8 102-56 22-9 102-58 22-10 102-81 22-11 102-83 102-116 22-12, 22-13 102-36, 102-37 22-14(1)-22-14(3) 102-111-102-113 22-14(5), 22-14(6) 102-114, 102-115 22-15-22-19 102-7-102-11 O-92-08  4- 7-92 1 46-32 O-92-13  5- 5-92 191/4-1-191/4-11 50-31-50-41 191/4-12-191/4-16 50-61-50-65 191/4-17-191/4-20 50-81-50-84 O-92-14  6-15-92 98-9 O-92-17  9-21-92 94-31 O-92-20 12-21-92 121/2-102-121/2-112 22-226-22-236 O-92-21 12-21-92 1 46-107 3 46-108 4 46-110 O-93-04  6-21-93 App. A, § 4.1 App. A, § 10.14 O-93-05  7- 6-93 16-63 54-31 16-64-16-68 54-33-54-37 16-69 54-32 O-93-06  7- 6-93 70-8 O-93-07  8- 2-93 98-4 O-93-09 12-20-93 16-70-16-75 38-31-38-36 O-94-06 78-19 O-94-08  6- 6-94 98-54 O-94-10  7- 5-94 171/2-40 30-31 171/2-41-171/2-44 30-33-30-36 171/2-45 30-32 O-94-11  7- 5-94 98-146 98-148, 98-149 O-94-12  9- 7-94 111/2-10 58-6 O-94-13  9-19-94 16-51-16-53 10-51-10-53 16-54, 16-55 10-57, 10-58 16-56 10-76 16-57 10-59 16-58-16-70 10-77-10-89 16-71-16-73 10-54-10-56 O-94-16 12-19-94 121/2-41-121/2-47 22-76-22-82 O-94-17 12-19-94 1 18-2 2 18-127 3 18-77 4 90-3 5 102-57 102-82 6 6-4 6-7 6-52 12-19-94(Ord.) 111/2-11 58-7 O-95-03  5-14-95 70-24 O-95-06  6-19-95 86-131 O-95-08  7-10-95       Added 42-151-42-176 O-95-09  7-10-95       Added 70-25 O-95-12 10- 2-95 6-55 6-114 O-95-16 12-20-95       Rpld 22-31       Added 22-5-22-40 O-95-17 12-20-95       Added 98-16 O-96-05  4-15-96       Added 6-150-6-154 O-96-07  4-16-96 82-1, 82-2 82-31-82-39 O-96-08  4-15-96       Added 18-130 O-96-10  7- 8-96       Added 86-150-86-169 O-96-11  7-15-96 94-31 O-96-12  8-12-96       Added 98-9(b)(26), (27) O-96-15  9-21-96       Added App. A, §§ 4.1.2.1., 4.1.13.1., 7.6.2.1.9., 7.6.2.1.10., 7.8.2.19., 7.8.2.20., 7.9.2.19., 7.9.2.20., 7.10.2.17., 10.16. O-96-16 12- 2-96 96-1, 96-2, 96-31-96-38 O-97-02  1-21-97       Added App. A, § 10.5.8. O-97-03  1-21-97       Rpld 42-81-42-88       Added 42-80-42-89 O-97-04  1-21-97 1 82-1 2 82-32(4) 3 82-33(g)(10) O-97-05  1-21-97 98-9(b)(2) O-97-07  3- 3-97       Added App. A, §§ 4.1.38.1., 4.1.68.1., 7.9.2.11.1., 10.17. O-97-10  3-17-97       Added App. A, §§ 4.1.23.1., 7.9.2.16.2., 10.18. O-97-12  4- 7-97       Added 22-2(d) O-97-13  4- 7-97 22-15(c) 22-18 22-20, 22-21 22-27, 22-29, 22-30       Rpld 22-22, 22-23, 22-26, 22-38 O-97-15  4-21-97       Added 98-9(b)(31) O-97-18  5-19-97 App. A, § 10.16.       Added App. A, § 7.4.5.1. O-97-19  6- 2-97 42-115(4) O-97-20  6-16-97       Added 86-21 O-97-22 11- 3-97 1 18-2(j) 2       Added 18-6 O-97-26 12- 1-97 98-148, 98-149 O-97-31 12-15-97 98-9(b) O-98-01  1-20-98 1       Added 98-17 O-98-02  2-17-98 98-148, 98-149 O-98-08  3-16-98 I 82-1 II, III 82-32 IV 82-39 O-98-09  3-16-98 96-33(c) O-98-10  6- 1-98 1 58-3 2       Added 58-8 58-86       Added 58-86.1 O-98-11  6-15-98       Added 70-26-70-28 O-98-16  8- 3-98 1 42-59 O-98-18 10- 5-98 98-54(a) O-98-Z-15 11- 6-98       Added App. A, § 10.6.7 O-99-03  3-15-99 1       Added 86-22 O-99-09  5-17-99 1-3 46-108-46-110 O-99-10  9-20-99 98-148, 98-149 O-99-12  7- 9-99 6-2 O-99-13  9- 7-99 86-21 O-99-18 12-20-99 58-8 O-99-19 12-20-99 1, 2 14-31 3-6 14-32-14-35 7 14-38 8 14-40 9       Added 14-30 10       Added 14-32.1 11       Added 14-39.1 12       Added 14-7.1 O-99-20 12-20-99       Added 42-201-42-206 O-99-Z-2  3-15-99       Added App. A, § 10.19 O-99-Z-08  6-19-99 Art. IV, § 1 App. A, § 4.1 Art. XII, § 1 App. A, § 12.5 O-00-04  3-20-00       Added 42-226-42-231 O-00-05  4- 3-00 58-64(i) O-00-06  6- 5-00 98-9(b) O-00-07  7- 5-00 1 42-59(8) O-00-08  7- 5-00       Added 98-18 O-00-12  8- 7-00       Added 98-84 O-00-13  8- 7-00 98-9(b) O-00-Z-5 10-16-00 Art. VII, § 1 App. A, § 7.1.2 Art. VII, § 2 App. A, § 7.2.2 Art. VII, § 3 App. A, § 7.3.2 Art. VII, § 4 App. A, § 7.4.2 Art. X       Added App. A, § 10.20 O-01-02  2- 5-01       Added 58-9 O-01-Z-1  2-20-01 Art. VII, § 1 App. A, § 7.3.3 Art. X, § 1 App. A, § 10.18.1 Art. X, § 2       Added App. A, § 10.18.5 01-04  3- 2-01 98-148, 98-149 O-01-05  3- 5-01 22-37 O-01-06  3- 5-01       Added 74-5 O-01-07  3-19-01       Added 58-9 O-01-09  5- 7-01 1       Rpldd 50-31-50-84 2       Added 42-251-42-304 O-01-10  6- 4-01       Rpld 42-80-42-89       Added 42-80-42-92 O-01-17  9- 4-01 42-59(14) O-01-18 10-15-01       Added 98-177-98-184 O-01-Z-4 10-15-01 Art. VII, § 1 App. A, § 7.5.4 Art. VII, § 2 App. A, § 7.8.3 Art. VII, § 3 App. A, § 7.8.4 Art. VII, § 4 App. A, § 7.9.3 Art. X, § 1 App. A, § 10.10.5 Art. X, § 2.1 App. A, § 10.19.1 Art. X, § 2.2 App. A, § 10.19.3 O-02-02  4-15-02       Added 42-311-42-321 O-02-03  5- 6-02       Added 98-9(b)(32) O-03-02  3- 3-03       Added 98-19 O-03-08  7- 8-03 98-177-98-184 O-03-10  8-19-03 I       Added 22-26 II, III 22-15(a) IV 22-15(b) >O-03-11  1- 1-04       Added 86-23 O-04-02  1-21-04 86-23(d)(7) O-04-04  3-15-04       Added 42-1 O-04-05  3-15-04       Rpld 42-80-42-90       Added 42-80-42-90 O-04-06  3-15-04       Rpld 42-111-42-118       Added 42-111-42-121 O-04-07  3-15-04       Rpld 42-151-42-176       Added 42-151-42-160 O-04-08  3-15-04       Rpld 42-251-42-261       Rpld 42-281-42-285       Rpld 42-301-42-304       Added 42-251-42-261 O-04-09  3-15-04       Added 42-400-42-412 O-04-10  3-15-04       Added 82-50-82-55 O-04-11  3-15-04       Added 90-50-90-505 O-04-13  7- 1-04       Rpld 54-31-54-37       Added 54-31-54-37 O-04-Z-08  7-19-04 1 App. A, § 4.1 App. A, § 7.5.4       Added App. A, § 10.21 O-04-Z-10  8-16-04 1 App. A, §§ 9.2, 9.3 App. A, § 9.5.3 O-04-20  9-21-04       Rpld 18-201       Added 18-201 O-04-21  9-21-04       Rpld 18-202-18-212       Added 18-202-18-212 O-05-01  2- 7-05 Art. I, § 1 6-2 Art. II, § 1 6-57(a) O-05-02  2- 7-05       Added 42-115(d)(7) O-05-05  4- 4-05 Art. I, § 1       Added 14-9(b), (c) Art. II, §§ 1, 2 14-31 Art. II, § 3 14-34 O-05-06  4- 4-05 74-5       Added 74-6 O-05-Z-09 11-21-05 Art. IV, §§ 1-7 App. A, § 4.1 Art. VII, §§ 1-3 App. A, § 7.1.3 Art. VII, §§ 1, 2 App. A, § 7.2.3 Art. VII, §§ 1, 2 App. A, § 7.3.3 Art. VII, §§ 1, 2 App. A, § 7.4.3 Art. VII, § 1 App. A, § 7.5.3 Art. VIII, § 1 App. A, § 8.1.2 Art. VIII, § 2 App. A, § 8.2 Art. X       Added App. A, § 10.3.4 Art. XII       Added App. A, § 12.5.4 O-05-12  6-20-05       Added 46-150-46-155 O-05-13  8- 1-05       Rpld 86-2       Rpld 86-5       Added 86-2       Rnbd 86-6       as 86-5 O-05-15 11- 7-05       Added 98-9(b)(33), (34) O-05-16 12-19-05 Art. I, § 1 6-2 Art. I, § 2       Added 6-25 Art. I, § 3 6-18(4) Art. I, § 3       Added 6-18(5) Art. II, § 1       Added 6-52(10) Art. II, § 2 6-56 Art. II, § 2 6-57(a) Art. III, § 1       Added 6-87(a)(7) Art. III, § 2       Rpld 6-87(b) Art. IV       Added 6-118(c) Art. VII       Added 6-170 O-06-01  2- 2-06       Added 58-10 O-06-Z-03  2-21-06 1       Added App. A, § 6.1.7 O-06-Z-19 12-19-06       Added App. A, § 8.1.12 O-07-01  2- 1-07 6-14(f) O-07-02  1-17-07 62-32(b) O-07-03  1-16-07       Rpld 42-251-42-261       Added 42-251-42-260 O-07-04  2- 5-07       Added 58-11 O-07-13 12- 3-07 1 82-1 2 82-33(a) 3 82-34(b)(2) 4       Rnbd 82-35-82-39       as 82-37-82-41 5       Added 82-35, 82-36 O-07-15 12-17-07 42-113(c)(2)a., b. O-07-Z-15 12-17-07 Art. IV App. A, § 4.1.1 Art. VII App. A, §§ 7.1.9, 7.2.7, 7.2.9 Art. X App. A, § 10.3.4       Added App. A, §§ 10.3.5, 
10.5.9, 10.10.6 O-08-03  2-19-08       Added 54-57.1, 70-29 54-59, 54-60, 54-63 O-08-Z-04  5-19-08 1, 2       Added App. A, §§ 8.1.13, 8.2.24 O-08-09  8- 4-08       Added 70-30 O-08-10  8- 4-08 22-2 O-09-01  2- 2-09 42-115(c)(1) O-09-Z-01  2-17-09 1 App. A, § 5.9.4 2 App. A, § 7.9.2.15 3 App. A, § 7.9.2.16 4 App. A, § 7.9.2.16.2 5 App. A, § 7.9.3.2 6 App. A, § 10.14.1.4 7       Added App. A, § 10.18.4.4 8 App. A, § 10.18.5 O-09-Z-02  4- 6-09 1 App. A, § 5.1 2       Added App. A, § 7.11 O-09-07  6-15-09       Added 98-9(b)(35) O-09-09  7-20-09 98-149(a) O-09-11 10-19-09 98-148(a), 98-149(a) O-09-12 11- 2-09 86-23 O-10-01  3- 1-10 98-84 O-10-03  4- 5-10 42-80-42-90 O-10-04  5- 3-10 98-12 O-08-11  8- 4-08       Added 6-59 O-10-09 12- 6-10       Added 42-500 O-11-10 11-21-11 6-1-6-24, 
6-51-6-60, 6-81-6-90, 
6-150-6-153, 6-170 O-12-05  7- 3-12 6-4(a), 6-5(b), 6-6(a), (c)       Added 6-52(12) O-12-Z-08  8-20-12 Art. IV       Added App. A, §§ 4.1.4.3, 4.1.47.2 Art. VII App. A, § 7.10.2.3 O-12-Z-09  8-20-12 Art. IV       Added App. A, § 4.1.4.2 Art. VII       Added App. A, § 7.1.2.9 Art. X       Added App. A, § 10.10.8 O-12-Z-10 10-15-12 Art. IV       Added App. A, §§ 4.1.15.1, 4.1.14.4 Art. VII App. A, § 7.10.2.3 O-12-07 11- 5-12 6-7(a) 6-9(a), (b) 6-10 6-13(a), (f) 6-14(a) 6-81       Added 6-82(a)(3) O-12-Z-15 12- 3-12 Art. VII App. A, §§ 7.9.16.2, 7.9.3.2       Added App. A, § 7.9.4.a.-e. O-12-Z-16 12- 3-12 Art. X App. A, §§ 10.18.2, 10.18.4 O-12-Z-17 12- 3-12 Art. VIII       Added App. A, §§ 8.1.14, 8.1.15, 8.5 App. A, §§ 8.2.5, 8.2.14-8.2.16 O-12-Z-18 12- 3-12 Art. V App. A, §§ 10.19.1, 10.19.1.1 O-12-Z-19 12- 3-12 Art. IV App. A, §§ 4.1.1, 4.1.1.1 Art. VI       Added App. A, § 6.13 Art. VII App. A, §§ 7.1.2.1.1, 7.1.2.6, 7.1.3, 7.2.2.2, 7.2.2.4, 7.2.3 Art. X App. A, § 10.7.3 O-12-Z-20 12- 3-12 Art. IV App. A, § 4.1.3.5 O-12-Z-21 12- 3-12 Art. IV       Added App. A, § 4.1.40.2 Art. VII       Added App. A, §§ 7.9.2.10.1, 7.9.6, 7.9.7, 7.10.3.4 App. A, §7.10.2.5 O-12-Z-22 12- 3-12 1       Added 14-7.1(5) 2       Added 14-8(4) Art. IV       Added App. A, §§ 4.1.33.1-4.1.33.4, 4.1.68.2 Art. VII       Added App. A, §§ 7.1.2.10, 7.2.2.6, 7.3.3.9-7.3.3.11, 7.4.2.7-7.4.2.10, 7.5.2.7-7.5.2.9, 7.6.2.3-7.6.2.6, 7.7.3.2, 7.7.4.3, 7.8.2.21-7.8.2.24, 7.9.2.21-7.9.2.24, 7.10.2.18-7.10.2.21, 7.11.3.v-7.11.3.y O-12-Z-28 12-17-12 Art. IV App. A, §§ 4.1.4, 4.1.28.b. Art. X       Added App. A, § 10.6.8 O-13-01  2- 4-13       Added 98-20 O-13-02  2- 4-13       Rpld 26-1-26-12       Added 26-1-26-13 O-13-03  2-19-13       Added 6-52(13) O-13-04  2-19-13       Added 98-21 O-13-Z-03  3-18-13 Art. X App. A, § 10.18.6 O-13-07  5- 6-13 1 86-82(1) 2 86-83(b) O-13-16 12-16-13 98-9(b) O-14-06  5- 5-14 1       Rpld 98-148(a), 98-149(a) 2(Att. A)       Added 98-148(a), 98-149(a) 3(Att. A)       Added 98-150 O-14-07  5-19-14 1;       Rpld Ch. 86, Art. III, 86-76-86-86 ;       Added Ch. 86, Art. III, 86-76-86-96 O-14-15  7- 7-14       Added 58-12 O-14-Z-26 11-17-14 1       Rpld App. A, §§ 1.1-14.4 1(Exh. A)       Added UDO, Arts. 1-12, §§ 1.1-12.1 2       Rpld Ch. 2, Art. II, §§ 2-31-2-36       Rpld Ch. 18, §§ 18-1-18-212       Rpld Ch. 42, Arts. IV-XII, §§ 42-80-42-500       Rpld Ch. 46, §§ 46-1-46-155       Rpld Ch. 50(title)       Rpld Ch. 58, §§ 58-1-58-157       Rpld Ch. 66, §§ 66-1-66-35       Rpld Ch. 78, §§ 78-1-78-19       Rpld Ch. 90, §§ 90-1-90-505 3       Rpld Ch. 86, §§ 86-76-86-96 O-15-01  1-20-15 1 UDO, 9.1.19 2 UDO, 9.2.10.C 3 UDO, 9.3.8.C 4 UDO, 9.6.8.F O-15-Z-01  1-20-15 1.1 UDO, 4.2.1, 4.2.3 1.2 UDO, 4.3.1, 4.3.3 1.3 UDO, 4.4.1, 4.4.3 1.4 UDO, 4.5.1, 4.5.3 1.5 UDO, 11.1.1.A.3 1.6 UDO, 11.1.2.A.3 1.7 UDO, 11.1.3.A.3 1.8 UDO, 11.1.4.B 1.9 UDO, 11.2.4.F.7 1.10       Rpld UDO, 11.2.7.C 1.11       Rpld UDO, 11.2.8.F 1.12(Exh. A) UDO, 11.2.10 1.13(Exh. B) UDO, 11.2.11 1.14, 1.15 UDO, 12.1 O-15-11  7-20-15 1       Rpld 98-150 2(Att. A)       Added 98-150 3(Att. B)       Added 98-151 O-15-12 10- 5-15 I       Added 22-7(d) II, III 22-8 IV-VIII 22-15(a)-(d) VIII 22-18 IX, X 22-26(b) XI, XII 22-26(b) XIII, XIV 22-34 XV 22-36 XVI       Added 22-38 XVII       Added 22-41 O-15-13 10- 5-15 I       Rpld 70-6 II       Added 70-6 O-15-14 10- 5-15 1 6-2 2, 6-56(b), (d) O-15-15 10-19-15 UDO, 10.1.2.B O-15-Z-19 12-21-15 1       Added UDO, 1.1.7-1.1.9 O-16-01  2-16-16 1, 2(Att. A) 98-148(a), 98-149(a) 1, 3(Att. B) 98-150(a) O-16-02  2-16-16 1 UDO, 10.1.6.A.1 O-16-08  5-16-16 98-84 O-16-09  5-16-16 1-3 54-31-54-33 O-16-Z-09  6-20-16 1, 2 UDO, 6.2 3-5 UDO, 6.5.7 O-16-12  9-19-16 1, 2(Att. A) 98-148(a), 981-149(a) O-16-13 10-17-16       Added Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 1, § 2-31, Div. 2, §§ 2-36-2-46, Div. 3, §§ 2-50-2-53, Div. 4, §§ 2-56-2-58 O-16-Z-13  8-15-16 1.1 UDO, 6.5.2.B.1 O-17-02  3-20-17 I UDO, 10.1.6.A.1 II UDO, 12.1 O-17-03  3-29-17 1       Added Ch. 86, Art. VII, §§ 86-170-86-202 2       Rpld 86-13 3 86-14(b) O-17-04  5-15-17 1.1 86-3 1.2 86-4 1.3       Added 86-21(f)(11) 1.4 86-24 2       Added UDO, 9.4 O-17-09  6-19-17 1.1-1.4 86-12(a), (b) 2.1, 2.2 UDO, 4.6.5.A, 4.6.7.C.2 3 UDO, 7.1.3 4       Added UDO, 7.6.11 5.1-5.7 UDO, 8.1.2.A, 8.2.2, 8.2.4.B, 8.2.5.B, 8.2.6.D 6.1-6.5 UDO, 11.2.5.B, E-H 7.1, 7.2 UDO, 12.1.1 O-17-10  6-19-17 6-88(a) O-17-13 12-18-17 1 UDO, 10.2.5 2 UDO, 12.1.1 O-18-01  3- 5-18 UDO, 10.1.6 A.2 O-18-03  4- 2-18 98-150 O-18-13  7-16-18       Rpld Ch. 94, Art. III, 94-51-94-61       Added Ch. 94, Art. III, 94-51-94-63 O-18-14  7-16-18 1 6-55(b) 2 6-114  
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws cited in the Related Laws. 
Georgia Law 
Year Page Section this 
Related Law 1986 4475 Art. IV, § 2A 1990 4079 Art. III, § 4 1994 4411 Art. IV, § 2 Art. IV, § 8  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
O.C.G.A. 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-7 1-4 1-3-1 1-2 1-3-1 et seq. 1-2 1-3-2 1-2 1-3-3 1-2 - UDO § 7.2.3 - UDO § 9.4.3 1-4-1 1-2 1-4-6 Ch. 62 1-4-7 Ch. 62 2-10-105 22-24 3-1-1 et seq. Ch. 6 3-3-2(a) 6-51 - 6-81 3-3-20 6-21 3-3-21 6-56 - 6-87 - 6-118 3-3-24.2 6-16 3-3-41 6-53 3-3-42 6-53 3-4-3 6-16 3-4-26 6-53 3-4-80 6-82 3-4-90 et seq. 6-53 3-4-130 Ch. 6, Art. V 3-5-36 6-2 3-5-80 6-53 3-6-60 6-53 4-3-1 et seq. 14-2 4-8-6 14-2 4-8-20 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. II 5-3-29 UDO § 10.1.5 5-4-1, et seq. 2-58 8-2 UDO § 12.1.1A 8-2-20(9) UDO § 10.1.2 8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(X) UDO § 10.1.2 8-2-25(a)(b) UDO § 10.1.2 8-2-111 UDO § 12.1.1I 8-2-26(d) UDO § 10.1.2 8-3-1 6-56 - 6-118 9-11-6 1-2 12-1 UDO § 12.1.1E 12-2-8 UDO § 9.4.4 12-3-1 et seq. Ch. 74 12-4-72 UDO § 9.4.3 12-5-20 UDO § 12.1.1T 12-5-23(a)(5) UDO § 9.4.4 12-5-30(F) UDO § 12.1.1S 12-5-30(f) UDO § 9.4.4 12-7-1 et seq. UDO § 9.4.4 12-7-1 UDO § 9.4.2 - UDO § 9.4.3 12-7-6 UDO § 9.4.3 12-7-6(b) UDO § 9.4.3 - UDO § 9.4.4 12-7-7(e) UDO § 9.4.6 12-7-7.1 UDO § 9.4.3 12-7-8(a) UDO § 9.4.5 - UDO § 9.4.6 - UDO § 12.1.L 12-7-17(9) or (10) UDO § 9.4.5 12-7-19(b)(4) UDO § 9.4.8 12-7-20 UDO § 9.4.5 - UDO § 9.4.8 12-8-20 et seq. Ch. 82 12-8-31.1 Ch. 82 12-8-40.1 Ch. 82 12-8-40.2 Ch. 82 12-8-60 et seq. Ch. 82 12-9-1 et seq. UDO § 6.6.1 15-21-73 1-12 15-21-93 1-12 15-21-100 1-12 15-21-112 1-12 16-1-1 et seq. Ch. 70 16-7-20 et seq. Ch. 26 16-7-25 Ch. 86 16-7-51 82-52 16-11-34 Ch. 98 16-11-36 70-19 16-11-43 Ch. 86 16-11-100 70-14 16-11-129 22-190 - 22-195 16-12-35(c) Ch. 10, Art. II 16-12-37 Ch. 14, Art. II 16-13-1 et seq. 70-24 16-13-2(f) UDO § 12.1.1D 17-6-10 62-1 17-6-11 1-12 - Ch. 98 17-6-50 Ch. 22, Art. III 17-10-3 1-12 17-10-3(e) 1-12 17-15A-2 54-57.1 - 70-29 20-1A-1 UDO § 6.5.2B 21-3-1 et seq. Ch. 34 21-3-125(d) 34-1 25-2 UDO § 12.1.1A 25-2-1 et seq. UDO § 10.2.3 - Ch. 46 - 46-66 25-2-12(b) UDO § 10.2.3 25-2-13 UDO § 10.2.3 25-2-13(b) UDO § 10.2.3 25-9-6 86-190 25-10 UDO § 10.2.5 25-10-2(b)(6)(B) UDO § 10.2.5 25-10-5.1(c)(1) UDO § 10.2.5 25-10-5.1(c)(4) UDO § 10.2.5 26-2-373 54-1 30-4-1 70-26 31-3-4(a)(4) Ch. 54 31-3-6 Ch. 54 31-3-5.2 UDO § 7.2.3 31-7-1(2) 54-31 31-19-1 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. II 32-1-1 et seq. Ch. 86 32-1-8 Ch. 86 32-4-1 et seq. Ch. 86 32-4-92 Ch. 86 32-6-1 et seq. Ch. 86 33-3-5 22-76 33-3-5(1) 22-80 33-8-4 22-79, 22-80 33-8-8 et seq. 22-24 33-8-8.1 Ch. 22, Art. IV - 22-79 33-8-8.2 Ch. 22, Art. IV - 22-80 34-9-1 2-1 35-8-1 et seq. Ch. 62 35-8-20 Ch. 62 35-9-1 et seq. Ch. 62 36-1-16 Ch. 82 36-1-20(a) UDO § 9.5.2 36-3-1 et seq. Ch. 2 36-18-1 UDO § 9.4.3 36-30-2 Ch. 2, Art. III 36-30-8 1-12 36-30-9 Ch. 62 36-30-10 Ch. 86 36-30-11 Ch. 86 36-31-1 et seq. Ch. 2 36-32-1(c) 1-12 36-32-10 6-17 36-33-3 Ch. 62 36-34-1 et seq. Ch. 2 36-34-2 Ch. 2 36-34-3 Ch. 74 - Ch. 86 36-35-1 et seq. Ch. 2 36-35-3 Ch. 2 36-35-6(5) Ch. 22, Art. V 36-35-6(a)(2) 1-12 - Ch. 70 36-37-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 36-37-6 Ch. 2, Art. III 36-39-1 et seq. Ch. 86 36-40-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 36-42-1 UDO § 11.1.7 36-60-1 et seq. Ch. 2 36-60-4 Ch. 98, Art. IV 36-60-12 Ch. 38, Art. II 36-60-13 Ch. 2, Art. III 36-61-11 Ch. 54, Art. III 36-62-1 UDO § 11.1.7 36-64-1 et seq. Ch. 74 36-64-5 Ch. 74 36-66-1 et seq. UDO § 12.1.1Z 36-66-1 UDO § 1.1.4 36-66B-4 UDO § 6.4.3 36-69-1 et seq. Ch. 30 36-71-2 22-6 36-72-1 et seq. Ch. 26 36-80-1 et seq. Ch. 2 36-81-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 36-81-3-36-81-6 Ch. 2, Art. III 38-3-1 et seq. Ch. 30 38-3-70 et seq. Ch. 30 40-1-1 Ch. 62 - 98-1 40-2-95 Ch. 102 40-5-58 102-81 40-5-64 102-81 40-5-100-40-5-104 UDO § 12.1.1P 40-6-1 et seq. Ch. 98 40-6-2-40-6-395 98-1 40-6-4 Ch. 102 40-6-7 Ch. 98 40-6-14 Ch. 42, Art. III 40-6-20(a) 98-179 40-6-20(f)(7) 98-179 40-6-76 Ch. 98 40-6-183 Ch. 98 - Ch. 98, Art. V 40-6-200 et seq. Ch. 98 40-6-206 Ch. 98, Art. IV 40-6-220 et seq. Ch. 98 40-6-247 Ch. 46 40-6-249 Ch. 82 40-6-253.1 Ch. 82 40-6-276 Ch. 102 40-6-290 et seq. Ch. 98 40-6-371 Ch. 98 40-6-371(a)(1)-(3) Ch. 98 40-6-371(a)(19) Ch. 30 40-6-372 Ch. 98 40-6-372-40-6-376 98-1 40-6-395 Ch. 62 40-8-70(b) Ch. 98 40-8-71(c) Ch. 42, Art. III 40-11-1 et seq. Ch. 98, Art. IV 40-13-1 et seq. Ch. 98 40-13-3 Ch. 98 40-13-21(a) 1-12 - Ch. 98 41-1-1 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. II - Ch. 54, Art. III 41-2-7 Ch. 54, Art. III 41-2-7-41-2-17 UDO § 10.1.5 - UDO § 12.1.1P 41-2-9 et seq. Ch. 54, Art. III 41-2-13 UDO § 10.1.5 41-39A UDO § 10.1.5 42-8-62 102-81 title 43 22-18 title 43, ch. 34 22-6 43-14-8.1 Ch. 38, Art. II 43-32-1 et seq. 22-2 44-1-13 Ch. 98, Art. IV - 98-81 44-3-130 et seq. Ch. 26 44-10-1 et seq. 44-317 - UDO § 11.1.6 44-10-1 UDO § 5.2.1 44-12-130 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. VIII 45-6-6 Ch. 2 45-6-7 et seq. Ch. 2 45-8-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 45-10-1 Ch. 2 45-11-1 1-10 - Ch. 62 45-11-1(d) Ch. 62 45-11-3 Ch. 62 45-11-5 Ch. 62 45-11-8 Ch. 22, Art. III title 46, ch. 3 22-24 46-7-15 22-24 46-8-197 Ch. 98 47-17-60 et seq. 1-12 tit. 48 R L § 7 48-2-40 R L § 6 48-3-9 UDO § 12.1.1I 48-4-78 UDO § 10.1.5 48-4-80 UDO § 10.1.5 48-4-81 UDO § 10.1.5 48-5-1 et seq. Ch. 94, Art. II 48-5-40 R L § 1 48-5-50.1 R L § 2A 48-5-52 R L § 1 48-5-350 et seq. Ch. 94, Art. II 48-5-355 22-24 48-5-356 22-24 48-5-358 Ch. 86 48-5-440 et seq. Ch. 66 48-5-492 Ch. 66 48-6-93 Ch. 22, Art. VI - 22-24 48-7-1 et seq. R L § 1 48-8-50 6-141 48-13-5 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. II 48-13-5-48-13-26 22-14 48-13-7 22-5 48-13-7 22-8 48-13-9 22-7 48-13-9(c)(1)-(18) 22-12 48-13-50 et seq. Ch. 94, Art. III 48-13-51(a)(3) 94-55 48-13-51(b) 94-51 - 94-52 48-13-51(b)(5)(A) 94-55 48-13-51(b)(5)(B) 94-55 48-13-51(h) 94-54 48-13-52 94-58 48-13-53.1 94-61 48-13-53.2 94-58 48-13-53.3 94-61 48-13-53.4 94-56 48-13-58 94-62 48-13-58.1 94-62 48-13-59 94-62 48-13-60 94-62 48-13-61 94-62 48-13-62 94-56 - 94-62 48-13-63 94-62 48-17-1 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. II 49-5-3 54-31 - UDO § 12.1.1A - UDO § 12.1.1P 50-5-100 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 50-8-7.3 Ch. 82 50-12-40 et seq. Ch. 74 50-14-1 Ch. 2 50-14-1(d) Ch. 2 50-14-3 Ch. 2 50-18-90 Ch. 2 50-18-99(e) Ch. 2 50-36-1 22-38 51-2-7 Ch. 14, Art. II 51-7-1 et seq. Ch. 62 51-7-20 Ch. 62 51-7-40 Ch. 62 53-5-1 et seq. R L § 4 319-1-4 48-313  
