THE CODE OF GRIFFIN, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Adopted: January 8, 2002 
Effective: January 8, 2002 
____________ 
Published in 2001 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
GRIFFIN, GEORGIA 
(2019) 
____________ 
Douglas S. Hollberg, City-at-Large 
Cynthia Ward, District 1 
Cora Flowers, District 2 
Holly Murray, District 3 
David Brock, District 4 
Truman L. Tinsley III, District 5 
Rodney McCord, District 6 
City Commission 
____________ 
Kenny Smith 
City Manager 
____________ 
Teresa Watson 
Executive Assistant to the City Manager 
____________ 
Andrew J. Whalen, III 
City Attorney 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
GRIFFIN, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Dr. Geraldine Jackson 
Chairman of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Dick Slade 
Thomas J. Perdue 
G. Carlton Imes, III 
Joanne Todd 
Anthony Dickson 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Ron H. Rabun 
City Manager and Secretary to the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Andrew J. Whalen, III 
City Attorney 
____________ 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1968 Code, as supplemented through December 9, 1997, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1968 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of H. Palmer Carr, Code Attorney, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Andrew J. Whalen, III, City Attorney for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Griffin, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Griffin, Georgia. 2001. 
ORDINANCE No. 01-22 
An Ordinance of the City of Griffin, Georgia Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Griffin; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing for Enforcement and Penalties for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Future Amendments of Said Code; Providing an Effective Date; and for Other Purposes. 
Be It Ordained By the Board of Commissioners of the City of Griffin, Georgia, and It Is Established as Follows: 
Section 1. The writing entitled "The Code of Griffin, Georgia", as published by Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida, 2001, consisting of Chapters 1 through 102, is adopted. A true and correct copy of said Code is attached hereto and by reference made a part of this Ordinance, as if set out in its entirety. The original of said Code shall be maintained in the public records of the City, with copies thereof available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price, as from time to time established by resolution of the Board of Commissioners. The original purchase price for a copy of said Code shall be $250.00. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before May 15, 2001, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. The repeal provided for in this section shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 3. The City Manager is charged by Charter with administration and enforcement of all ordinances. Whenever the City Manager has delegated administration and/or enforcement to another officer or employee of the City, any act by such delegate shall be of the same force and effect as if performed by the City Manager. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of violating any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed One Thousand ($1,000.00) Dollars or confinement not to exceed six (6) months. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City Manager may pursue other remedies such as abatement of public nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation or suspension of licenses and permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form of a written ordinance so as to indicate the intention of the Board of Commissioners to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated into the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and/or amendments. All amendments to the Code shall be published in a form suitable for incorporation into the Code and supplements published at least quarterly. The cost for supplements shall be initially established at $75.00, as may be revised by resolution of the Board of Commissioners from time to time adopted. 
Section 6. In accordance with O.C.G.A. Sec. 36-80-19(d), the Code shall be made available by posting on the Internet; or a published written copy furnished promptly to the State Law Library, with a copy to the Spalding County Law Library. If published on the Internet, the Code shall be supplemented at least quarterly; copies furnished to the State Law Library and Spalding County Law Library shall be supplemented at least annually, without charge. 
Section 7. Ordinances heretofore adopted on or after May 16, 2001, that amend or refer to ordinances that had been codified in previous general codifications shall be construed to amend or refer to like provisions of this Code and are saved from repeal by this Ordinance. 
Section 8. This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its adoption on second and final reading. 
First Reading: December 11, 2001 
Second Reading: January 8, 2002  
PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS 
Act No. 745 (H.B. 1735) 
2003-2004 Session of the 
Georgia General Assembly 
Effective Date: October 4, 2004 
An Act Creating a New Charter 
For the 
CITY OF GRIFFIN, GEORGIA  
ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 
 
Section 1.1. - Corporate name. 
The territory hereinafter designated in Spalding County, Georgia, is hereby reincorporated by the enactment of this charter under the name and style of the City of Griffin, Georgia, a body politic and corporate, having the power to sue and be sued, with all the powers hereinafter specified, and all other powers, duties, rights, and immunities as are granted by the Constitution and general laws of the State of Georgia to municipal corporations. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
Section 1.2. - Corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of said city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of the city shall at all times be shown on a map, to be retained permanently as a public record in the office of the city manager at the city hall, Griffin, Georgia, and designated as the "Official Map of Griffin, Georgia." The original of such map, which is expressly by reference incorporated herein as an integral part of this charter, shall be signed by the chairperson of the commission and be attested thereto by the secretary. All future alterations of said map, as directed by the commission by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundary, shall be signed by the chairperson and secretary. Reproductions of such map, whether hand-drawn, photographic, or digital, when certified by the secretary to the commission, shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
Section 1.3. - Corporate powers. 
(a)  This city shall have all the powers possible for any municipal corporation to have under the present and future Constitution and laws of this state as completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited, reserved, or limited by this charter, general law, or the present or future Constitution of this state. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be liberally construed in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
Section 1.4. - Exercise of corporate powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter and general law. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or in the manner provided by pertinent laws of this state. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
Section 1.5. - Adoption of legislation; force and effect of ordinances; publication and distribution. 
(a)  Acts of the commission which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. The power to adopt an ordinance amending this charter shall only be derived from subsection (b) of Code Section 36-35-3 of the O.C.G.A. or any successor law relating to the home rule powers of municipal corporations. All other proposed ordinances shall be introduced in writing, in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "It is hereby ordained by the Board of Commissioners of the City of Griffin, Georgia, and established as follows:" and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  A proposed ordinance may be introduced by any member of the commission, including the chairperson or presiding officer, at any meeting of the commission. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected in accordance with procedural rules which the commission may establish; provided, however, that an ordinance shall not be finally adopted the same day it is introduced, except for ordinances whose subject matter involves a zoning decision, the annexation of territory into the boundaries of the city, or an emergency matter as provided in this charter. Upon the introduction of any proposed ordinance, the secretary shall distribute copies to each member of the commission, the city manager, and the city attorney and shall make copies thereof available for public inspection and copying as provided by law. Upon adoption of any ordinance, the secretary shall authenticate its adoption by the secretary's signature and record the original in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose, which shall be a public record of the city and available for public inspection and copying at all reasonable times. All ordinances shall become effective upon their final adoption unless a later effective date is specified therein. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COMMISSION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Act 288, H.B. 911, adopted March 20, 2018, passed by the voter's at the election of May 22, 2018 , amended Art. II of the Charter in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 2.1—2.13, pertained to commission and commissioners, and derived from 2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232; Ord. No. 11-04, Exhs. A—C, adopted May 24, 2011. 
 
Section 2.1. - Corporate and governing authority. 
The municipal government of the city shall consist of a commission of seven citizens, who shall be known as the 'Mayor and Commissioners of the City of Griffin, Georgia,' hereafter referred to collectively as the 'commission.' The commission shall be the legislative and governing authority of the city. Except as otherwise provided by law or this charter, the commission shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city, but no individual member, including the person holding the office of mayor, shall have or exercise any power under this charter, except as provided herein. Members of the commission shall possess the qualifications and be elected in the manner provided by general law and this charter; provided, however, that members of the commission in office on the effective date of this charter shall in all respects be successors to and a continuation of the governing authority elected under the prior charter and shall serve the terms for which elected. The members of the commission shall devote as much of their time to the office as may be necessary. 
( Act 288, H.B. 911, 3-20-2018, election of 5-22-2018 )  
Section 2.2. - Qualification and election of mayor and commissioners. 
(a)  Any person who is a citizen of this state, has attained the age of 18 years, and has at least 12 months' residency within the city shall be eligible to be elected to the office of mayor or commissioner; provided, however, that no person who is not a qualified elector of the city, who has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude unless that person's civil rights have been restored, who holds an office of trust under the government of the United States, this state, or any foreign state which by the laws of the State of Georgia he or she is prohibited from holding, or who is the holder or receiver of public money of this state or any county, school district, or municipality thereof who has refused or failed when called upon after reasonable opportunity to account for and pay over the same to the proper officer, shall be eligible to hold the office of mayor or commissioner. 
(b)  Candidates for Districts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 shall have resided within their respective election district for at least six months on the date of qualifying. Commissioners shall remain residents of their respective election districts throughout their terms of office. 
(c)  Candidates for mayor shall possess all of the qualifications for the office of commissioner but may reside in any election district of the city. 
(d)  Only those qualified electors residing within a city election district may vote for candidates for commissioner from their corresponding district. All qualified electors of the city may vote for candidates for mayor. 
(e)  Elections for the offices of mayor and commissioners shall be held and conducted by the Griffin-Spalding Board of Elections and Registration in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. or other such laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(f)  The mayor and commissioners shall serve a term of four years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. Before assuming the duties of the office or exercising the powers thereof, a newly elected mayor or commissioner shall be sworn before any federal or state judicial officer, or any officer of this state duly authorized to administer oaths, at any time following certification of his or her election. Except for a mayor or commissioner elected to fill an unexpired term, a newly elected mayor or commissioner shall take office on January 1 following his or her election. 
(g)  The mayor and commissioners shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by an ordinance enacted in accordance with Code Section 36-35-4 of the O.C.G.A. 
(h)  Those members of the city council in office on the effective date of this section shall serve out the terms of office to which they were elected. In the November, 2019, municipal election, no election shall be held for the at-large commissioner from District 7 and, on and after January 1, 2020, such position shall be abolished. An election for the position of mayor shall be held at the November, 2019, municipal election and the person elected mayor at such election shall take office on January 1, 2020. 
( Act 288, H.B. 911, 3-20-2018, election of 5-22-2018 )  
Section 2.3. - Districts established; apportionment of election districts based upon population. 
(a)  The original apportionment of the city into six single-member election districts was in accordance with the consent decree in REID, et al. v. MARTIN, et al. , Civil Action File No. C-84-60N, U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Georgia. Thereafter, the commission, following publication of each United States decennial census, has reapportioned election districts in accordance with Code Section 36-35-4.1 of the O.C.G.A. The current reapportionment plan is set forth at Ga. L. 2012, p. 5743. 
(b)  Future reapportionment of election districts shall be adopted by a home rule ordinance enacted in accordance with paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of Code Section 36-35-3. Such ordinance shall incorporate by reference a reapportionment plan based upon official census tract and block references to the areas included within each district, using the criteria set forth in Code Section 36-35-4.1 of the O.C.G.A. For future reference, a map illustrating election districts may be published as an appendix to the Code of Griffin, Georgia. 
( Act 288, H.B. 911, 3-20-2018, election of 5-22-2018 )  
Section 2.4. - Majority vote required. 
No candidate for the commission shall be declared elected until he or she shall have received a majority of the votes of all qualified electors voting in the election. 
( Act 288, H.B. 911, 3-20-2018, election of 5-22-2018 )  
Section 2.5. - Oath of office. 
Upon entering each term of office, the mayor and commissioners shall take and subscribe to the following oath: 
'I do solemnly swear and affirm that I will faithfully and honestly discharge the duties of the office of (mayor/commissioner) of the City of Griffin, Georgia, to the best of my skill and knowledge, in accordance with its charter and all applicable laws. I do further swear that I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due this state or any political subdivision or authority thereof, and I will well and truly account for and pay over all public moneys and property that may come into my hands during my term of office. I do further swear that I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, this state, or any foreign state which by the laws of the State of Georgia I am prohibited from holding. I do further swear that I am qualified to hold the office of (mayor/commissioner) of the City of Griffin according to the Constitution and laws of Georgia. I do further swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Georgia. I do further swear that I am a resident of the district from which I have been elected and have been a resident of the district for the time required by the Constitution and laws of this state. So help me God.' 
( Act 288, H.B. 911, 3-20-2018, election of 5-22-2018 )  
Section 2.6. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies in office. 
(a)  The office of mayor or commissioner shall become vacant upon the occurrence of any event specified by the Constitution or general laws of this state or upon the incumbent losing the qualifications required for holding the office. 
(b)  A vacancy in the office of mayor or commissioner shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, by appointment of the mayor and commissioners, if less than 12 months remains in the unexpired term; otherwise, by a special election, as provided in Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., or other such laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
( Act 288, H.B. 911, 3-20-2018, election of 5-22-2018 )  
Section 2.7. - Quorum for commissioners meeting; voting; conflicts of interest. 
(a)  Four commissioners, or three commissioners and the mayor, shall constitute a quorum. In order to enact ordinances or take action, the vote of a majority of those present shall control. An abstention, except when based upon the member's disqualification for announced conflict of interest or other legal grounds, shall be counted as an affirmative vote. Except when a roll call vote is requested by any member, votes may be cast by voice ('aye' or 'nay') or by show of hands. The mayor shall announce all votes and declare each matter approved or rejected. 
(b)  No member of the mayor and commissioners shall vote or act upon, or seek to influence the approval or rejection of, any ordinance, resolution, contract, or other matter within the official jurisdiction of the city in which that person is financially interested. Any member having a financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any ordinance, resolution, contract, or matter pending before or within a department of the city shall disclose such interest, in writing, to the mayor and commission at the earliest opportunity and disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. 
( Act 288, H.B. 911, 3-20-2018, election of 5-22-2018 )  
Section 2.8. - Meetings of the commission. 
(a)  The commission shall hold regular meetings on the second and fourth Tuesday of each month at such times as set by ordinance, which meetings shall be open to the public, except as allowed by law; shall keep minutes of their proceedings; and shall record all their actions therein. They may meet at such times and as often in extra called meetings as any three of them or the mayor may designate or call. 
(b)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the mayor and commission may convene on call of the mayor or any two commissioners, provided that such emergency meeting is called in accordance with the Georgia open meetings law, Code Section 50-14-1, et seq., of the O.C.G.A. At such emergency meeting, as the only order of business, the mayor and commission may consider and adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rates charged by the city for any utility services provided; or authorize the borrowing of money, except temporary borrowings made in anticipation of taxes. An emergency ordinance shall be proposed in the form required for ordinances generally and shall contain a declaration stating in clear and precise terms the conditions that constitute the emergency warranting the meeting and action taken therein. An emergency ordinance shall require the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of those members eligible to vote at the meeting. It shall become effective immediately or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following its enactment unless affirmatively ratified at the next regular meeting of the commission. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
( Act 288, H.B. 911, 3-20-2018, election of 5-22-2018 )  
Section 2.9. - Rules of procedure. 
The mayor and commissioners may adopt rules of procedure and orders of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and general law. Procedural rules and similar administrative matters affecting governance of the city may be adopted by resolution instead of ordinance. 
( Act 288, H.B. 911, 3-20-2018, election of 5-22-2018 )  
Section 2.10. - Inquiries and investigative powers. 
(a)  The mayor and commissioners shall exercise general legislative oversight over all appointed officers, departments, agencies, and employees of the city and shall have the right, from time to time as a majority of such commission deems necessary, to call upon such officers and employees for an accounting of their actions in the performance of their official duties. 
(b)  Following the adoption of an authorizing resolution defining the scope thereof, the mayor and commissioners may conduct inquiries and make investigations into the affairs of the city, its elected and appointed officers, and the conduct of any department, agency, or employee thereof, and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony under oath or affirmation, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
( Act 288, H.B. 911, 3-20-2018, election of 5-22-2018 )  
Section 2.11. - Mayor pro tem. 
The mayor shall annually appoint a member of the commission to serve as mayor pro tem and to act in the mayor's absence, disability, or disqualification. The commissioner so appointed shall have no additional powers or duties, except those of mayor when acting as mayor pro tem. 
( Act 288, H.B. 911, 3-20-2018, election of 5-22-2018 )  
Section 2.12. - Duties of the mayor. 
The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the commission. The mayor shall be entitled to vote on all questions, motions, or matters brought before the mayor and commissioners for action. The mayor or, in his or her absence, the mayor pro tem and the city manager shall sign all orders, checks, and warrants for the payment of any moneys out of the treasury of the city and shall execute on behalf of the city all contracts, deeds, and other obligations. The mayor may also perform those perfunctory duties of the office, but shall not act on behalf of or bind the city without express authority or approval of the commission as directed by ordinance or resolution. Except for the power to fill appointments as authorized by this charter, general or local laws, or intergovernmental agreements, the mayor shall exercise no powers or authority beyond those granted under this charter. When this charter, a general law or local act, ordinance, resolution, or contract makes reference to the chairperson, it shall hereafter be deemed a reference to the mayor. The commission, by the vote of at least four commissioners, may direct the mayor to sign any order, check, warrant, contract, deed, or other obligation and, upon such vote taken for that purpose, it shall be the duty of the mayor to execute the same. The mayor shall also accept personal service of process on behalf of the city and its governing body, but not on behalf of any commissioner when sued in a personal capacity. 
( Act 288, H.B. 911, 3-20-2018, election of 5-22-2018 )  
Section 2.13. - Secretary to the commission; other officers. 
The city manager shall serve as secretary to the commission, whose duties shall require his 204 or her attendance at all meetings, the recording of minutes of proceedings, serving as 205 custodian of all public records and the seal of the city, and such other duties as assigned by 206 the commission by ordinance or resolution. The secretary shall perform all duties and 207 responsibilities imposed by general law on the clerk of a municipal corporation. The 208 commission may appoint such subordinate officers, as needed, and define the duties and 209 compensation thereof by ordinance or resolution. 
( Act 288, H.B. 911, 3-20-2018, election of 5-22-2018 )  
ARTICLE III. - APPOINTIVE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
 
Section 3.1. - Officers other than commissioners enumerated. 
There shall be as appointive officers of the City of Griffin the following: 
(1)  City manager; 
(2)  City attorney; 
(3)  Judge of the municipal court; 
(4)  Solicitor of the municipal court; 
(5)  Municipal court clerk; 
(6)  Municipal elections superintendent and municipal registrar; and 
(7)  Such additional offices as the commission, by ordinance, shall create, defining therein the duties and compensation for such officers. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
Section 3.2. - City manager. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and shall fix the manager's compensation. The manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of administrative and professional qualifications and experience, without political favor or affiliation, and shall, at a minimum, be: 
(1)  The holder of a bachelor's degree or higher in management, public administration, public finance, or any comparable field; 
(2)  At least 21 years of age; 
(3)  Of good moral character; and 
(4)  Free of a history of conviction for any felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(b)  The city manager shall be the administrative and fiscal head of the city's government and shall devote his or her entire time and attention to the office. Except for purposes of inquiries and investigations under Section 2.10 of this charter, commissioners shall deal with all officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the manager solely through the manager, and neither the commission nor its individual members shall give orders or direction to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately, other than the city manager. 
(c)  By written designation filed in the city's minutes, the manager shall designate, subject to approval of the commission, a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the manager during the manager's temporary absence or physical or mental disability. During any prolonged absence or disability, the commission may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the manager shall return or the manager's disability shall cease. 
(d)  The city manager shall be responsible to the commission for the administration of all city affairs placed in the manager's charge under this charter, by general law or by ordinance or resolution of the commission. As the chief administrative officer, the manager shall appoint and fix the compensation and benefits for all administrative department managers, subject to approval of the commission, and approve the hiring of all subordinate employees; provided, however, that all such managers and employees shall serve for an indefinite term at the pleasure of the city manager, unless provided otherwise by personnel ordinance. Upon approval of the commission, by resolution, and within the constraints of the annual operating budget, the manager shall establish, and from time to time revise, the administrative organization of the city. As necessary for the good of the city, the manager may suspend or remove all administrative department managers and employees, except as otherwise provided by law or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this charter. 
(e)  The city manager is employed at will and may be summarily removed from office, without cause or notice, at any time upon the affirmative vote of at least four members of the commission. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
Section 3.3. - Duties of the city manager. 
As the chief administrative officer the city manager shall: 
(1)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, unless otherwise restricted by law or this charter; 
(2)  Attend all meetings of the commission and have the right to participate in discussion, but not vote; provided, however, that the manager shall have no right to attend closed meetings of the commission held for the purpose of deliberating upon the appointment, compensation, discipline, or removal of the manager; 
(3)  See that all laws, provisions of this charter, and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed and performed, subject to delegation to subordinate officers, managers, and employees. It shall be the duty of the manager to supervise performance by his or her delegates at all times; 
(4)  Prepare and submit to the commission a proposed annual operating budget and capital project budgets for the city and its utilities sufficiently in advance of the fiscal year. Upon approval by the commission, the budgets shall serve as an appropriations ordinance for the line items indicated therein; 
(5)  Submit to the commission on a timely basis monthly financial operating reports and an annual audit showing the financial position of the city, its departments, and its utilities at fiscal year end; 
(6)  Make monthly written reports to the commission of administrative activities concerning the operations of the city, its departments, and its utilities under the manager's supervision and such other reports as the commission may require or request; 
(7)  Keep the commission fully informed as to the financial condition of the city and its future needs and make recommendations to the commission concerning the financial affairs of the city; and 
(8)  Perform such other duties as are specified in this charter, by general law, or as from time to time are required by the commission by ordinance or resolution. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
Section 3.4. - City attorney. 
There shall be appointed by the commission a city attorney, who shall hold office and serve at will. The city attorney shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia in good standing, having at least five years' experience in the practice of law and familiarity in the field of municipal law. The city attorney shall perform the duties of chief legal officer of a municipal corporation, whose duties shall include prosecution and defense of legal actions brought in the name of or filed against the city, its officers, and its employees in any court; code enforcement and abatement of public nuisances; drafting and review of ordinances, contracts, and other legal documents; general counsel to the commission and city manager; and legal oversight over operations of the city, its departments, and its utilities. The commission shall fix the compensation for the office and determine, by ordinance or contract, whether the officer shall be full time or part time; provided, however, that the city attorney shall at all times be subject to the Georgia Rules of Professional Conduct. The city attorney may be removed from office at any time, without cause or notice, upon the affirmative vote of at least four members of the commission. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
Section 3.5. - Municipal court judge. 
There shall be appointed by the commission a judge of the municipal court, who shall serve at the pleasure of the commission, subject to the Rules of the Judicial Qualifications Commission. Such judge shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia in good standing, having at least seven years' experience in the practice of law. The judge shall preside over all sessions of the Municipal Court of the City of Griffin, Georgia, and perform all judicial functions required by general law and this charter. The commission shall fix the compensation for the office by ordinance or resolution. The judge may be removed from office at any time, without cause or notice, upon the affirmative vote of at least four members of the commission. The judge may appoint a qualified attorney to serve as judge pro tempore during his or her absence or disability or to handle specific cases in which the judge may have a conflict. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
Section 3.6. - Municipal court solicitor. 
There shall be appointed by the commission a solicitor of the municipal court, who shall serve at the pleasure of the commission, subject to the Georgia Rules of Professional Conduct. Such solicitor shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia in good standing, having at least three years' experience in the practice of law. The solicitor shall prosecute all misdemeanors and quasi-criminal or traffic ordinance violations before the municipal court. The commission shall fix the compensation for the office by ordinance or resolution. The solicitor may be removed from office at any time, without cause or notice, upon the affirmative vote of at least four members of the commission. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
Section 3.7. - Municipal court clerk. 
There shall be appointed by the commission a clerk of the municipal court, who shall serve at the pleasure of the commission. Such officer shall possess the qualifications established by law and complete such certification requirements, within the time allowed by law, as may now or hereafter be required for the office. The commission shall fix the compensation for the office by ordinance or resolution. The municipal court clerk may be removed from office at any time, without cause or notice, upon the affirmative vote of at least four members of the commission. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
Section 3.8. - Municipal elections superintendent and municipal registrar. 
There shall be appointed by the commission a municipal elections superintendent, who shall also serve as municipal registrar; provided, however, that where the duties of municipal election superintendent are being performed, under ordinance or contract, by the Spalding County Board of Elections and Registration, such officer shall only perform the duties of municipal registrar as established in Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code." This officer shall serve at the pleasure of the commission, who shall fix the compensation for the office by ordinance or resolution. This officer may be removed from office at any time, without cause or notice, upon the affirmative vote of at least four members of the commission. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
Section 3.9. - Assistant appointive officers. 
Upon recommendation of the city manager and approval by the commission, the appointive officers named or described above may designate deputies or assistants, as necessary, and delegate such duties and functions of the office, in writing, to such deputies or assistants as the officers deem proper. When acting in the place and stead of the appointive officer, such deputies or assistants shall enjoy the same rights and immunities as the appointive officer. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
Section 3.10. - Oaths of appointive officers; bonds. 
(a)  Before exercising the duties of office, all appointive officers and their deputies shall appear before any officer duly authorized by law to administer an oath and subscribe the oath of office as required by law. Official oaths shall be filed in the office of the Judge of the Probate Court of Spalding County, Georgia. 
(b)  All appointive officers and their deputies shall give bond, with good and sufficient surety, payable to the commission, in the amount established by ordinance for the specific office, conditioned upon the faithful discharge of the duties of the office by the officer during such time he or she continues in office or discharges the duties thereof, and such other conditions as the commission may require, by ordinance. In the absence of an ordinance or resolution specifying the amount of bond required, the amount of such bond shall not be less than $100,000.00. All bonds shall be filed in the office of the Judge of the Probate Court of Spalding County, Georgia. Where authorized by law, blanket bonds for one or more appointive officers may be accepted in lieu of individual bonds. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 
 
Section 4.1. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court having all of the jurisdiction afforded by this charter and general law known as the Municipal Court of the City of Griffin, Georgia. The municipal court shall convene, upon order of the judge, at regular intervals as often as necessary to try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other laws over which it has jurisdiction. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
Section 4.2. - Procedure; rules of court. 
The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by issuance of summons, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served or executed by any officer authorized by law; to enforce obedience to orders, judgments and sentences, including the express power to punish by contempt of court; and to administer oaths as are necessary. The judge shall have full power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that all rules and regulations so adopted shall be filed with the secretary of the commission and made available for public inspection and copying. Upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants and their attorneys at least 48 hours prior to such proceedings. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
Section 4.3. - Certiorari. 
In those cases where a right of appeal does not exist by law, the right to certiorari from the final decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of the judge of the Superior Court of Spalding County, Georgia, as provided by law. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
ARTICLE V. - POWERS GENERALLY 
 
Section 5.1. - General corporate powers. 
As a body corporate the city may sue and be sued; have and use a common seal; own, purchase, have, hold, receive, and enjoy any estate, whether real, personal, or any other kind, located inside or outside the limits of the city; and may, by authority of the commission, sell or dispose of the same for the benefit of the city, as the commission at any regular or called meeting may adjudge proper and right. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
Section 5.2. - Powers enumerated. 
The commission shall have full power and authority to adopt such reasonable ordinances and regulations as it may deem proper, not in conflict with the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of Georgia or otherwise preempted by the general laws of this state, including, without limitation, the following: 
(1)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at-large of animals and fowl, and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted hereunder; 
(2)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(3)  Building regulations. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to enforce building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and construction trades; provided, however, that where standardized technical codes are to be enforced, a copy of the adopted technical code or regulation shall be available for inspection and copying in the city manager's office during reasonable hours; 
(4)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of occupation taxes on businesses, occupations, trades, and professions as authorized by Title 48 of the O.C.G.A., or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same as allowed by law; to provide for the manner and method of payment of regulatory fees; and to revoke permits after due process for failure to pay regulatory fees or failure to meet other regulatory requirements; 
(5)  Condemnation. To exercise the power of eminent domain to condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A., or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(6)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations for the express purposes allowed by law. To be binding upon the city, all contracts shall be in writing, approved by the city attorney as to form, authorized by a vote of the commission, and spread upon its minutes. All contracts signed by the chairperson, attested by the secretary, and bearing the city seal shall carry the presumption of validity; 
(7)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists inside or outside the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(8)  Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of the state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources and storm waters, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment; 
(9)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and, from time to time, to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city, and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(11)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(12)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(13)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(14)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish, by ordinance, boards, commissions, and agencies of the city, and to confer upon such entities the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; to establish the qualifications and duties of members; to provide for the compensation and reimbursement of members expenses, provided that all board members shall serve at-will and may be removed at any time without cause or notice. Except as provided expressly by charter or law, no board member shall hold elective or appointive office in the city; 
(15)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money, including temporary borrowings, for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(16)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold, in trust or otherwise, any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city, on such terms as the commission, in its sole discretion, shall deem appropriate; 
(17)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city, and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(18)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of municipal utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of public water supply, treatment, and distribution, a system for the collection, treatment, and disposal of sewerage and storm waters, gas works, electric distribution and generation facilities, cable television, telephone and other telecommunications facilities, transportation facilities, transit systems, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties, and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same. Such municipal systems may be operated, both inside and outside the territorial boundaries of the city, as a utility or enterprise fund; 
(19)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(20)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(21)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning; to classify property and land uses by zoning; and to provide development regulations and the like as the commission deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and esthetically pleasing community; 
(22)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers, and to establish, operate, or contract for a police agency and a fire fighting agency; 
(23)  Public hazards: removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(24)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detention, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; and to regulate the use of public improvements. For such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A., or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(25)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, public disturbances, and disorderly conduct; 
(26)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(27)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for or impose taxes on public utilities and public service companies; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, standards, and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service commission; 
(28)  Regulation of rights-of-way and roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, utilities, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(29)  Retirement and benefit plans. To provide and maintain a retirement plan and other benefit plans for officers and employees of the city; provided, however, that all such plans shall be nondiscriminatory; 
(30)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights of way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands, and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(31)  Solid waste collection and disposal. To levy, fix, assess, and collect solid waste collection and disposal fees, and other sanitary service charges, taxes, or fees for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(32)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate junk dealers, pawn shops, and the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult entertainment, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(33)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(34)  Taxes: ad valorem. To levy and provide for the levy and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; to grant, by ordinance, such exemptions from taxation and the amount thereof as allowed by law; provided, however, that the homestead of each resident of the City of Griffin who is totally disabled or who is 62 years of age or older and who received less than $12,500.00 of specified income during the preceding calendar year shall be entirely exempt from ad valorem taxation by the city. For purposes of this provision, the term "homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in Code Section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A., but shall not include more than the residence and three acres of land. A person is totally disabled if the person is wholly and permanently unable to pursue any gainful employment. The tax collector of the city shall require appropriate proof of such disability, including, if necessary, the affidavits of not more than two licensed physicians as to the person's disability. The exemption granted in this paragraph shall apply only to ad valorem taxes levied by the city, including, but not limited to, taxes levied to retire general obligation indebtedness; 
(35)  Taxes: other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(36)  Taxicabs and vehicles for hire. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(37)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate urban redevelopment agencies and conduct urban redevelopment programs; 
(38)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia. No listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
ARTICLE VI. - TRUSTS AND SPECIAL FUNDS 
 
Section 6.1. - Light, Water, and Sewerage Emergency Reserve Fund; trust created. 
(a)  An Act creating the charter of the City of Griffin, approved July 21, 1921 (Ga. L. 1921, p. 959, as amended by Ga. L. 1959, p. 2451), created the Light, Water, and Sewerage Emergency Reserve Fund as a perpetual trust, which is hereby continued. 
(b)  The trust shall be held, invested, and administered by a board of trustees consisting of the chairperson of the commission, the city manager, and the city attorney. The board shall elect a chairperson and a secretary. The city manager shall serve as treasurer and give security for the faithful discharge of his or her duties, including all trust funds placed in his or her hands. The vote of a majority of the board of trustees shall control on all questions. 
(c)  The purpose of the trust is to provide a source of funds for the emergency repair and replacement of the equipment and facilities of the city's electric, water, and sewerage systems. A reserve fund of $1 million has been established by payments to the trustees from annual net revenues of these utility systems. The commission, in setting the rates, fees, and charges for the electric, water, and sewerage utilities, shall raise and pay over to the trustees, in each year, an amount as determined by the commission by proper resolution or appropriation in the annual budget of not less than one-half of 1 percent of the net revenue as shown in the annual audit for the previous fiscal year until the principal of such trust, when added to income realized from investment, shall amount to $1 million; thereafter, any income accruing to such trust in any fiscal year shall be paid by the trustees into the general fund of the city. Should the balance of the trust corpus ever fall below $1 million, the commission shall replenish the trust until it reaches the $1 million level. 
(d)  The trustees of the fund are authorized and shall have full power, either directly or through agents, to invest and reinvest assets of the fund and to purchase, hold, sell, assign, transfer, and dispose of any securities and other investments in which assets of the fund have been invested, any proceeds of any investments, and any money belonging to the fund, provided that such power shall be subject to all terms, conditions, limitations, and restrictions imposed by the laws of the State of Georgia upon domestic life insurance companies in making and disposing of their investments; provided, further, that, the board of trustees shall not invest more than 50 percent of the fund's assets in equities. 
(e)  The trustees shall encroach upon the trust corpus only to repair or replace the equipment or facilities of the electric, water, and sewerage utilities when such equipment or facilities have been damaged or destroyed by fire, windstorm, ice storm, tornado, or other act of God, to the extent property insurance coverage is not available. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
Section 6.2. - Cemetery Trust Fund; trust created. 
(a)  An Act amending the charter of the City of Griffin, approved July 21, 1921 (Ga. L. 1921, p. 959, as amended by Ga. L. 1959, p. 2669), created the Cemetery Trust Fund as a perpetual trust, which is hereby continued. 
(b)  The trust shall be held, invested, and administered by a board of trustees consisting of the chairperson of the commission, the city manager, and the city attorney. The chairperson shall be chair of the board of trustees and preside at all meetings. The city manager shall serve as secretary-treasurer and give security for the faithful discharge of his or her duties, including all trust funds placed in his or her hands. All meetings shall be called and conducted in accordance with the Georgia Open Meetings Law and provisions of this charter. The vote of a majority of the board of trustees shall control on all questions. 
(c)  The city manager shall pay to the trustees 50 percent of the revenue received by the city from the sale of contracts for burial rights, cemetery lots, graves, burial spaces, niches, mausoleums, columbaria, urns, or crypts, or any other revenue derived from operation of the cemeteries owned or maintained by the city. This money shall be added to and become a part of the trust corpus. 
(d)  The trustees of the fund are authorized and shall have full power, either directly or through agents, to invest and reinvest assets of the trust and to purchase, hold, sell, assign, transfer, and dispose of any securities and other investments in which assets of the fund have been invested, any proceeds of any investments, and any money belonging to the trust, provided that in making investments and in acquiring and retaining those investments and managing the assets of the trust, the trustees shall exercise the judgment and care, under the circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion, and intelligence exercise when acting in a like capacity and familiar with such matters, considering the purposes, provisions, and distribution requirements of the trust. Within the standard provided herein and considering their overall written investment strategy, the trustees are authorized to acquire and retain every kind of property, whether real, personal, or mixed, and every kind of investment, specifically including, but not by way of limitation, bonds, debentures, and other corporate obligations and stocks, preferred or common, and may retain such investments without any limitation as to time and without regard as to its suitability for original purchase. 
(e)  The trustees shall not use or expend the corpus of this trust for any purpose. 
(f)  The trustees shall annually, based upon each fiscal year-end audit, pay to the city manager all of the net income earned from investment of this trust during the fiscal year, to be placed into a restricted account and used exclusively for the perpetual care and maintenance of the cemeteries of the City of Griffin or for the purchase and preparation costs of land to be used solely for cemetery purposes. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232; Ord. No. 17-08 (HR17-1), § 1, 4-25-2017, eff. 7-1-2017 )  
ARTICLE VII. - TRANSITION, REPEALER, AND EFFECTIVE DATE 
 
Section 7.1. - Existing Code and prior ordinances. 
All provisions of the Code of Griffin, Georgia, and any uncodified ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the commission. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
Section 7.2. - Existing personnel and officers. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all personnel and officers of the city and their rights, privileges, and powers shall continue beyond the time this charter takes effect for a period of 180 days before or during which the commission shall pass a transition ordinance detailing any changes in personnel and appointive officers required or desired and arranging such titles, rights, privileges, and powers as may be required or desired to allow a reasonable transition. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
Section 7.3. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by the appropriate city officer, departments, agencies, or personnel. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
Section 7.4. - Construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
Section 7.5. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, or sentence or part thereof of this charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this charter unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, and sentence or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
Section 7.6. - Specific repealer. 
Expressly saved from repeal are those provisions of the charter of the City of Griffin, Georgia, approved July 21, 1921 (Ga. L. 1921, p. 959), as amended, as relates to benefits payable to any vested participant or beneficiary, as defined, eligible to receive benefits from "The Employees Aid Fund," being that certain retirement plan for employees of the City of Griffin, created under local Act effective March 27, 1941; otherwise, such charter is hereby repealed in its entirety and all amendatory acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
Section 7.7. - Effective date. 
This charter shall be submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division, under Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, for preclearance within 60 days following certification of its enactment by the Secretary of State, with a copy thereof to the Attorney General of Georgia. The effective date of this charter shall be the thirtieth day following final receipt of notice of preclearance from the U.S. Attorney or his or her designee. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
Section 7.8. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
(2004 Ga. Laws, page 4232)  
RELATED LAWS 
House Bill 3EX (AS PASSED HOUSE AND SENATE) 
By: Representatives Yates of the 85th, Post 1, 
Lunsford of the 85th, Post 2, 
and Howell of the 92nd 
ACT 1EX 
A BILL TO BE ENTITLED 
AN ACT 
To authorize the City of Griffin to lease municipal property for up to five years with options to renew for three additional five-year periods to a nonprofit corporation for certain purposes related to recreation; to provide restrictions; to provide for insurance coverage and indemnity; to provide for the termination of any such lease; to provide for related matters; to provide an effective date; to provide for a contingency; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
SECTION 1. 
(a)  The City of Griffin is authorized to lease or enter into a contract for a valuable consideration for the operation and management, and renewals and extensions thereof, of any real or personal property owned by the City of Griffin comprising fairgrounds, ballfields, golf courses, swimming pools, or other like property used primarily for recreational purposes for a period not to exceed five years to a nonprofit corporation which is qualified as exempt from taxation under the provisions of Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 that will covenant to use and operate the property for annual regional fair purposes or to continue the recreational purpose for which the property was formerly used and intended on a nondiscriminatory basis for the use and benefit of all citizens of the community; provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall have the effect of authorizing alienation of title to such property in derogation of rights, duties, and obligations imposed by prior deed, contract, or like document of similar import or that would cause the divesting of title to property dedicated to public use and not subsequently abandoned; and provided, further, that the lessee or contractee under a management contract shall not mortgage or pledge the property as security for any debt or incur any encumbrance that could result in a lien or claim of lien against the property. The lease or management contract may provide for options to renew such lease or management contract for not more than three renewal periods and each such renewal period shall not be greater than the original length of such lease or management contract. As a condition of any lease or management contract, the lessee or contractee shall provide and maintain in force and effect throughout the term of such lease or management contract sufficient liability insurance, in an amount not less than $1 million per claim, no aggregate, naming the City of Griffin as a named insured; shall assume sole responsibility for or incur liability for any injury to person or property caused by any act of omission of such person while on the property; and shall agree to indemnify the City of Griffin and hold it harmless from any claim, suit, or demand made by such person. As an additional condition of any such lease or management contract, the lessee or contractee shall provide to and maintain with the City of Griffin a current copy of the liability insurance policy, including any changes in such policy or coverages as such changes occur, and shall provide proof monthly in writing to the City of Griffin that the lessee or contractee has in force and effect the liability insurance required by this subsection which the City of Griffin shall retain on file. As a further condition of any lease or management contract, the lessee or contractee shall agree to indemnify the City of Griffin and hold it harmless from any claim, suit, or demand arising out of any improvements to the property or any indebtedness or obligations incurred by the lessee or contractee in making any such improvements to such property. When the lessee or contractee charges any person to enter or go upon the land for the purpose of attending the annual regional fair or for attending or participating in recreational purposes, the consideration received by the City of Griffin for the lease or management contract shall not be deemed a charge within the meaning of Article 2 of Chapter 3 of Title 51 of the O.C.G.A. 
(b)  The City of Griffin shall have the right unilaterally to terminate such lease after giving three months' notice of its intention to do so. 
(c)  Any lease entered into as provided in subsection (a) of this section shall be automatically terminated upon conviction of the lessee or contractee for any offense involving the conduct of unlawful activity. In such event, any improvements to the property made by the lessee shall be forfeited. The City of Griffin shall not be liable in any manner or subject to suit for any indebtedness or other obligations of the lessee or contractee associated with any such improvements to the property and shall take such improvements free and clear of any such indebtedness or other obligations. 
(d)  Any lease entered into as provided in subsection (a) of this section shall be for the fair market value of the property; provided, however, that improvements made by the tenant to the leased property and donated to the City of Griffin or an authority of the City of Griffin shall be valued and may apply as rent on a prorated basis and that, at the expiration or termination of such lease, such improvements shall remain and shall be the property of the City of Griffin or an authority of the City of Griffin, as applicable. 
SECTION 2. 
This Act shall become effective on July 1, 2004, provided that House Bill No. 1565 passed by the General Assembly during its 2004 Regular Session authorizing the General Assembly by local law to authorize municipalities to enter into the type of leases contemplated by this Act becomes effective on or before such date. Otherwise, this Act shall stand repealed as of such date and shall be of no force and effect. 
SECTION 3. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed.  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Griffin, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1968, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Codification of ordinances and resolutions required, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions, the following rules shall govern, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners: 
Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they shall be bound thereby. 
Board of commissioners. The term "board of commissioners" means the board of commissioners of the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of Griffin, Georgia. 
City. The term "city" means the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
Code. The terms "Code" and "this Code" mean the Code of Griffin, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Corporate limits. The term "corporate limits" means the corporate limits of the City of Griffin. 
County. The terms "county," "the county" and "this county" mean the County of Spalding, Georgia. 
Court. The term "court" means the municipal court provided by law for the punishment of offenders against the laws or ordinances of the city, whether it shall be the court now constituted or a court hereafter established pursuant to law. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or an official of the city to do some act or perform some function, it shall be construed to authorize the head of such department or the official to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required function, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
Gender. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
Month, year. The terms "month" and "year" mean calendar month and calendar year unless otherwise provided. 
Municipal court. The term "municipal court" means the Municipal Court of the City of Griffin. 
Names of officers, departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Griffin" were added. 
Nontechnical and technical words. The ordinary significance shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case they shall have the significance attached to them by experts in such trade, or with reference to the subject matter. 
Number. The singular or plural number shall each include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes the term "affirmation." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations and bodies politic, or any combination thereof, as well as to natural persons. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean generally next before and next after unless the context requires a different significance. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The phrase "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list compiled and published by the city which contains rates for utility and other public enterprises, fees, deposit amounts, performance bonds, and various charges as determined from time to time by the board of commissioners, an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the city clerk where it is available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
Seating, minimum. Where this Code requires seating for a minimum number of persons, only chairs, stools and booths shall be provided as the required seating. The capacity of seats without dividing arms shall be determined by allotting 18 inches per occupant. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include the mark of all illiterate or infirm persons. 
State. Whenever the terms "state," "the state" and "this state" are used they shall refer to the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" includes streets, sidewalks, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes and all other public highways in the city, unless otherwise provided. 
Substantial compliance. A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code or ordinances amendatory thereof, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient; and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided. 
Tenant and occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupied, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. The present or past tense shall include the future. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals, and also pictures, illustrations and printed or written designs. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1968, § 1-2)  
Sec. 1-3. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations of such ordinances and not as new enactments.  
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines of sections, history notes and editor's notes. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1968, § 1-3) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7.  
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or matter covered under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1968, § 1-4)  
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without incorporation in this Code of any such invalid or unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1968, § 1-5) 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3.  
Sec. 1-7. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
(16)  Any ordinance setting the rate of ad valorem taxes. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.  
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of the repeal of chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Griffin, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Griffin, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (division, article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which section (division, article or chapter) reads as follows:…." The new section, division, article or chapter shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1968, § 1-6)  
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of commissioners during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1968, § 1-7) 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1.  
Sec. 1-11. - Liability for violations by corporations; other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by the corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as the corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where the violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person.  
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty; continuing violations; additional penalties. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance or resolution of the city, or rule or regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the city under authority duly vested in such person or agency, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by a combination of such punishments. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In every case in which the municipal court shall impose a fine, which shall be construed to include costs, for any offense against a criminal or traffic law of this state or any offense against a city ordinance, there shall be imposed as an additional penalty a sum equal to ten percent of the original fine. 
(c)  At the time of posting bail or bond in any case involving a violation of a criminal or traffic law of this state or a violation of a city ordinance, an additional sum equal to ten percent of the original amount of bail or bond shall be posted. In every case in which the municipal court shall order the forfeiture of bail or bond, the additional sum equal to ten percent of the original bail or bond shall be collected. 
(d)  The additional penalties set forth in this section shall be in addition to that amount required by O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 to be paid into the peace officers' annuity and benefit fund, or by any other provision of law. 
(e)  The additional penalties as prescribed in this section shall be assessed and collected by the clerk or court officer charged with the duty of collecting monies arising from fines and forfeited bonds. Such additional penalties shall be paid over to the board of commissioners by the tenth day of each month following the month in which these sums are collected. 
(f)  All such sums collected and paid over to the board of commissioners shall be deposited into a special account which shall be known as the "county jail fund." 
(g)  All moneys collected pursuant to this section and placed in the county jail fund shall be expended solely and exclusively for constructing, operating, and staffing the county correctional facilities, or for such other purposes as specified in O.C.G.A. § 15-21-95. 
(h)  The additional penalties provided for by this section shall not be imposed or collected in the municipal court unless the city and the county enter into an intergovernmental contract providing for use of the county jail, correctional institution, or detention facility by city prisoners. 
(Code 1968, § 1-8) 
State Law reference— Punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; display of drivers license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials. O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e); payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-70-20 et seq., the city and county have entered into an agreement for the implementation of a local government service delivery strategy. Such agreement was executed by city officials on August 22, 1999. An official copy of such agreement is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Cross reference— Any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(3); the administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-7(13); animal control board, § 14-32; civil emergencies, ch. 34; courts, ch. 38; administration of flood regulations, § 50-61 et seq.; planning, ch. 66; taxation, ch. 82; administration of taxation regulations, § 82-1; utilities, ch. 94; retirement benefits, app. B; administration of retirement benefits plan, app. B, § 19A-7.1 et seq.; board of trustees, app. B, § 19A-7.2. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Corporate seal. 
The corporate seal of the city shall be as follows: A round seal with a device containing a female figure seated, holding in her right hand a staff with the cap of liberty on the top of same, her left hand resting on a shield, a bale of cotton and barrel projecting beyond such shield, with the mast and sail of a vessel in the background. On the device there shall be the words, "Cassis tutissma virtus." Such seal shall remain in the custody of the manager, and shall also be the official seal of his office. 
(Code 1968, § 2-1)  
Sec. 2-2. - Municipal elections. 
(a)  Authorization of county to conduct municipal elections. For municipal elections in the city to be conducted biennially, the board of commissioners does hereby authorize the Spalding County Board of Elections to conduct such elections pursuant to the Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq., and further directs such board to perform all duties of municipal election superintendent as set forth in that code. As compensation for their services, the city shall reimburse the general fund of the county for the salaries of the board of elections in every odd-numbered year and pay the costs associated with conducting municipal elections. Where municipal elections are conducted in conjunction with state or county elections, the city shall pay its pro-rata share of such expenses. 
(b)  Absentee ballot clerk. The chief registrar of the county is appointed as absentee ballot clerk for the city and shall perform the duties set forth in the Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 
(c)  Use of electronic voting equipment authorized. The use of electronic voting equipment, as provided to the Spalding County Board of Elections by the secretary of state, shall be used for casting and counting votes in all future municipal elections. If the board of elections, for the reasons set out in O.C.G.A. § 21-2-334, finds the use of electronic voting equipment to be impossible or impractical for any municipal election or special municipal election, the casting and counting of votes shall be conducted by paper ballot in the manner provided in the Georgia Elections Code. The city shall be solely responsible for reimbursing the board of elections for all costs of programming and certifying the electronic voting equipment, including adequate technical support for the installation, setup and operation of such equipment, when used for municipal elections, and the prorated cost thereof when municipal elections are conducted in conjunction with federal, state and county elections. 
(d)  When effective; deemed contract. This section shall be deemed an intergovernmental contract between the parties and may be terminated by any party giving written notice to all other parties at least 60 days in advance, provided, such termination shall not prejudice the conduct of any pending election. 
(Code 1968, § 2-11; Ord. No. 03-11, § 1, 4-8-2003)  
Secs. 2-3—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt municipal ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; personal liability of councilmembers and other municipal officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4. 
 
Sec. 2-31. - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings of the board of commissioners shall be duly called and conducted twice monthly, at the City Courtroom, 235 East Solomon Street, Griffin, Georgia, on the second and fourth Tuesdays of the month, commencing at 6:00 p.m., Eastern Standard Time, except in those months when Daylight Savings Time is being observed during which regular meetings shall be held at 6:00 p.m., Eastern Daylight Savings time. Nothing contained in this section shall preclude the board of commissioners from canceling any regular meeting, from calling special or emergency meetings, or from changing the time, date, or location for a regular meeting when notice thereof is given in accordance with the Georgia Open Meetings Law, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. 
(b)  The city manager shall post a schedule of regular meeting dates for each calendar year, at the place where regular meetings are held and notify the news media accordingly. 
(Code 1968, § 2-3; Ord. No. 99-4, §§ 1, 2, 7-27-1999)  
Sec. 2-32. - Compensation of commissioners. 
(a)  There is hereby established for each member of the board of commissioners a salary in the amount of $875.00 per month; provided, however, the member currently serving as chairman of the board shall receive a salary of $1,000.00 per month. As used in this section, the term "salary" shall include any form of compensation or other payment issued to a member of the governing authority, including expense allowance, except the value of insurance, retirement or pension benefits, federal old age, survivors and disability programs, hospitalization and worker's compensation benefits in which the member is eligible to participate, and reimbursement for expenses actually and necessarily incurred in carrying out official duties. 
(b)  Each member of the board of commissioners is declared eligible to participate in or receive the benefit of any insurance, retirement or pension benefit, federal old age, survivors and disability programs, hospitalization and worker's compensation benefits offered by the city to its employees on a nondiscriminatory basis, unless the terms and conditions of such benefit program expressly exclude participation by elective members of the municipal governing authority. 
(c)  Each member of the board of commissioners shall be reimbursed for expenses actually and necessarily incurred in carrying out their official duties. Reimbursement shall be made upon submission of an expense voucher to the city manager, drawn in accordance with terms and procedures of the city finance and accounting department and supported by proper documentation. Monthly the city manager shall furnish to the board a written list of the actual reimbursement paid to each commissioner. 
(d)  Effective January 1, 2002, being the beginning date of new terms of office following the next regular election of members of the municipal governing authority, the salaries for members, as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, shall be increased to $1,120.00 per month, and the salary for the chairman shall increase to $1,283.34 per month. 
(e)  Inasmuch as general law, codified at O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4, has preempted Charter section 2.16, Commissioners Salary, 1921 Ga. Laws, page 959, this section shall supersede such Charter provision and shall be deemed controlling. 
(Ord. No. 00-14, §§ 1—4, 7-25-2000)  
Secs. 2-33—2-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Regulations pertaining to city employees on such subjects as employment policy, employee benefits, holidays and leaves of absence, travel and employee appraisals are contained in the city's personnel policies and procedures manual which is compiled and published separately by the city. An official copy of that manual is on file in the office of the city manager. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee saved from repeal, § 1-7(4); officers of the board of trustees, app. B, § 19A-7.3. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-61—2-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CODE OF ETHICS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for government services, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3; Public Employee Hazardous Chemical Protection and Right to Know Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 45-22-1 et seq.; municipal or county governments not to require residence as condition of employment, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-5; Drug-Free Public Work Force Act of 1990, O.C.G.A. § 45-23-1 et seq.; random drug testing of state employees in high-risk jobs, O.C.G.A. § 45-20-90 et seq.; Fair Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq.; personal liability of councilmembers and other municipal officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4; power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of municipal officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(2). 
 
Sec. 2-76. - Adoption. 
There is established for and within the city a code of ethics for officers and employees which shall read as set out in this division. Any person in the service and employ of the city should: 
(1)  Put loyalty to the highest moral principles and to the country above loyalty to persons, party or government departments. 
(2)  Uphold the constitution, laws and regulations of the United States and the state and the ordinances of the city and never be a party to their evasion. 
(3)  Give a full day's labor for a full day's pay and give to the performance of his duties his earnest effort and best thought. 
(4)  Seek to find and employ more efficient and economical ways of getting tasks accomplished. 
(5)  Never discriminate unfairly by the dispensing of special favors or privileges to anyone, whether for remuneration or not, and never accept for himself or his family, favors or benefits under circumstances which might be construed by reasonable persons as influencing the performance of his governmental duties. 
(6)  Make no private promises of any kind binding upon the duties of office, since a government employee has no private word which can be binding on public duty. 
(7)  Engage in no business with the government, either directly or indirectly, which is inconsistent with the conscientious performance of his governmental duties. 
(8)  Never use any information coming to him confidentially in the performance of governmental duties as a means for making private profit. 
(9)  Expose corruption wherever discovered. 
(10)  Uphold these principles, ever conscious that public office is a public trust. 
(Code 1968, § 2-5(a))  
Sec. 2-77. - Restrictions on political activities by officers and employees. 
(a)  An officer or employee of the city shall not: 
(1)  Hold any elective or appointed public office, regardless of whether remuneration is attached, which conflicts (or gives the appearance of a conflict) with his efficiency or the integrity of the city. 
(2)  Engage in the performance of duties of any elective or appointed public office during assigned duty hours of city employment, except with the express prior approval of the board of commissioners. 
(3)  Direct, manage, control or participate in a political campaign during assigned duty hours of city employment. 
(4)  Seek, use or attempt to use any political endorsement to secure for himself or any other person an appointment, promotion, increase in pay or any other advantage in employment with city. 
(5)  Use or promise to use, directly or indirectly, any official authority or influence, whether possessed or anticipated, to influence the political action of any other person or to affect the results of a nomination, campaign or election to any public office. 
(6)  Directly or indirectly coerce, command or advise any employee of the city to pay, lend or otherwise contribute anything of value to any person, party, committee, organization or agency for political purposes. 
(7)  Engage in any political activity in violation of federal or state law. 
(8)  Endorse or oppose a candidate for public office in any election or a candidate for political party office in a political advertisement, broadcast, campaign literature or similar material. 
(b)  An officer or employee, acting in his capacity as a private citizen, may: 
(1)  Register and vote in any election. 
(2)  Promote and encourage other persons to exercise their right to vote. 
(3)  Express a personal opinion privately and publicly on political candidates and issues. 
(4)  Participate in nonpartisan activities of a civic, community, social, professional, employee or similar organization. 
(5)  Display bumper stickers, badges or political posters so long as such display is not under color of office or position. 
(6)  Be a member of a political party or other political organization and participate in its activities to the extent permitted by federal and state law. 
(7)  Attend partisan and nonpartisan political meetings and rallies as a spectator. 
(8)  Sign a petition for specific legislative action or to place a candidate's name on an election ballot. 
(9)  Be active in connection with a question which is not specifically identified with a political party. 
(10)  Serve as a nonpartisan worker at the polls in an election. 
(11)  Write a personal letter to a newspaper or other publication expressing a personal view on public issues or a preference for a specific political candidate. 
(12)  Participate fully in public affairs in any manner which does not materially compromise his efficiency or integrity as an employee, or the neutrality, efficiency or integrity of the city. 
(c)  This division shall not apply to any elected member of the board of commissioners of the city. 
(Code 1968, § 2-5(b))  
Sec. 2-78. - Conflicts of interest by officers and employees. 
(a)  No officer or employee of the city shall contract to buy from or sell to the city any real or personal property, goods or services, or a combination thereof, when such purchase or sale would benefit or be likely to benefit such officer or employee, except after competitive bid thereon. 
(b)  No officer or employee of the city shall act as a dealer, agent or broker or in any other manner in connection with the sale of goods or services, or both, to the city, unless such person operates a regularly established business enterprise which, when selling such goods or services, or both, to the city, meets all legal requirements relative to the submission of competitive bids. 
(c)  No officer or employee in the discharge of his public function shall act upon any measure relating to a specific transaction which directly and immediately affects his pecuniary interest. 
(d)  In any matters where a public officer or employee deems himself to have a pecuniary interest in the specific transaction, he shall make such public disclosure as may be appropriate and recuse himself from presiding over, deliberating or voting upon the matter. 
(e)  This division, any disclosures made under this division or recusals required by this division, shall be supplemented to all statutory disclosure and/or disqualification requirements under federal or state law. 
(Code 1968, § 2-5(c))  
Sec. 2-79. - Penalties for violating provisions of this division. 
(a)  Any officer or employee who willfully violates any part of section 2-78 shall be tried in the municipal court of the city, and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(b)  In addition thereto, upon conviction for an intentional violation of section 2-78, the officer or employee shall be immediately terminated from office or employment with the city and forever barred from future employment therewith. 
(c)  Any officer or employee who violates any part of section 2-76, 2-77 or 2-78, but who commits such violation without willful intent, shall be notified in writing of the alleged violation and disciplined according to the severity of the violation, including termination from office of employment. Any employee so aggrieved shall have the opportunity for hearing in accordance with the personnel grievance procedure of the city. 
(Code 1968, § 2-5(d))  
Sec. 2-80. - Leave of absence for officers and employees campaigning for public office or engaged in political activities. 
(a)  Officers and employees of the city are not required to take a leave of absence without pay upon qualifying for elective public office; provided, however, that all officers and employees are subject to the restrictions on political activity set forth in section 2-77. 
(b)  The city has no policy on political leaves of absence for its officers and employees. Personnel are expected to fulfill their assigned job descriptions by devoting to the city their full attention and energies. Any officer or employee requesting a leave of absence without pay shall be afforded the same consideration afforded employees seeking leave for other purposes. 
(Code 1968, § 2-5(e))  
Secs. 2-81—2-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CITY MANAGER 
 
Sec. 2-96. - Bond. 
The city manager shall give bond payable to the city with one or more securities, to be approved by the board of commissioners, in an amount to be determined by the board of commissioners for the faithful discharge of his duties, and for the faithful accounting of all funds coming into his hands belonging to the city. The board of commissioners may require a new bond or additional securities at any time. The city shall pay the premium on the bond. 
(Code 1968, § 2-49)  
Sec. 2-97. - Powers and duties generally. 
The city manager shall have the powers and duties conferred by charter and by ordinance or resolution of the board of commissioners, but he may delegate any of such powers and duties to subordinates except for such as are specifically prohibited from being delegated. 
(Code 1968, § 2-50)  
Sec. 2-98. - Inspection of manager's records; removing records from office prohibited. 
The books, accounts, vouchers, and all papers belonging to the manager's office, shall at all times be open to inspection by the board of commissioners and the public. Provided that it shall be unlawful for any person, whether an officer of the city or any other person, to remove from the manager's office any of such books, records or other documents, without a written order from the chairman. Any person convicted of removing any of such books, records, or documents in violation of this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-12. 
(Code 1968, § 2-51)  
Sec. 2-99. - Books, records required to be kept. 
The city manager shall keep the following books and records: 
(1)  A neat and accurate minute book of the proceedings of the board of commissioners. 
(2)  An ordinance book in which shall be entered all ordinances passed by the board of commissioners, with the date of the meeting when enacted. 
(3)  A book for recording all licenses issued, together with the names, places of business, and date of license. 
(4)  A complete and approved set of books and vouchers showing all sums of money he may receive, when received, and from what source, also all sums of money paid out, how paid, the date paid, to whom paid, and the balance on hand. 
(5)  He shall keep a bond account book, showing the date of issue of all bonds, their number and amounts, to whom issued, when due and to whom paid, together with an account of interest coupons, their number and amounts, when due and to whom paid, or the board of commissioners may authorize this to be done by some approved financial institution. 
(6)  He shall keep a full and complete docket of tax fi. fas. showing in whose hands the docket of tax fi. fas. are placed for collection, and if paid, to whom and when paid, the amount of the execution, interest and cost, and the amount collected on the tax, and if any property is sold under such execution, a description of the property sold and the amount realized. 
(7)  A book in which shall be recorded the liens of the city for assessments for public improvements, containing the names of the property owners, if known, a description of the property upon which the lien is claimed, the amount of the assessment, and the date due. 
(8)  A record of lots in city cemeteries. 
(Code 1968, § 2-54)  
Sec. 2-100. - Duty to seal and attest documents. 
The city manager shall affix the corporate seal and attest all deeds and other instruments requiring the corporate seal. 
(Code 1968, § 2-55)  
Sec. 2-101. - Monthly reports required. 
The city manager shall make out and submit to the board of commissioners a monthly report of all his receipts and disbursements of moneys. 
(Code 1968, § 2-56)  
Sec. 2-102. - Deposit, disbursement of money. 
The city manager shall deposit all city moneys in the bank or banks designated by the board of commissioners, in the name of the city. Disbursements shall be made in the manner prescribed by the board of commissioners and in accordance with good accounting procedure. 
(Code 1968, § 2-6)  
Secs. 2-103—2-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CITY ATTORNEY 
 
Sec. 2-121. - Salary and allowances for city attorney. 
The city attorney shall receive a salary fixed by the board of commissioners, payable monthly, which shall be for services rendered in attending the meetings of the board of commissioners, and ordinary consultations. For all services in court, and for any unusual services, in drawing contracts, ordinances, or other extra services, he shall present an itemized account which shall be allowed for a reasonable amount. 
(Code 1968, § 2-7)  
Secs. 2-122—2-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - EMPLOYEE HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Retirement benefits, app. B. 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to provide insurance, retirement and pension benefits, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 
 
Sec. 2-141. - Subscription to plan. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 47-5-40, the city hereby subscribes to a plan of employee benefits consisting of group health, dental, life and accidental death insurance offered through the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System. Such benefits shall be provided to eligible employees and dependents as defined by the insurance carrier under Policy Number GH 19088-8 (health and dental) and Policy Number 17910-8 (life and AD & D) or its successor (or successors) issued by the Northwestern National Life Insurance Company (or its successor) to the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System. 
(Code 1968, § 2-85(a))  
Sec. 2-142. - Only qualified employees and elected officials to be included. 
The city agrees to include only qualified employees and retirees of the city and elected officials to such city when such officials elect to be included in the plan, on the original census of participants and on participant enrollment cards provided to Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System. 
(Code 1968, § 2-85(b))  
Sec. 2-143. - Benefits pursuant to COBRA. 
Persons who have not worked for more than 90 consecutive days due to sickness or accidental injury shall be entitled only to a continuation of employee benefits pursuant to the Consolidated Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) of 1986. 
(Code 1968, § 2-85(c))  
Sec. 2-144. - Summarization of benefits. 
Benefits to be provided under the city's plan are summarized in the benefit booklets which are to duplicate, with minor revisions agreed upon, the plan design of the city's benefit plan options immediately preceding the effective date of the ordinance from which this division was derived. 
(Code 1968, § 2-85(d))  
Sec. 2-145. - Remittance of contributions; notice of discontinuance. 
The city agrees to remit to the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System the monthly contributions necessary to keep in force the coverages provided. Such contributions shall be due and payable on the first day of each month and late fees or charges, as established by the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System Board of Trustees, shall be collected on any contributions not received by the 15th day of each month. The city agrees to provide 30 days' advance written notice to the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System of its intent not to continue participation in the employee benefit program. 
(Code 1968, § 2-85(e))  
Sec. 2-146. - Plan year. 
The plan year for the provision of employee benefits offered by the city to its employees shall begin on January 1, 1994, with the next renewal plan year beginning on January 1, 1995. The renewal date in succeeding years to be established by the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System in accordance with its operating rules and regulations. 
(Code 1968, § 2-85(f))  
Secs. 2-147—2-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-7(2); taxation, ch. 82. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-171—2-185. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PROCUREMENTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-14, § 1, adopted Nov. 27, 2018 , repealed the former Div. 2, §§ 2-186—2-193, and enacted a new Div. 2 as set out herein. The former Div. 2 pertained to purchases and derived from Ord. No. 10-02, § 1, adopted Apr. 27, 2010. 
State Law reference— Appointment of budget officer, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-4; preparation of proposed budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5; adoption of budget ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-6; establishment of fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3; local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq.; power of expenditure, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ II; multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; purchases through state, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq.; grants of state funds to municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1 et seq.; discretion of governing body as to management and disposition of property, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-2; acquisition, sale and lease by municipality of real and personal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1 et seq.; disposition of municipal property generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6; authority to dispose of public utility plants or properties, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-7. 
 
Sec. 2-186. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the term: 
Competitive solicitation means a method of soliciting quotes, bids or proposals, in writing, based upon the lowest responsive, responsible solicitation based upon criteria identified in an invitation for bids or request for proposals, approved by the city manager. 
Responsible solicitation means a person or entity that has the capability in all respects to perform fully and reliably the contract requirements. 
Responsive solicitation means a person or entity who has submitted a solicitation that conforms in all material respects to the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids or request for proposals. 
Sealed competitive solicitation means a method of soliciting bids or proposals, in writing, whereby the amount of each solicitation remains sealed until the announced time of opening and at which time all solicitations are opened and tallied. 
Sole source means those procurements made pursuant to a written determination by the city manager that there is only one source for the required equipment, material, supply, service, or construction item. 
( Ord. No. 18-14, § 1, 11-27-2018 )  
Sec. 2-187. - Procurement coordinator. 
There is hereby created the position of procurement coordinator, who shall be charged with the centralized purchasing and procurement of equipment, materials and supplies for all departments of the city. The position of procurement coordinator shall be filled by appointment of the city manager, who shall define his or her duties and supervise his or her performance. 
( Ord. No. 18-14, § 1, 11-27-2018 )  
Sec. 2-188. - Scope of coverage. 
(a)  All purchasing, leasing or contracting for equipment, materials and supplies shall be governed by this division. Contracts for services, where feasible, should be competitively solicited upon written specifications approved by the city manager; provided, however, it is recognized that the ability to render certain services, particularly those of learned professionals, are often unique to an individual contractor and are incapable of competitive solicitation. All contracts shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney as to legal form, approved by the board of commissioners and spread upon the minutes of the board of commissioners' meeting at which approval was granted. All contracts shall be executed in the manner and with the requisite formalities set forth in the City Charter or other applicable law; provided, however, when the form of a standardized contract for city-provided utilities or other services has been approved by the board of commissioners, such contract may be executed by the city manager or his designee(s) as and for the act of the commission. 
(b)  Repairs and general maintenance, where feasible, shall be competitively solicited; however, certain equipment, systems and facilities can only be repaired or serviced through authorized service centers or by specially trained personnel who do not engage in solicitation. The public interest is best served by maintaining such equipment, systems and facilities in accordance with manufacturer's requirements and warranties. For this reason, such services may be obtained without first obtaining bids as generally required by this division. 
(c)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. 13-10-91, all contracts for the physical performance of services within this state, to be binding on and enforceable against the city, shall require the contractor to register and participate in the federal work authorization program to verify work eligibility of all newly hired employees and subcontractors. Before a solicitation for any such service is considered by the city, the solicitation shall include a signed, notarized affidavit from the contractor attesting to the following: 
(1)  The affiant has registered with and is authorized to use the federal work authorization program; 
(2)  The user identification number and date of authorization for the affiant; and 
(3)  The affiant is using and will continue to use the federal work authorization program throughout the contract period. 
No contractor or subcontractor under contract with the city in connection with the physical performance of services within this state shall be entitled to payment from public funds for its services unless such contractor or subcontractor registers and participates in the federal work authorization program. It shall be deemed a breach of contract for any contractor, or subcontractor thereof, who physically performs services within this state under a contract with the city, to fail or refuse to participate in the federal work authorization program throughout the term of such contract. It shall be the duty of the contractor and/or subcontractor(s) to maintain records of federal work authorization verification for all newly hired employees for the term of the contract and to maintain such records for not less than three years from the contract's date of final completion. Such records shall be considered an open public record and made available to the city upon request or in the event of contract audit by a federal or state agency; provided, however, any information in such record protected from public disclosure by federal or state law shall be redacted. 
( Ord. No. 18-14, § 1, 11-27-2018 )  
Sec. 2-189. - Procurement of equipment, materials, and supplies. 
(a)  The city manager, in his discretion, upon recommendation of the procurement coordinator, may delegate to the department director the procurement of equipment, materials, and supplies having a gross or combined cost of less than $5,000.00; provided, however, purchases shall not be subdivided in an effort to evade the limitations of this section. Where feasible, whenever like purchases are required by more than one department, the procurement coordinator shall consolidate purchase orders to receive full advantage of available quantity discounts. 
(b)  All other procurement of equipment, materials, or supplies having an estimated cost of less than $25,000.00 shall be competitively bid upon written specifications drawn by the department manager in consultation with the procurement coordinator, as approved by the city manager. The manner of advertisement or bid solicitation (including the pre-qualification of potential vendors), the period bid solicitations remain open, and procedures governing bidding and bid openings shall be recommended by the purchasing coordinator and approved, in writing, by the city manager. ALL REQUESTS FOR PROCUREMENT SHALL BE ISSUED WITH RESERVATION OF THE CITY'S RIGHT TO REJECT ALL BIDS; TO REBID UPON READVERTISEMENT (WITH OR WITHOUT MODIFIED SPECIFICATIONS); OR, IN CASES WHERE ALL BIDS RECEIVED FAIL TO MEET SPECIFICATIONS, TO NEGOTIATE WITH THE BIDDER WHOSE PRODUCT COMES CLOSEST TO MEETING SPECIFICATIONS. Purchases of less than $25,000.00 shall be approved, in writing, by the city manager. 
(c)  Where authorization to procure is not provided by subparagraphs (a) or (b) above, all procurement of equipment, materials, or supplies shall be competitively solicited upon written specifications drawn by the department director in consultation with the procurement coordinator, as approved by the city manager. The manner of advertisement or bid solicitation (including the pre-qualification of potential vendors), the period bid solicitations remain open, and procedures governing bidding and bid openings shall be recommended by the procurement coordinator and approved, in writing, by the city manager. ALL INVITATIONS TO BID OR REQUESTS FOR PROPOSALS SHALL BE ISSUED WITH RESERVATION OF THE CITY'S RIGHT TO REJECT ALL BIDS; TO REBID UPON READVERTISEMENT (WITH OR WITHOUT MODIFIED SPECIFICATIONS); OR, IN CASES WHERE THE LOWEST RESPONSIVE AND RESPONSIBLE BID RECEIVED EXCEEDS FUNDING APPROPRIATED, TO NEGOTIATE WITH THE LOWEST BIDDER. Purchases of $25,000.00 or more shall be approved by the board of commissioners in a duly convened public meeting. 
(d)  The lowest responsive, responsible solicitation shall be approved. Where the lowest solicitation is not responsive or the solicitor is not deemed responsible, written documentation shall be maintained explaining why the lowest bid was rejected. Where the amount of procurement is less than $25,000.00 the city manager shall determine rejection of the lowest solicitation; where the amount of procurement is $25,000.00 or more, rejection of the lowest solicitation shall be determined by the board of commissioners. 
(e)  In determining the lowest responsive, responsible solicitation, a preference of up to five percent or $2,500.00, whichever is least, may be given to manufacturers, distributors, materialmen and suppliers having physical local business addresses within the 30223 or 30224 zip code areas. Otherwise, as far as may be reasonable and practicable without sacrificing price or quality, preference may be given to Georgia suppliers over out-of-state suppliers. A similar preference may be given to American suppliers over foreign suppliers. 
(f)  In determining specifications for procurement of equipment, materials and supplies, it is the policy of the City of Griffin to be environmentally-conscious and eco-friendly, including energy efficient/alternative energy initiatives and recycling/waste reduction and disposal options. Consideration may reasonably be given to the procurement of "green products". 
(g)  The requirements of this section shall not be applicable to the procurement of equipment, material, and supplies when the city manager has determined the procurement of such item(s) is only available from a sole source. 
(h)  The requirements of this section shall not apply when procurement of equipment, material, and supplies is available through federal or state bulk procurement programs, intergovernmental contracts, and similar cooperative buying services in which the city participates (including, but not limited to: the department of administrative services, Georgia Correctional Industries, Electric Cities of Georgia, and GMA programs). 
( Ord. No. 18-14, § 1, 11-27-2018 )  
Sec. 2-190. - Emergency procurements. 
If not feasible to call an emergency meeting of the board of commissioners, the city manager shall be authorized to approve the procurement of equipment, materials and supplies, without obtaining competitive solicitations, during any emergency situation affecting the health, safety or general welfare of the city and its operations, upon the concurrence of the chairman of the board of commissioners or, in his or her absence, the chairman pro tem. 
( Ord. No. 18-14, § 1, 11-27-2018 )  
Sec. 2-191. - Budgetary constraints. 
All procurements shall be chargeable to the appropriate account of the approved annual balanced budget. Before approval of any procurement not provided for or exceeding its budgeted amount, the budget shall be amended in the manner provided by law to reflect such expenditure. 
( Ord. No. 18-14, § 1, 11-27-2018 )  
Sec. 2-192. - Prohibited transactions. 
Procurements shall not be routinely solicited from suppliers in which any elected or public official of the city is known to hold a pecuniary interest of ten percent or greater, or over which he or she exercises significant managerial control, unless the city manager can demonstrate that no other reliable source of supply is available, and the public officer makes written disclosure of such interest and abstains from participation in the consideration of the procurement. All procurements, regardless of amount, from suppliers in which a public official holds a pecuniary interest of ten percent or greater, or exercises significant managerial control, shall require the approval of the board of commissioners. 
( Ord. No. 18-14, § 1, 11-27-2018 )  
Sec. 2-193. - Contracts for public works construction. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, "public works construction" means the building, altering, repairing, improving, or demolishing of any public structure or building or other public improvements of any kind to any real property, other than a project covered by federal or state funding whose solicitation and contract requirements take precedence over general law found in O.C.G.A. Title 36, Chapter 91. 
(b)  All public works construction contracts entered into by the City of Griffin with private persons or entities shall be in writing and on file in the city manager's office, available for public inspection and copying during normal business hours. All public works construction contracts shall be executed and entered in the manner and with the formalities required by the City Charter and other applicable laws. 
(c)  Unless otherwise required to follow specific procedures set forth in federal or state grant or funding agreements for a specific project, the city shall comply with the sealed competitive solicitation procedures set forth in O.C.G.A. Title 36, Chapter 91, including the requirement of all bonds and maintenance agreements set forth therein, which by reference are made a part hereof. 
(d)  The requirements of this section shall apply to all public works construction projects having an estimated cost of $100,000.00 or more, except that these requirements shall not apply to projects necessitated by an emergency; provided, the nature of the emergency shall be found and described in the minutes of the board of commissioners. The requirements of this section shall not apply to any projects or portions of projects self-performed by the city or when labor is performed by inmates from a state correctional institution. The requirements of this section shall not apply to sole source public works construction projects when the board of commissioners, by resolution in a duly convened public meeting, has found and concluded that competitive procurement is not available or otherwise not feasible. 
(e)  In determining the lowest responsive, responsible solicitation, a preference of up to five percent or $2,500.00, whichever is least, may be given to manufacturers, distributors, materialman and suppliers having physical local business addresses within the 30223 or 30224 zip code areas. Otherwise, as far as may be reasonable and practicable without sacrificing price or quality, preference may be given to Georgia suppliers over out-of-state suppliers. A similar preference may be given to American suppliers over foreign suppliers. The policy set forth in this section shall not apply to public works contracts in which federal or state funding is provided. 
( Ord. No. 18-14, § 1, 11-27-2018 )  
Sec. 2-194. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 2-195. - Short title. 
This division shall be known as the identity theft prevention program. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 10-28-2008)  
Sec. 2-196. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 10-28-2008)  
Sec. 2-197. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this division, the following definitions shall apply: 
City means the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
Consumer report shall have the same meaning as in Section 603(d) of the Fair Credit Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. 1681a(d)). 
Consumer report information means any record about an individual, whether in paper, electronic, or other form, that is contained in a consumer report or is derived from a consumer report, including personal identifying, medical and financial information. 
Covered account means (i) An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and (ii) Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Disposal means the discarding or abandonment of consumer report information, including personal identifying information, medical information or financial information that may be contained in or derived from a consumer report or in a covered account; or, the sale, donation, or transfer of any medium, including computer equipment, on which such information was stored. 
Governing authority means the Board of Commissioners of the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, a government or governmental subdivision or agency, a trust, an estate, a partnership, a cooperative, or an association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information, bank account information or driver's license information, and for a natural person includes their Social Security number, mother's birth or maiden name, and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 10-28-2008)  
Sec. 2-198. - Findings. 
(a)  The city is a "creditor" pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water, wastewater, stormwater, electric, and solid waste. 
(c)  The city's previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts is as follows: Within the past three years, attempts have been made to open a utility account using fraudulent personal identifying information. In addition, payment of accounts have been made by presentment of forged checks. Information about these incidences was immediately given to the appropriate law enforcement agency by city staff. 
(d)  The processes of opening a new covered account, handling existing covered account, restoring an existing covered account, and making payments on such accounts have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(e)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(f)  The city determines that there is a risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways: 
(1)  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
(2)  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
(3)  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and 
(4)  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 10-28-2008)  
Sec. 2-199. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account, each applicant shall provide the city with a valid government-issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer, or, for customers who are not natural persons, the same type identification card of the customer's agent who is opening the account and proof of the agent's authority to do so. Such applicant shall also, upon request, provide any information necessary for the city to access the applicant's consumer credit report. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. 
(b)  Each account shall be assigned an account number which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to encrypt account numbers. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 10-28-2008)  
Sec. 2-200. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(b)  Such password(s) shall be changed by the manager of the information technology department or his designee on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain a combination of upper and lowercase letters, numbers and symbols. 
(c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts shall be reported immediately to the information technology manager and the password changed immediately. 
(d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the customer service manager. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 10-28-2008)  
Sec. 2-201. - Payments and bank drafts. 
(a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)  Credit card payments may only be made over the telephone or the city's website after verification by password or confirmation of personal identifying information. Such payment information shall be entered directly into the customer's account in the computer data base and shall not be otherwise recorded. 
(c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of any credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 10-28-2008)  
Sec. 2-202. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account, handling a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft. Such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts from banks or financial institutions, consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include but are not limited to: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
i.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
ii.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
iii.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
iv.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the creditor. For example: 
i.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
ii.  The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the creditor. 
d.  Other questionable information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as one submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the address or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, the city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
i.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
ii.  A material change in the pattern of use of provided city services. 
c.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
d.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
e.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
f.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 10-28-2008)  
Sec. 2-203. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account, handling an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the customer service manager, who will notify the city manager and/or appropriate law enforcement agency. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the customer service manager who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the customer service manager in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall be directed to perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the customer service manager: 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  Make the following changes to the account if it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.  Close the account; 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(5)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(b)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the customer service manager who will notify the city manager and/or appropriate law enforcement agency. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the customer service manager, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the customer service manager in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the customer service manager: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 10-28-2008)  
Sec. 2-204. - Disposal of personal identifying information in covered accounts. 
(a)  In accordance with applicable laws and ordinances pertaining to retention and disposal of public records, it shall be the goal of the city to take reasonable measures to prevent unauthorized access to and use of consumer report information and any personal identifying information, medical information, and financial information contained in covered accounts while such information is needed and maintained by the city, and to properly dispose of such information within a reasonable time after a covered account becomes inactive or the purpose for attaining such information has been extinguished. 
(b)  Measures shall be implemented to burn, pulverize or shred all documents containing such information so that the information cannot be read or reconstructed, including the erasure or destruction of electronic media on which such information was stored. 
(c)  Whenever the city elects to transfer such documents, files or data, regardless of the medium in which stored, to an independent destruction contractor for ultimate disposition, due diligence shall be exercised in the selection and retention of the contractor, including: 
(1)  Reviewing and evaluating the company's information security policies and procedures; 
(2)  Obtaining information about the company from several reliable references; and 
(3)  Conducting a background investigation on the contractor, including a compliance audit of similar contracts with other entities. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 10-28-2008)  
Sec. 2-204.1. - Program administration. 
The customer service manager is directly responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager or his or her designee is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued covered types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)  The customer service manager will report to the city manager at least annually on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.  Service provider arrangements; 
c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)  The customer service manager shall be responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The customer service manager shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 10-28-2008)  
Sec. 2-204.2. - Updating the program. 
The board of commissioners shall annually review staff compliance reports, including any recommendations, and, if deemed necessary, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the board of commissioners shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of committing identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in techniques and methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Changes in the payment methods and types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Changes in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 10-28-2008)  
Sec. 2-204.3. - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts, the customer service manager, the city manager or his or her designated contracts compliance officer, and the city attorney shall exercise their discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of their ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures agreed upon by contract which are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 10-28-2008)  
Sec. 2-204.4. - Treatment of address discrepancies. 
(a)  Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this section is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(b)  In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
a.  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(1); 
b.  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
c.  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
(2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(c)  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
(1)  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
(2)  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
(3)  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(d)  The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)  Verifying the address through third-party sources; or 
(4)  Using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 10-28-2008)  
ARTICLE V. - RECORDS RETENTION 
 
Sec. 2-205. - Retention schedules for local government records—Adopted. 
"Retention Schedules For Local Government Records", as promulgated by the Archives, Records and Information Management Section, Georgia Secretary of State, effective April 1, 2005, as from time to time amended, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as the minimum retention schedules for public records of the city. For purposes of this section, definitions found at O.C.G.A. § 50-18-91 are hereby incorporated by reference. Municipal court records shall be maintained in accordance with those standards promulgated, from time to time, by the Georgia Administrative Office of Courts. 
Notwithstanding an applicable records retention schedule to the contrary, records relevant to an actual or potential investigation, administrative proceeding, or lawsuit, shall be preserved until the city attorney or other legal representative of the city determines the records are no longer needed. This exception supersedes any previously or subsequently established retention schedule for those records. 
(Ord. No. 06-10, § 1, 11-14-2006)  
Sec. 2-206. - Compliance. 
The city manager and each department head under the city manager will be responsible for overseeing implementation, maintenance, security and compliance with record retention requirements. The responsibility imposed by this section includes training and education of employees in the creation, storage, indexing or archival [archiving] of public records, records management and retention, compliance with open records laws, and production and disclosure of records in litigation. 
(Ord. No. 06-10, § 2, 11-14-2006)  
Sec. 2-207. - Records management officer. 
The city manager is hereby appointed and designated as the records management officer for the city. It shall be the duty of the records management officer to promulgate policies and procedures governing public records management ("records management program") and the training, supervision and discipline of officers and employees for violations of such policies and procedures. Such policies and procedures shall include electronically stored information in addition to records created or maintained in tangible format. The records management officer may designate, in writing, such assistant or deputy officers as required to perform the duties of his office. 
(Ord. No. 06-10, § 3, 11-14-2006)  
Sec. 2-208. - Title vested in city. 
Title to any public record created or required to be filed or recorded with the city or any department or agency thereof shall be vested in the city and no individual officer or employee shall acquire any property rights therein. Any records designated as "confidential" or "privileged" by law shall be so treated in their creation, maintenance, storage, dissemination, and disposal. Access to such records shall be restricted in the manner provided by law and disclosure thereof shall be made available only to authorized individuals. Unauthorized disclosure or the granting of access to any restricted public record of the city, except in strict accordance with this article and any records management program adopted pursuant thereto, shall constitute grounds for disciplinary action against city officers and employees responsible for such action, including removal from office or dismissal from employment. 
(Ord. No. 06-10, § 4, 11-14-2006)  
Sec. 2-209. - Destruction of records. 
The destruction of public records shall occur only through the application of the appropriate retention schedule and after satisfying any administrative approvals necessary to authorize destruction. Alienation, alteration, theft or unauthorized destruction of public records of the city by any person or persons in a manner not authorized by an applicable records management program or retention schedule is prohibited, and may result in such person's criminal prosecution and/or removal from public office or dismissal from public employment. 
(Ord. No. 06-10, § 5, 11-14-2006)  
Secs. 2-210—2-214. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - NON-DISCRIMINATION 
 
Sec. 2-215. - Purpose and intent. 
Throughout this Code, provisions are made for the issuance by the city of various licenses, permits, and approvals. Some are required by federal or state law while others are part of a comprehensive regulatory scheme adopted by this board of commissioners. The commission finds that the number of ever-increasing demands on city staff, resources, and infrastructure is limited, not only by budgetary constraints, but physical limitations and manpower. It is the objective of this commission to utilize its resources wisely, fairly, and in the most efficient manner, while requiring consideration of criteria and standards without discrimination or favor. The intent of this article is to recognize and provide guidance for city staff and this commission as the city's governing authority to ensure that city services, privileges, and benefits are delivered in a non-discriminatory manner. 
Most all forms of licenses, permits, and approvals required by the city involve some form of deployment of city resources. In order to conserve and allocate these resources wisely, the city often must balance competing factors affecting its citizens, property owners, residents and businesses. Licensing and permitting often requires some form of due process, or notice, and can only be approved following a hearing or other means of allowing citizens to be heard. Adequate advance notice to the pertinent city staff is key to timely and relevant decision-making, as well as a full understanding of material facts and the applicant's objectives. Normally, the burden is on the applicant to apprise the city staff of material information by filing a complete application. 
Fees charged in relation to permits or licenses are established to recoup the city's cost of permit/license review and administration. In certain cases, the fee will also seek to recoup anticipated costs to the city for the burden placed on infrastructure and services, such as additional security and traffic control. The upfront payment of required fees is part of the submission of a complete application. Waiver or reduction of fees and waiver of a complete written application is discouraged, except as incentives for economic development, and should only be approved by the city manager, upon written recommendation of a department manager. 
Last, while it is the general intent of this commission to make its permitting and licensing procedures as simplified as possible, the need for fully informed decision-making by city staff and this commission mandates the need for consistency and transparency, which are only attainable through a written application process, followed by documented verification and review. In all instances where applications are filed, the city will seek to provide a timely response to the applicant, with all final decisions (approval, denial, or approval upon reasonable conditions) given to the applicant in writing. 
( Ord. No. 16-03, § 1, 2-9-2016 )  
Sec. 2-216. - Non-discrimination. 
This provision shall apply to all licensing, permitting, and/or approval requests found in this Code. Though certain Code sections may contain objective criteria or standards relevant to the specific license, permit, or approval sought, this provision shall serve as an overlay and guide the decision-making process. 
(1)  No license, permit, or approval shall be denied nor shall the applicant be given less favorable treatment as to time, place, or manner requirements or conditions on account of the race, color, creed, religion, gender, domestic relationship status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, political affiliation, or gender identity of the applicant and/or participants in the business, undertaking, event, or activity to be carried out by the applicant under such license, permit, or approval. 
(2)  No license, permit, or approval shall be denied nor shall the applicant be given less favorable treatment as to time, place, or manner requirements or conditions based upon the message or content of speech of the applicant and/or participants in the business, undertaking, event, or activity to be carried out by the applicant under such license, permit, or approval. 
(3)  Where it is assumed or reasonably believed that issuance of a license, permit, or approval is likely to result in unreasonable hostility by opponents of an applicant and/or its group or entity, or there is a heighten risk to public safety, based upon the content of speech or the message conveyed by the applicant and/or participants in the undertaking, event, or activity to be carried out by the applicant under such license, permit, or approval, reasonable accommodation as to time, place, and manner requirements shall be afforded, including provision of city resources necessary for traffic control, and police and fire protection; provided, however, payment for or reimbursement of the cost of such accommodation may be imposed by the city as a reasonable condition for such approval. 
(4)  All other conditions or modifications of the time, place, and manner requirements for a license, permit, or approval shall be reasonable and imposed based upon compelling reasons relating to public safety, health, or the environment. When approval is based upon the imposition of reasonable conditions, all such conditions shall be clearly set forth in the written notice of decision. 
( Ord. No. 16-03, § 1, 2-9-2016 )  
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, adopted August 22, 2017 , repealed the former Ch. 6, §§ 6-1—6-4, 6-31—6-57, 6-76—6-79, 6-101—6-103, 6-121—6-125, 6-151—6-154, 6-170, 6-176—6-188, 6-201—6-208, 6-226—6-231, and enacted a new Ch. 6 as set out herein. The former Ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 17-01, § 1, adopted Feb. 24, 2017 . 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine, intended for human consumption. 
Authorized catered event means a function held at a location within the city for which an event permit has been issued in accordance with this section. 
Bar means any premises at which a licensed retailer derives 75 percent or more total annual gross revenue from the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. Under this chapter, a bar may only be licensed to operate on premises located within a special entertainment district designated by the board of commissioners. 
Barrel means (a) as related to distilled spirits, 53 gallons; and (b) as relates to malt beverages, 31 gallons. 
Bouncer means an individual primarily performing duties in a bar related to verifying age for admittance, security, maintaining order, or safety, or a combination thereof. 
Brewer means a manufacturer of malt beverages. 
Brewpub means an eating establishment in which malt beverages are manufactured on the premises, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36. 
Bona fide private club means any nonprofit association organized under the laws of the state which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; 
(2)  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members; 
(3)  Owns, hires, or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
a.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; and 
b.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
(4)  Has no member, officer, agent, or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
Brownbagging means the bringing, taking or carrying of any alcoholic beverage into a business lawfully operating within the city but not licensed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises, with the intent to consume such alcoholic beverage on the premises, or the taking of any alcoholic beverage into premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages during such times the sale or consumption of such beverages is prohibited by law; provided that bringing an alcoholic beverage into a house, apartment, room or other unit designed for private residential occupancy for consumption by the residents and invited guests thereof shall not fall within this definition. 
Craft beer, as defined by the Brewers Association, Boulder, Colorado, the trade organization for the craft beer/microbrewing industry, are beers (a form of malt beverage) produced by a small, independent brewer who follows traditional brewing processes using select, sometimes non-traditional, ingredients to produce a distinctive product. Craft brewers produce very limited annual quantities, much less than traditional breweries which produce millions of barrels per year. 
Dessert wine means a wine having an alcoholic strength of more than 14 percent alcohol by volume but not more than 24 percent alcohol by volume. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Distiller means a manufacturer of distilled spirits. 
Domestic winery means any winery, manufacturer, maker, producer, or bottler of wine located within this state. 
Eating establishment means an establishment open to the public which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, and/or wines for consumption on the premises and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food as its principal business purpose. In order to be licensed for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises under this chapter, eating establishments are expected to keep and maintain regular days and hours of operation, at least four (4) days per week, as a convenience to the public, other than holidays, vacations, and periods when closed for repairs or remodeling. When determining the total annual gross food and beverage sales for eating establishments operating as a brewpub, barrels of malt beverages sold to licensed wholesale dealers, or packaged in bottles or growlers sold to the public for consumption off the premises, shall not be used. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, brandy. Fortified wine is classified as a distilled spirit. 
Food caterer means any person who prepares food for consumption off the premises where prepared and offers it, for hire, at an authorized catered event. 
Fruit grower means any person who grows peaches, apples, pears, grapes, or other perishable fruits in this state and who manufactures distilled spirits from the perishable fruits grown in this state. 
Georgia farm winery means a domestic winery which makes at least 40 percent of its annual production from berries, fruits and grapes grown in the State of Georgia and which is directly licensed by the Commissioner of Revenue to manufacture wine in this state. 
Growler means a bottle, container or vessel, with a capacity of at least 32 ounces and not exceeding 64 ounces that is designed for and especially intended to be filled with a craft beer from a keg by a licensee, or employee of a licensee, holding an eating establishment, brewpub, hotel, or bar license for on premises consumption issued pursuant to this chapter, or a specialty package retailer. A refilled growler that has been properly sealed shall be considered an "unbroken package" for purposes of this chapter. 
Hotel means any lodge, inn, or similar establishment which offers overnight sleeping accommodations to registered guests for hire, and at which one or more prepared meals or food are regularly served daily and consumed in one or more dining rooms, having an adequate and sanitary kitchen, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted on the same premises. Hotels may grant franchises for the operation of an eating establishment and lounge on their premises, and the holder of such franchise shall be included in this definition of hotel. Lounges may be located separately from dining facilities in hotels provided there is a commonality of ownership of the eating establishment and lounge. 
Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer means any Georgia retail dealer licensed, either for package sales or on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages, who additionally holds a valid license from a county or municipality to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wine for consumption off-premises at authorized catered events. 
Lounge means a separate room adjacent to and under common ownership with an eating establishment in which alcoholic beverages may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises. Except in the case of a bona fide private club or hotel, as defined in this section, a lounge shall be part of the eating establishment, as defined in this section, and shall be interconnected by a doorway opening into the dining area of the eating establishment. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than fourteen percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any distiller engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer; and 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vintner. 
Person means any individual, company, corporation, association, partnership, or other legal entity. 
Powdered alcohol means a powdered or crystalline substance that contains any amount of alcohol for direct use or reconstitution. 
Premises, when used in conjunction with package sales, means the floor space on and from which the package sale of alcoholic beverages is conducted; when used in conjunction with a lounge or restaurant, it means that floor space on and from which the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises is conducted. 
Prepared meals or food means a meal cooked or prepared on the premises of the eating establishment according to the order of the customer, while seated at a table, in a booth, at a counter or bar, and primarily intended for consumption on the premises where prepared. 
Proper identification means any document issued by a government agency containing a description of the person and such person's photograph, and giving the person's date of birth; proper identification includes, but is not limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or identification card issued under O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-100 through 40-5-104. Proper identification shall not include a birth certificate. 
Public club means an establishment, other than an "eating establishment" or a "bar" as defined in this chapter, having the principle purpose of offering live music, dancing, theatrical productions or comedians, and at which the consumption on-premises of alcoholic beverages is incidental. A public club shall not be operated or conducted in conjunction with any other mercantile business, trade or profession, and may offer and sell only those items commonly associated with such establishments. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells, at retail only to consumers and not for resale, distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages for consumption on the licensed premises. 
Retail package dealer means any person engaged in selling, at retail only to consumers and not for resale, any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages in unbroken packages intended for carryout or consumption off the licensed premises. 
Special entertainment district means the area or areas of the city, designated by the board of commissioners, in which bars, public clubs, specialty package retailers, and domestic farm winery tasting rooms are an acceptable land use, as designated on a map labeled "special entertainment district", the original of which is appended hereto as Exhibit "A" and, by reference, made a part hereof as if fully set out herein, including all properties fronting on any streets forming the boundaries of such district(s) and facing toward the district. For purposes of authenticity, the current map of the special entertainment district shall be signed and dated by the chairperson of the board of commissioners and publically displayed in the city administrative office; all future revisions to said map shall be enacted by ordinance and authenticated as provided herein. 
Specialty package retailer means a licensee under this chapter, operating from a fixed premise within the special entertainment district of the city, that may offer to the public package retail sales of craft malt beverages (beer) and/or wine(s) only, provided at least 50 percent of the floor space is dedicated to the retail sale of gourmet food items (not intended for consumption on the premises, such as a butcher shop and/or delicatessen meats, cheeses, breads and bakery items, and condiments) and related items or accessories, such as cooking and serving utensils, vessels and kitchen equipment, party or entertainment-related items (cups, plates, napkins, etc.) and beer and/or wine-making equipment and ingredients. Licensees may also sell unique marketing items, such as imprinted logo tee-shirts and hats. 
Table wine means a wine having an alcoholic strength of not more than 14 percent by volume. 
Tasting room means an outlet for the promotion of a manufacturer's product by providing samples of such product to the public on the premises where manufactured, or on premises adjacent thereto under common ownership, and for the sale of such product at retail for consumption on the premises and for sale in closed packages for consumption off the premises. Samples can be given free of charge or for a fee. Offsite tasting rooms of a domestic farm winery may only be located within a special entertainment district designated by the board of commissioners. 
Vintner means a manufacturer of wine. 
Wholesaler means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to package dealers, or to on-premises consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combination of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
ARTICLE II. - PURPOSE AND INTENT; VIOLATIONS. 
 
Sec. 6-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter is enacted in furtherance of the police powers of the city to promote the health and general welfare of its citizens; to regulate and control by licensing the manufacturing and sale of malt beverages, wine, and distilled spirits, either at wholesale or retail, for consumption on the premises or by the package for off-premises consumption; to establish reasonable regulations and ascertainable standards for licensees and consumers which will ensure responsible consumption and use of alcoholic beverages and protect the public peace; to protect schools, churches, and residential areas from the negative secondary effects attributable to establishments that sell malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits; and to ensure that only qualified persons obtain licenses for the sale, manufacture, or distribution of malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-3. - Compliance with chapter. 
No person shall distribute or sell, or offer for sale, any alcoholic beverages at wholesale, by the package, or for consumption on the premises, within the city without first having complied with the licensing provisions of state law and this chapter. No person licensed or issued a permit pursuant to this chapter shall use powdered alcohol as an alcoholic beverage or use powdered alcohol to create an alcoholic beverage. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-4. - Violations; penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person knowingly and intentionally to violate any prohibition contained in this chapter. Any person found guilty of or entering a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a violation of this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-12. Any violation of this chapter by a person licensed or issued a permit pursuant to this chapter shall constitute grounds for the suspension and revocation of any and all such licenses and permits issued to such person. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Secs. 6-5—6-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LICENSES; QUALIFICATIONS; LOCATION RESTRICTIONS; SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES 
 
Sec. 6-31. - Required. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages in the city without first having obtained a license therefor, provided that wholesalers and distributors maintaining no fixed place of business, warehouse or other facility in the city and possessing a valid state license may make sales and deliveries to licensed retail package dealers and licensed retail consumption dealers without obtaining a city license. 
(b)  Except as specifically authorized in this chapter, no person licensed for the sale of a particular class of alcoholic beverages may sell other class of alcoholic beverage without first obtaining the required license therefor; provided, however, a person licensed to sell distilled spirits for on-premises consumption shall be authorized to serve malt beverages and wine, without obtaining a separate license, during the same hours as are permitted under this chapter for the serving of distilled spirits by the drink. 
(c)  A retail consumption dealer may also sell beer or wine (but no packaged distilled spirits) by the unbroken package for carryout purposes only, without obtaining a separate license, provided, such package sales shall not be made on any day or at any time when the sale of package beer and/or wine for carryout purposes is otherwise prohibited by law, or from any location (licensed premises) which is within distances to grounds or buildings where the package sale of alcoholic beverages for carryout purposes is otherwise prohibited by law. Floor space within the licensed premises for packaged beer or wine shall not exceed ten percent of the area designated for sale and consumption on the premises. The sale of beer or wine by the package for off-premises consumption shall not be used in calculating the total annual gross food and beverage sales for an eating establishment. A brewpub licensee shall not be prohibited from selling wine and malt beverages by the package for consumption off the premises. A retail consumption dealer shall not sell distilled spirits by the package at any time. 
(d)  Any eating establishment which is licensed to sell wine for consumption on the premises may permit a patron to remove one opened bottle per patron for consumption off the premises if the patron has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine with such meal on the eating establishment's premises. The partially consumed bottle of wine shall be recorked or securely resealed by the licensee or its employees and placed in a bag or other container, with a dated receipt for the wine and meal attached to the container. If the licensee charges a recorking fee, such fee shall not exceed $3.00 per bottle of wine. If transported in a motor vehicle, the container with the resealed bottle of wine shall be placed in a locked glove compartment, a locked trunk, or the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. 
(e)  The license to manufacture distilled spirits in this state shall include the right to sell up to 500 barrels of distilled spirits per year produced at the distiller's license premises to individuals who are on such premises for (1) consumption on the premises; and (2) consumption off the premises, provided that such sales for consumption off the premises shall not exceed a maximum of 2.250 milliliters of distilled spirits per customer per day. 
(f)  The license to manufacture malt beverages shall include the right to sell up to 3,000 barrels of malt beverages per year produced at the brewer's licensed premises to individuals who are on such premises for (1) consumption on the premises, and (2) consumption off the premises, provided that such sales for consumption off the premises shall not exceed a maximum of 288 ounces of malt beverages per consumer per day. 
(g)  The license to manufacture wine by a Georgia farm winery shall include the right to offer wine samples and to make retail sales of its wine and the wine of any other Georgia farm winery in a tasting room on the premises of the winery, or on property located contiguous to the farm winery and owned by the farm winery, for consumption on the premises and in closed packages for consumption off the premises; provided, however, the commissioner of revenue may authorize a vintner to establish up to five additional locations in this state for off-site tasting rooms, and to ship and sell in bulk or in bottles, its wines. Limitations on the quantities and terms of sale shall be established by state law. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-32. - Classification. 
Licenses issued under this chapter are classified as follows: 
(1)  Manufacturer: Distillery/brewery/brewpub*/winery. 
(2)  Wholesaler: Malt beverages/wine. 
(3)  Wholesaler: Distilled spirits. 
(4)  Eating establishment: On-premises consumption: malt beverages. 
(5)  Eating establishment: On-premises consumption: wine. 
(6)  Eating establishment: On-premises consumption: distilled spirits. 
(7)  Public club/bar: Malt beverages/wine.** 
(8)  Public club/bar: Distilled spirits.** 
(9)  Hotel: Malt beverages/wine. 
(10)  Hotel: Distilled spirits. 
(11)  Retail package: Malt beverages/wine. 
(12)  Retail package: Distilled spirits. 
(13)  Retail package: Specialty package retailer.** 
(14)  Private clubs: Malt beverages/wine. 
(15)  Private clubs: Distilled spirits. 
(16)  Alcohol beverage caterer: Malt beverages/wine. 
(17)  Alcohol beverage caterer: Distilled spirits. 
(18)  Fraternal organization: Malt beverages/wine. 
(19)  Fraternal organization: Distilled spirits. 
(20)  Ancillary tasting. *** 
*Brewpub license shall only issue in conjunction with on-premises consumption license for an eating establishment and shall be governed by the provisions of this article pertaining to on-premises consumption licensees. 
**License shall only issue for location within special entertainment district as defined in this chapter. 
***License issued only for establishments licensed for retail consumption of alcoholic beverages, including brewpubs, or retail package sales of malt beverages and/or wine only. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-33. - Qualifications of applicants. 
(a)  No license shall be granted under this chapter to any applicant who is not a citizen or resident legal alien of the United States possessing proper authorization to own a business; provided, however, except for a retail dealer's license for distilled spirits, residency by an applicant shall not be a requirement if the applicant designates a resident of the city, Spalding County, or county bordering Spalding County who shall manage the business operated under the license and be responsible for any matter relating to the license. As required by state law, an applicant for a retail dealer's license for the sale of distilled spirits in unbroken packages must be a bona fide resident of Georgia residing for at least 12 months in a county where the sale of distilled spirits is not prohibited, as evidenced by the certificate of the probate court of the county of the applicant's residence. Residency requirements shall be met continuously during the term of the license. 
(b)  All applications shall be in the name of the person(s) who will own and operate the licensed establishment, unless a business entity duly formed and in good standing. Business entities registered with the Secretary of State (corporations, limited liability companies, limited liability partnerships, trusts, estates, etc.) shall apply for a license in the legal name of the entity, and the license shall be issued in the name of such entity. Applicants shall attach to the application a certificate showing compliance with the annual registration requirements from the Secretary of State, corporate division, and showing the name and address of a registered agent for service within the state. In the case of closely-held corporate applicants, the majority stockholder must meet the requirements of individual applicants under this subsection at the time application is made and at all times during which the license is in effect. Where the applicant is a corporation or other business entity, an agent involved in the active management of the business to be licensed, as designated by resolution, shall meet the requirements of individual applicants under this subsection at the time application is made and at all times during which the license is in effect. 
(c)  General partnerships shall apply for a license in the name of one of the partners, who is a resident of this state, and the license shall be issued in the name of all partners of the partnership. If the applicant is a partner in a partnership, the requirements of this section shall apply to all partners at the time of application, and at all times during which the license is in effect. 
(d)  A fraternal organization shall be permitted to apply for a license in the name of any qualified officer of the organization. 
(e)  In addition to meeting all qualifications for a license under state law, all applicants for licenses, whether original or renewal, must attach to their applications evidence of their good character. In addition to meeting state qualification standards, no license, whether original or renewal, shall be issued to any person, partnership, corporation, or business entity organized for pecuniary gain if any individual having an interest either as owner, partner or stockholder, directly or indirectly, beneficial or absolute, or such person's spouse, shall have been convicted of or shall have taken a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to, within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application of any felony, or within five years immediately prior to filing of the application of any misdemeanor, except non-moving traffic violations; provided, however, the city manager shall have discretion to waive any misdemeanor conviction, based upon its factual circumstances, which does not reflect adversely on the applicant's good character. The restrictions of this subsection as to stockholders shall apply only to stockholders of closely-held corporations and to stockholders of publicly-traded corporations who hold in excess of ten percent of outstanding stock. 
(f)  On-premises consumption licenses shall be issued only to applicants who meet the definition of a hotel, eating establishment, Georgia farm winery tasting room, public club/bar, fraternal organization, or bona fide private club. In addition to sales of its own malt beverage brewed on the premises, the holder of a brewpub (manufacturer) license shall separately be licensed as an eating establishment and hold retail consumption licenses for distilled spirits, malt beverages and wine, purchased from licensed wholesalers, and an ancillary tasting license. 
(g)  All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall expire on December 31 of each year and application for renewal shall be made annually on or before November 1. Applicants for renewal licenses must meet all qualifications of applicants for original licenses. Licenses in suspension on the date of expiration shall not be subject to renewal until the terms of the suspension have been lifted. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-34. - Application submission; basic information. 
(a)  Every applicant for a license under this chapter shall make written application to the city manager on forms furnished by the city. The applicant shall answer all questions on the application truthfully, under oath, and shall supply all information and furnish all certificates, affidavits, bonds and other supporting data or documents as required by this chapter. No application shall be deemed complete unless accompanied by a set of the applicant(s)' fingerprints, which shall be promptly submitted to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(c). 
(b)  Each application shall state the name and address of each applicant; the place where the proposed business is to be located; and the type(s) of license(s) applied for. The application shall also contain a beginning balance sheet showing the proposed original capitalization of the business and its source. If an applicant is a corporation or other business entity, the application shall state the names of all officers and owners of the entity and the percentage ownership of each. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall state the names of all partners therein, whether general or limited. All applications shall include the names of all persons that have or will have a direct or indirect beneficial interest in the business for which the license is sought. Each application shall also contain such additional information as the city manager prescribes, shall be verified as true by the applicant before a notary public and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable deposit of $150.00 to cover the cost of investigating the applicant and processing the application. If granted, the application fee shall apply against the initial license fee. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-35. - Distance prohibitions. 
(a)  In order to demonstrate a location meets all distance prohibitions imposed by state law, each application shall be accompanied by a scale drawing of the premises for the proposed business, showing its location with respect to all streets within 800 feet in every direction. The front door or main entrance of the proposed location shall be the center point of a circle, having a radius of 600 feet. Such drawing shall also depict the distance from the premises to each church building, school building, educational building, school ground, college campus, governmentally owned and operated alcohol treatment center and housing authority property within the circumference of the circle. Applications for package dealers in distilled spirits shall also show the distance to the nearest distilled spirits package dealer therein, if any. All such distances shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. 
(b)  Licensees for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall not be subject to regulation as to distances from churches, schools, and colleges, but shall meet state distance requirements from governmentally owned and operated alcohol treatment centers and housing authority property; provided, however, licensees for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises located within prohibited distances from churches, schools, and colleges shall not sell any malt beverages or wine by the sealed package for carryout purposes. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-36. - Review of application. 
In reviewing an application under this chapter, the city manager may utilize the chief of police and other city officials with respect to matters within their areas of expertise. All applicants shall furnish such additional data, information and records as may be requested of them by the city manager, chief of police or other city officer such as would be useful in determining whether to approve or reject such application. Copies of all form ATT-17, Personnel Statements, filed with the state shall be submitted with the application. By filing an application, the applicant agrees to produce for oral interrogation any person who is to have a beneficial interest in the business for which the license is sought or who is to be employed by such business. The failure to provide requested data, information and records or to make those persons specified available for interrogation within a reasonable time shall be grounds for denial of an application. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-37. - Ownership of premises. 
Unless the applicant under this chapter will own the premises from which the business will be conducted, the application shall also disclose the name of every person owning a beneficial interest in the premises and shall state the amount of rental to be paid, the manner in which the rental is to be determined, and to whom and at what intervals the rent is to be paid. The applicant shall also attach a copy of the proposed lease with the verified statement of the applicant that such lease contains the entire agreement between the parties. No license shall be issued to an applicant who leases premises under a variable rent system whereby the landlord shares in the profits from the business. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-38. - Limitations on interest in licenses. 
No person shall have, own or enjoy any ownership interest in, share in the profits from, or otherwise participate in the business of any alcoholic beverage license unless a full description of such interest shall have been furnished to the city at the time of making application for the license. It shall be the continuing duty of an alcoholic beverage licensee to report to the city manager, in writing, within ten days, any change in any interest in such licensee's business. Failure to report to such change in interest shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license. Under the de minimis concept, a person who owns less than ten percent of the shares of a corporation whose stock is publicly traded shall not, on the fact of stock ownership alone, be deemed to have a beneficial interest in a license held by a corporation. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-39. - Sale, distribution and other dealing in alcoholic beverages within the city by officials and employees; exemptions. 
(a)  No member of the board of commissioners holding or having a beneficial interest in any alcohol license issued by the city shall vote or participate in the consideration of any action affecting such alcohol license issued by the city. For purposes of this section, a member shall be deemed to have or hold a beneficial interest if the license is issued in the name of the person's spouse, child, parent or sibling, or in a partnership or corporation in which such person owns more than ten percent controlling interest. 
(b)  No officer or employee of the city, whose official duties involve issuance and regulation of alcoholic beverage licenses or the enforcement of alcoholic beverage laws, shall hold any interest, direct or indirect, in any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city or in any establishment licensed by the city to engage in the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages. The city manager, upon advice and consent of the board of commissioners, may exempt officers and employees of the city from the provisions of this section, upon written finding that such officer or employee's involvement, direct or beneficial, in any business licensed by the city to engage in the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages would pose no conflict of interest or interference with the performance by the officer or employee of his official duties for the city. 
(c)  No officer or employee of the city shall be permitted to engage in employment with any person, firm or corporation licensed by the city to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages. The city manager may, in writing, exempt those officers or employees from the prohibition of this section, upon finding that such employment would pose no conflict of interest or interference with the performance by the officer or employee of his official duties for the city; provided, however, no certified police officer shall be permitted employment by any establishment that deals in alcoholic beverages without first obtaining the written consent of the chief of police. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-40. - Standard for new license at existing location. 
An application for a new alcoholic beverage license for an existing licensed location shall be subject to all the requirements for the granting of an original application for a new license. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-41. - Location restrictions for wholesalers' and manufacturers' licenses. 
With the exception of a brewpub licensed in conjunction with an eating establishment, no manufacturer's or wholesaler's license under this chapter shall be issued except for premises located within an industrial zoning classification or within the Central Business District (CBD) zoning classification, and meeting all requirements of the city zoning and developmental ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-42. - Location restrictions for package sales. 
(a)  Retail package sales of distilled spirits shall be conducted only in package stores with a minimum wholesale inventory value of $50,000.00. 
(b)  Except as allowed by section 6-31(c) and the provisions of this chapter for specialty package retailers, package sales of malt beverages and/or wine intended for consumption off the premises may be conducted only in conjunction with distilled spirits package stores or the business operation of a grocery store, discount/general merchandise department store, convenience store, or drugstore meeting the requirements of this section. For the purpose of this subpart, "grocery store" shall mean a grocery retailer carrying a full selection of food and grocery items, including fresh produce and meats and having a minimum total retail floor space of 10,000 square feet of which at least 85 percent is reserved for the sale of food and other nonalcoholic beverage items. A "convenience store" shall mean a retail store carrying a limited selection of canned, packaged or prepared food and grocery items and at which gasoline may be regularly available for sale, provided that no service or mechanical work is performed on motor vehicles, and provided further that the minimum wholesale value of the inventory of food and grocery items maintained on the premises for sale to the public is no less than $10,000.00, exclusive of malt beverages and wine, tobacco products and candy. Discount/general-merchandise department store means a store with retail floor space open to the public in excess of 9,000 square feet of which no more than 4 percent is devoted to the sale of alcoholic beverages. For the purpose of this section a "drugstore" shall mean a retail store at which prescription drugs and medications are dispensed under the control of a licensed pharmacist, and which sells at retail various personal health-related items for which prescriptions are not required. 
(c)  Licenses for the package sale of distilled spirits will be issued only for premises located within a commercial zoning classification under the city's Unified Development Code, and fronting on one of the following streets: 
(1)  North Expressway (Hwy. 19/41) from the north city limit south to its intersection with Taylor Street. 
(2)  Taylor Street/Memorial Drive/Arthur K. Bolton Parkway (Hwy. 16) from west city limit to east city limit; provided that no license for the package sale of distilled spirits shall be granted for a premises located within the Special Entertainment district of the city. 
(3)  West McIntosh Road from the west city limit to its intersection with Old Atlanta Road (that portion of West McIntosh Road west of the North Expressway (U.S. Highways 19 and 41) is also designated as Georgia Highway 92 on the State Highway System). 
(4)  South Hill Street between Crescent Road and the south city limit. 
(5)  Williamson Road (S.R. 362) from the Martin Luther King, Jr. Bypass (S.R. 341/19 and 41) to the southwest city limits. 
No new license for the retail package sale of distilled spirits shall be approved for a location within 500 yards of any other business licensed to sell packaged distilled spirits at retail, as measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground; provided, however, that this limitation shall not apply to any hotel licensed under this chapter. 
(d)  A specialty package retailer, as defined by this chapter, may hold an ancillary tasting license under this chapter, but may not operate its business in conjunction with any other retail business except as allowed by this chapter. No package sales of any distilled spirit shall be permitted by a specialty package retailer, whose business premises shall be located within a special entertainment district as defined by this chapter. 
(e)  All premises at which the package sale of alcoholic beverages is authorized shall meet all requirements of state law and the city's Unified Development Code, as well as minimum building, fire and life safety codes. 
(f)  Premises licensed on May 15, 2001, for the package sale of distilled spirits and lying outside the locations authorized for package sales in subsection (c) may continue such operation, provided they are in compliance with all other provisions of this chapter. Cessation of any such business for 90 days creates a rebuttable presumption of abandonment and may result in loss of grandfather status and serve as grounds for revoking any current license. Except as provided herein, no new licenses for the package sale of distilled spirits shall be issued for a location not meeting the location requirements of subsection (c). 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-43. - Location restrictions for on-premises consumption. 
Licenses for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption in conjunction with an eating establishment, hotel, or bona fide private club shall only be issued on premises located within a commercial zoning classification and meeting all requirements of the city zoning and developmental ordinances. A brewpub may operate as an eating establishment and shall be licensed in conjunction with on-premises consumption of other alcoholic beverages purchased from a licensed wholesaler. Licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption at a bar or public club shall only be issued for premises located within a special entertainment district of the city, as herein defined. All applications for on-premises consumption licenses shall, by accompanying sketch or drawing made a part thereof, identify those portions of the premises, including any outside porches or patios, where alcoholic beverages may be sold and/or consumed; provided, however, hotels licensed for on-premises consumption shall be permitted to cater functions in ballrooms, meeting rooms, reception areas, or pool/patio areas in connection with a meeting, conference, convention or similar type gathering at such hotel. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-44. - Indebtedness to city. 
No license under this chapter shall be issued to any applicant if any person holding a beneficial interest in the business to be licensed owes any delinquent taxes or assessments to the city. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-45. - Investigation of application; issuance. 
Every application filed pursuant to this chapter shall be thoroughly investigated by the chief of police, who shall make a formal written report and recommendation to the city manager. The city manager shall review the chief's report and make such further investigation as he deems appropriate. All applications shall be investigated and acted upon within 90 days of the date of submission of a completed application, unless consent of the applicant to extend the investigative period has been obtained in writing. Inability of the city manager to obtain the good faith cooperation of the applicant in the investigation process, within the time period specified, shall constitute grounds for denial of the license. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-46. - Consideration for granting of licenses. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city manager to issue or refuse to issue a license under this chapter to any applicant. In determining whether or not any application shall be granted and a license issued, the city manager shall consider all mandated standards of this chapter and the following information in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)  If the applicant and/or any holder of an interest in the license has ever violated any federal, state, county or municipal law, ordinance or administrative regulation regarding alcoholic beverages, their possession, sale, manufacture, distribution, handling, or dealing therein; 
(2)  The manner in which the applicant and/or any holder of an interest in the license has conducted any business within the city as to the necessity for excessive police intervention; 
(3)  The reasonably anticipated effect on the immediately surrounding neighborhood for which the license is sought as to traffic congestion, noise and/or light pollution; 
(4)  Whether the applicant and/or any holder of an interest in the license has ever had any alcoholic beverage or business license suspended or revoked by any state or any political subdivision thereof, or whether any alcoholic beverage business with which the applicant and/or any holder of an interest in the license has been associated has been cited for a violation of the laws or regulations of any state or any local ordinance pertaining to alcoholic beverages, and the outcome of such proceedings. 
(b)  If, upon investigation of an application for a license or renewal of an existing license, the city manager determines the applicant or any of its employees have been convicted, or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendre, to any felony, any law, regulation or ordinance involving alcoholic beverages, gambling, narcotics, or tax laws, sufficient to warrant denial, the city manager shall have the option of issuing a probationary license conditioned upon posting a bond, with adequate security, in an amount not to exceed $5,000.00, in addition to the license or renewal fee. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-47. - Grant of application; notice of denial. 
(a)  All applications for alcoholic beverage licenses meeting this chapter shall be granted by the city manager for a period of up to one year, expiring on the last day of December in each year, unless some specific cause regarding location, traffic or environmental conditions or the specific causes set out in section 6-46 justifies a refusal. In the event of denial for location, traffic or environmental conditions, the applicant shall be entitled to file a new application of like kind for a different location without the loss of any part of the application fee. In the event the city requests additional documents during the application review, the 60-day review period shall be stayed until production of the additional documents is completed. 
(b)  If the city manager denies an application for a license, the applicant shall be provided notice in writing of the denial, and a listing of the reasons therefor. The applicant shall have the right to appeal to a hearing officer by filing a request for hearing with the city manager no more than ten days following receipt of the denial notice. A hearing shall be held not more than 30 days from the date the city manager receives the written notice of appeal. Within ten days from the date of conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall notify the applicant and the city manager, in writing of his decision. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-48. - False information in application. 
Any material omission from, or untrue or misleading information in, an original, renewal or transfer application for a license under this chapter shall be cause for the denial or refusal of a license, or for the revocation of a license previously granted. Any failure to notify the city manager of the change in any relationship as specified in section 6-38(d) within ten days after such change is made shall likewise constitute due cause for cancellation, revocation or suspension of a license. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-49. - License and permit fees. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed a license fee, payable at the time of issuance of the license under this chapter and each annual renewal license, as follows: 
Manufacturers, wholesalers and brewpubs: 
Manufacturer: Distillery, brewery, winery: $5,000.00. 
Wholesale: Malt beverages/wine: $100.00 only if wholesaler has business location within the city. 
Wholesale: Distilled spirits: $3,500.00 only if wholesaler has business location within the city. 
Brewpub: Beer only: $1,500.00 when issued in conjunction with eating establishment/on-premises consumption license. 
Eating establishments, Georgia farm winery tasting rooms, and hotels: 
On-premises consumption: Malt beverages: $500.00. 
On-premises consumption: Wine: $500.00. 
On-premises consumption: Distilled spirits: $4,000.00, includes malt beverages and wine when only served during same hours as distilled spirits. 
Public clubs and bars: 
On-premises consumption: Malt beverages: $1,000.00. 
On-premises consumption: Wine: $1,000.00. 
On-premises consumption: Distilled spirits: $5,000.00 includes malt beverages and wine when only served during same hours as distilled spirits. 
Retail package sales: 
Retail package: Malt beverages/wine: $1,500.00. 
Retail package: Distilled spirits: $5,000.00, includes malt beverages and wine. 
Retail package: Specialty package retailer (malt beverages/wine): $1,500.00. 
Private clubs and fraternal organizations: 
On-premises consumption: Malt beverages/wine: $350.00. 
On-premises consumption: Distilled spirits: $1,000.00. 
Alcohol beverage catering: 
Alcohol beverage caterer: Malt beverages/wine: $50.00. 
Alcohol beverage caterer: Distilled spirits: $100.00, includes malt beverages and wine. 
Event permits (per day, each event, three-day maximum): $25.00. 
Ancillary tasting: Malt beverages and/or wine: $150.00. 
(b)  The license fees imposed by this section are regulatory fees intended to offset the city's cost in administering and enforcing this chapter. In addition thereto, licensees are subject to payment of an occupational tax in accordance with chapter 82. 
(c)  When a license is issued on or after July 1, the license fee is prorated by one-half. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-50. - Annual renewal; payment of fee; suspension of operation. 
All alcoholic beverage licenses are annual licenses that run from January 1 to December 31 of each year. Holders of existing licenses in good standing shall apply to the city manager for renewal for the next calendar year on or before November 1 by filing a renewal application in proper form and tendering the required fees. Annual license fees are due January 1 of each year and shall be past due if not paid by that date. After January 1 there shall be imposed a penalty equal to one-half of the amount of the license fee for which application is made, which together with the license fee shall be paid before a new license is issued. The State of Georgia Department of Revenue shall be promptly notified of all licenses which were not timely renewed on or before January 1, and all privilege to carry on and conduct a business governed by this chapter shall be immediately suspended due to license expiration. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-51. - Privilege nature of license. 
(a)  All licenses issued under this chapter shall constitute a grant of privilege to carry on or conduct a business covered by such license during the term of the license, subject to the terms and conditions imposed by the City Charter, this chapter and other applicable ordinances of the city and the constitution, laws and regulations of the state and of the United States of America applicable thereto. 
(b)  All licenses issued under this chapter shall have printed on the face the following words: 
THIS LICENSE IS A PRIVILEGE CONDITIONAL ON THE HOLDER MEETING ALL STANDARDS FOR SUCH LICENSE AND OPERATING REGULATIONS APPLICABLE THERETO SET OUT IN CITY ORDINANCES AND GEORGIA LAW. FAILURE TO MEET SUCH STANDARDS OR TO COMPLY WITH SUCH OPERATING REGULATIONS SHALL SUBJECT THE HOLDER TO THE LICENSE BEING REVOKED FOLLOWING NOTICE AND HEARING. 
(c)  All licenses shall be conspicuously posted in the place of business. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-52. - Transferability of licenses. 
(a)  Generally. Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be transferable except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  Death. In case of the death of any person owning a license, or any interest therein, the same may, with the approval of the city manager and subject to the terms of this chapter, be transferred to the administrator, executor or personal representative of the deceased person, or to the devisees or heirs at law of the deceased person, if such devisees or heirs meet the qualifications contained in this chapter. The license of a deceased person shall be held by his administrator, executor, or personal representative only for the time necessary to complete administration of his estate and to dispose of the license or interest therein. One transfer may be made by the administrator, executor, or personal representative of a deceased license holder to a person meeting the qualifications of this chapter. 
(c)  Partnerships. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a partner in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership and to assign his interest to one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such withdrawal shall not serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership, unless such new owner shall apply for a license and comply with all provisions of this chapter, and then only upon the approval of the city manager. 
(d)  Increased capitalization. A partnership or corporation holding a license may take on additional partners or shareholders, as the case may be, where it is determined that the additional capital furnished is to be used exclusively for additional inventory or expanded facilities of the business or for building new facilities and where it further appears that the other partners or shareholders will not receive any of the additional capital investment. Such additional partner or new stockholder must apply for a license and meet all requirements of a licensee, including approval by the city manager, before he shall be permitted to acquire such interest. 
(e)  Transfer of locations. Should a transfer of location be approved, there shall be no new license fee, but the new premises must meet all location requirements as for a new license. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-53. - Suspension and revocation; grounds and procedure. 
(a)  When any state license issued by the commissioner of revenue pursuant to O.C.G.A. Chapter 3, Alcoholic Beverages, is revoked, any similar license issued to the same person by the city shall automatically become invalid and the licensee shall immediately cease and desist to operate thereunder. 
(b)  Except as provided in sections 6-55 and 6-56, no license which has been issued or which may be issued pursuant to this article shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause and after hearing and upon at least three-day prior written notice to the holder of the license of the time, place and purpose of the hearing and a statement of the charges upon which the hearing shall be held. 
(c)  The term "due cause" for the purposes of this section shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Conviction of, or the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere by, the licensee or any of his employees or any person holding an interest in the license for any felony, any law, administrative regulation or ordinance involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or narcotics, or tax laws. 
(2)  Conviction of, or the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere by, the licensee or any of his employees or any person holding an interest in the license for any sex offense when the licensed business is for on-premises consumption. 
(3)  Conviction of a violation of subsections (e), (f), or (g) of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 by an owner, operator, or employee of a alcohol licensee offering to the public any bona fide coin-operated amusement machine within the licensed establishment. 
(4)  Suspension or revocation of any state license required as a condition for the possession, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages. 
(5)  Material falsification of any fact given in an application for a license issued under this chapter or bearing upon the licensee's qualification therefor. Any act which may be construed as a subterfuge in an effort to circumvent any of the qualifications for a license under this chapter shall be deemed a violation of the requirement attempted to be circumvented. 
(6)  Any person to whom a license has been issued is no longer actively engaged in the dealing of alcoholic beverages (closure of the business for more than 90 consecutive days shall create a rebuttable presumption the licensee has abandoned the business). 
(7)  Failure to meet or maintain any standard prescribed by this chapter as a condition or qualification for holding a license. Loss of qualifications during the term of a license shall be grounds for revocation or for denial of renewal. 
(8)  Any other factor known to or discovered by the city whereby it is objectively shown the licensee, any of the licensee's employees or any person holding an interest in a license, has engaged in conduct at or involving the licensed business or has permitted conduct on the licensed premises that constitutes a violation of federal or state law, local ordinance or administrative regulations involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or narcotics for all alcohol licensed businesses and including any sex offense under state law or local ordinances with respect to businesses licensed for on-premises consumption. With respect to this section, it shall be rebuttably presumed that the violative act was done with the knowledge or consent of the licensee; provided, however, that such presumption may be rebutted only by evidence which precludes every other reasonable hypothesis save that such licensee did not know, assist or aid in such occurrence, or in the exercise of full diligence that such licensee could not have discovered or prevented such activity. 
(d)  Notice of suspension or revocation proceedings shall be served on the person(s) named on the license. Notice shall be in writing. The notice may be served personally, by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested), or by statutory overnight delivery. If by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the licensee at its last known address as it appears in the records of the city. The burden shall be on the licensee to provide notice, in writing, of any change of address for service of notices and process. In the case of service by registered or certified mail of any notice required by this chapter, the service shall be deemed complete on the third business day following the date of mailing with the United States Postal Service. If by statutory overnight delivery, the notice shall be delivered to the physical street address of the licensee, either at the licensed premises or at his place of residence, and effective on the first business day after depositing with the delivery service. 
(e)  The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer appointed by the chairperson of the board of commissioners. The hearing officer shall be an attorney licensed to practice in the state who is disinterested in the proceeding. 
(f)  Hearings shall be only as formal as necessary to preserve order and shall be compatible with the principles of justice. The city attorney shall present the city's case and bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that due cause exists to suspend or revoke the license. At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to represent itself or be represented by counsel, may cross examine all witnesses offered by the city, and may call witnesses and present evidence in its own behalf. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply to hearings under this section, although the hearing officer shall have the right to exclude evidence which has no relevance or carries no indicia of reliability. All testimony shall be offered under oath or affirmation. 
(g)  The hearing officer shall make his final determination within ten business days of the completion of the hearing. The decision shall be placed in writing and contain the hearing officer's findings of fact, conclusions of law, and decision as to sanction, if any. Such sanction may include one or more of the following: revocation of the license, suspension of the license for no more than 12 months, imposition of a probationary period not to exceed 12 months, and/or a civil monetary penalty not to exceed $5,000.00. Progressive sanctions, depending on the severity of the violation, are encouraged but not required. Where the remaining term of the license is less than 12 months, imposition of suspension or probation for a period in excess of the term of the existing license shall be applied to any renewal license. A subsequent violation within a probationary period shall be cause for revocation and/or denial of license renewal. A total of three separate and unrelated violations within 24 months, whether or not within a probationary period, shall be grounds for permanent revocation. 
(h)  The hearing officer's decision shall be personally served or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested to the licensee and his attorney, with a copy to the city attorney, within ten business days of the close of the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall constitute final action by the city, subject to review upon petition for certiorari to the superior court. 
(i)  Upon receipt of notice of adverse action against the licensee under this section, the licensee may waive its right to a hearing and stipulate to a sanction, as recommended by the city manager, in consultation with the chief of police. Any stipulation entered under this subsection shall be in writing, signed by the licensee, and nonappealable. 
(j)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2.1, the city manager shall be required to provide notification to the Georgia Department of Revenue within 45 days of any officer, department, agency, or instrumentality of the municipality taking disciplinary action against any person issued a license to operate any premises at which 75 percent or more total gross annual revenue is derived from the sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(k)  The notification required under subparagraph (j) above shall be in the format for the reporting of disciplinary actions established by the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
(l)  For purposes of subparagraph (j), "disciplinary action" shall have the same meaning as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2.1(a)(1), which includes any citation or arrest arising out of the violation of any law, rule, regulation, resolution, or ordinance of a governmental entity relating to the manufacture, distribution, sale, or possession of alcoholic beverages against a licensee, any employee of a licensee, or any person holding a financial interest in the license of a licensee on the premises or place of business of any licensee. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-54. - No refunds following suspension or revocation. 
If a license issued under this chapter is suspended or revoked, the licensee shall not be entitled to a refund of any portion of the application or license fees previously remitted. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-55. - Short-term emergency suspension for violation involving licensed business. 
(a)  The city manager has authority to suspend a license for a short-term period not to exceed ten days. The city manager's decision shall be in writing, with the term of the suspension and the reasons stated, and shall be mailed or delivered to the licensee as provided in section 6-53(c). 
(b)  A short-term suspension by the city manager must be for an emergency cause. Emergency cause for the short-term suspension of a license shall consist of a third or subsequent violation by the same licensee or the licensee's agents on the same premises within a two-year period of any state or federal laws, administrative regulations of the state or city ordinances regulating such business holding a license, including those prohibiting gambling, regulating the sale, manufacture, distribution, handling, dealing in, and possession of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in an unlawful manner, and the manufacture, sale, or distribution of any controlled substance which puts the city and the health and safety of its citizens at such risk that an immediate suspension is necessary until a hearing as provided for in section 6-53 can be held. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-56. - Emergency suspension of all alcoholic beverage licenses. 
The board of commissioners is authorized to suspend the sale of alcoholic beverages under all licenses issued pursuant to this chapter during any state of emergency declared by the governor or any local emergency as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-69-2, or for any other serious emergency situation when the board of commissioners deems such immediate suspension necessary for the protection of the health and welfare of the citizens of the city. Such suspension may be made effective immediately and shall remain in force until the board of commissioners determines the emergency is over or until the next meeting of the board of commissioners, at which time the suspension shall cease unless the same is extended by affirmative action of the board of commissioners. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-57. - Acceptance of application after rejection or revocation. 
When any license or permit to operate a package store is rejected or revoked by the city manager, no new application shall be accepted from the same applicant for a license within 36 months from the time of such rejection or revocation. Submission of a new application by another applicant, which application shows the applicant was previously rejected or revoked as a holder of an interest in the desired license, shall result in rejection of the new application. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Secs. 6-58—6-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - EXCISE TAX  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-76. - Imposed. 
In addition to the license fees required by this chapter and in addition to the excise taxes levied by the state, all licensees under this chapter shall pay to the city the taxes imposed in this article. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-77. - Unlawful retail sales. 
No person shall sell at retail by the package or for consumption on the premises within the city any alcoholic beverage on which the taxes imposed by this chapter have not been paid. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-78. - Administration and enforcement authority; recordkeeping; confidentiality of reports. 
(a)  Authority of tax collector. The city manager shall designate, in writing, a tax collector, who shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the levy and collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The city manager shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the board of commissioners, not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state, or the constitution of the state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the taxes under this article. 
(c)  Records required from licensee; form. Every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city shall keep and preserve, for a minimum of three years, all invoices relating to each purchase of alcoholic beverages and such other records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the tax collector may require. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents; audits. In the administration of the provisions of this article, the city tax collector may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in such person's possession or custody information relating to sales of alcoholic beverages which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the tax collector and shall set forth the price charged for each sale, the date or dates of sales, and such other information as the tax collector may require. The city tax collector or person(s) designated in writing by him may examine and audit the books, papers, records, financial reports, inventory, equipment and facilities of any licensee liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of the return made; or if no return is made, to ascertain and determine the amount of tax, penalty and interest required to be paid. 
(e)  Wholesale records. Every distributor, wholesale dealer, and manufacturer required to make reports under this article shall keep accurate and complete records of all sales of distilled spirits, malt beverages, and wine to any package dealer or on-premises consumption dealer and of all reports made to the city for a period of four years from the time the tax to which they relate becomes due or the date the tax is paid, whichever is later, which records shall be made available for inspection by the city tax collection or the city manager at all reasonable times and places. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-79. - Examination of records; audits. 
The city tax collector or any person authorized in writing by the city may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the licensee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. If a city audit discloses a deficiency of more than three percent over what has been returned and remitted, the licensee shall reimburse the city for all costs of the audit, including but not limited to accountant's fees and out of pocket expenses, the value of time expended by city employees in the investigation, including reasonable cost of overhead, and all attorneys' fees and costs of collection if action must be instituted by the city. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Secs. 6-80—6-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PACKAGE SALES 
 
Sec. 6-101. - Imposed; amount. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed an excise tax on alcoholic beverages, on the first sale, use or possession within the city, subject to exemptions set forth in state law, in the following amounts: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons. 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(3)  Where wines are sold by the package, a tax of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(4)  On the package sale of distilled spirits and on the sale of distilled spirits to private clubs, a tax of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(b)  Except for direct package sales by a manufacturer, the excise taxes provided in subsection (a) of this section shall be imposed upon and shall be paid by the licensed wholesale dealer. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-102. - Report; payment. 
(a)  Each wholesaler of wine and distilled spirits responsible for payment of the excise tax shall file a report with the city itemizing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of alcoholic beverages, by location, by size and type of container, sold during the preceding month in the city. Each wholesaler of malt beverages responsible for payment of the excise tax shall file with the city, Ga. Rev. Dept. form ATT-122, showing the exact quantities of malt beverages, by size and type of the container, sold within the city during the preceding month. 
(b)  The wholesale dealer shall remit the tax imposed under this division to the city on the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the alcoholic beverages are sold or dispensed. 
(c)  Each manufacturer of distilled spirits, malt beverage and wine within the city that is authorized to sell direct, for consumption on the premises or by the unsealed package, shall report and remit the local excise tax to the city tax collector by the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which alcoholic beverages are sold or dispensed. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-103. - Purchases to be made from licensed wholesalers or distributors. 
Except where a manufacturer is authorized to make direct sales, licensees subject to the tax under this division shall purchase alcoholic beverages only from wholesalers or distributors licensed by the state. All sales must be to the establishment designated on the license. No transfers, borrowing or internal sales or transfers from one licensed retailer to another shall be permitted. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Secs. 6-104—6-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DISTILLED SPIRITS FOR CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES 
 
Sec. 6-121. - Imposed; amount. 
There is imposed an excise tax upon the sale of distilled spirits by the drink, which tax shall be three percent of the charge to the public, members or guests for the beverages. This tax does not apply to the sale of fermented beverages made in whole or in part from malt or any similar fermented beverage, nor to wines for which an excise tax has already been paid under division 2 of this article. Each retail consumption licensee shall collect, report and remit the tax in the manner described in sections 6-122 through 6-124. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-122. - Itemized billing by licensee; liability for payment of tax. 
Every licensee subject to the tax under this division shall, at the time of collecting for food and drinks served, give to the purchaser a written receipt on which the price of alcoholic beverages served shall be itemized separately. Where the charges for food and drink are satisfied by credit card or deferred payment, the payment of the tax to the licensee may be deferred in like manner. However, the licensee shall be liable therefor at the time and to the extent that such credits are incurred. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-123. - Collection of tax by licensee. 
Every licensee or its agent is hereby authorized and directed to collect the tax imposed in this division from purchasers of distilled spirits by the drink sold within its licensed premises. The licensee shall be liable to the city for the full amount received or collected as tax, whether collected appropriately or inappropriately; and for any amount of tax that should have been collected, but was not. Any person who receives or collects the tax or any consideration represented to be the tax shall hold the amount so collected in trust for the benefit of the city and is liable to the city for the full amount collected, plus penalty and interest. Such licensee or agent shall furnish such information as may be requested by the city tax collector to facilitate the collection of this tax. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-124. - Payment and collection procedures. 
(a)  Due date of taxes; penalty and interest. All taxes collected by any licensee or agent under this division shall be due and payable to the city on or before the twentieth day of every month next succeeding each respective calendar month, as set forth in this section. A specific penalty of 15 percent is imposed for failure to pay any amount of tax when due and payable to the city. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest. 
(b)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; execution. On or before the twentieth day of the month, a written return for the preceding calendar month shall be filed with the city tax collector in such form as the tax collector may prescribe by every licensee or agent liable for the payment of tax under this division. 
(c)  Contents of return. All returns shall show the gross receipts from the sale of distilled spirits by the drink, amount of tax collected or authorized due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the city tax collector. 
(d)  Delivery of return and remittance. The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the net amount of tax due to the city tax collector on or before the due date. 
(e)  Collection fee allowed licensees. Licensees collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state sales tax under the Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act, as now or hereafter amended. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-125. - Purchases to be made from licensed wholesalers or distributors; exception. 
Except for brewpubs, licensees shall purchase alcoholic beverages only from wholesalers or distributors licensed by the state. All sales must be to the establishment designated on the license. No transfers, borrowing or internal sales or transfers from one licensed retailer to another shall be permitted. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Secs. 6-126—6-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PAYMENT AND COLLECTION 
 
Sec. 6-151. - Determinations of deficiencies or in absence of return; overpayments; delinquency and fraud. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city tax collector is not satisfied with the return of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person responsible for collecting and paying the tax over to the city, the tax collector may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or obtained by subpoena served upon the licensee, including itemized receipts. 
(b)  Estimate of gross receipts in absence of return. If any licensee fails to file a return, files a false or fraudulent return, or when the tax collector reasonably believes a tax deficiency is due to a fraudulent intent to evade the tax imposed by this article, the person shall be assessed a specific penalty of 50 percent of the tax due. The city tax collector shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee or, as the case may be, of the amount of the total sales in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the licensee failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the tax collector. Upon the basis of this estimate, the tax collector shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid to the city. One or more determinations may be made for one or for more than one period. 
(c)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination, the city tax collector may offset overpayments, for a period or periods, against underpayments, for another period or periods, against penalties, and against the interest on underpayments. The interest on overpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in section 6-154. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Promptly after making his determination, the city tax collector shall give to the person written notice to be served personally, by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested), or by statutory overnight delivery in the manner prescribed for service of notices in section 6-53(c). Such notice shall inform the person of his right to an informal hearing before the city manager, whose decision shall be final and binding upon the city as to the tax, penalties, and interest due. The city manager shall be authorized to waive any penalty or parts thereof. Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this article or authorized rules or regulations, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be served within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-152. - Delinquent tax collection; duty of assignees to withhold taxes; liability; offsetting of erroneous collections. 
(a)  Action for tax; time therefor. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city may bring an action in the courts of the state, or of the United States, to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees, costs of collection and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any licensee liable for any amount under this article sells his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the city tax collector showing that he has been paid, or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold; certificate of notice of amount due; time to enforce successor's liability. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold the necessary amount from the purchase price as required in this section, the purchaser becomes personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by it to the extent of the purchase price valued in money. Within 30 days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, the city tax collector shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at his address as it appears on the records of the city of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall begin at the time the licensee sells out his business or at the time that the determination against the licensee becomes final, whichever event occurs later. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-153. - Tax credit penalty or interest paid more than once or illegally collected. 
Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this article, it may be offset as provided in section 6-151(c). If the licensee determines that it has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city tax collector, it will have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the city, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on amounts then due and payable from the licensee by whom it was paid or its administrators or executors. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-154. - Failure to pay tax; penalties and interest. 
(a)  Delinquent penalty. Any person who fails to pay the tax imposed in this article to the city, or fails to pay any amount of such tax required to be collected and paid to the city, within the time required, shall pay a civil penalty of 15 percent of the tax, or amount of the tax, in addition to the tax or the amount of the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at an annual rate equal to the bank prime loan rate as posted by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Statistical Release H.15, or any publication that may supercede it, plus three percent, to accrue monthly. Such annual interest rate shall be determined for each calendar year based on the first weekly posting of Statistical Release H.15 on or after January 1 of each calendar year. Interest shall begin to accrue from the date the tax is due until the date the tax is paid. Any period less than one month shall be considered to be one month. 
(c)  Penalty; negligence or disregard of rules and regulations. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination has been made is due to gross negligence or disregard of rules and regulations, including a licensee's failure to issue written itemized receipts of alcoholic beverages sold, a penalty of 15 percent of the amount of such deficiency shall be added thereto in addition to the 15 percent prescribed by subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination has been made is due to fraud or an intent to evade any provision of this chapter or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the deficiency shall be added thereto in addition to the 15 percent prescribed by subsection (a) of this section. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Secs. 6-155—6-169. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - VIOLATIONS. 
 
Sec. 6-170. - Violations of this article. 
Any person willfully and intentionally violating any of the provisions of this Article IV relating to collection and payment of the excise tax imposed on alcoholic beverages shall be deemed guilty of an offense against the city and, upon conviction in the Municipal Court of Griffin, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00; or if unable to pay the fine, by incarceration not to exceed six months. Each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this article is committed, continues, or is permitted by the person responsible, shall be a separate offense and punished accordingly. Prosecution of a violation under this section shall not affect the underlying civil obligation to pay the taxes due. Any person who files a false or fraudulent return to evade the obligation to collect and remit the tax correctly shall be guilty under this section. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Secs. 6-171—6-175. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - REGULATIONS FOR ALL ESTABLISHMENTS AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 6-176. - Expiration of license for failure to commence or operate business; new buildings. 
(a)  All holders of licenses under this chapter must open for business within six months after issuance of the license; failure to do so shall serve as an automatic forfeiture and cancellation of such license unless an extension of the time is granted by the city manager before the expiration of the six-month period for good cause shown. No refund of the license fee shall be made in the event of such forfeiture; provided, however, where the building in which a licensee proposes to operate is, at the time of application for such license, in construction and not yet certified for occupancy, a license may be issued for such location, provided the plans and specifications for the proposed building are filed with the city manager and show compliance with the other provisions of this chapter and applicable ordinances of the city. No sales shall be allowed at such location until the building has been completed in accordance with plans and specifications and is in conformity with all other provisions of this chapter and applicable ordinances of the city. If the building is not completed during the year in which the licensee fee was paid, such fee shall apply to the year in which the building is completed and the business commences. 
(b)  Any holder of a license under this chapter who shall begin the operation of the business authorized by the license, but who shall thereafter cease to operate the business as authorized by the license for six months, shall thereupon forfeit such license, which license shall be automatically canceled without the necessity of any further action of the city, unless a written extension of time is granted by the city manager before the expiration of the six-month period for good cause shown. No refund of license fees shall be made in the event of such forfeiture. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-177. - Inspection authority of city. 
As a condition of every license issued under this chapter, the city reserves the right to inspect premises from which alcoholic beverages are licensed to be sold at all reasonable times. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-178. - Event permit for authorized catered functions. 
(a)  Any licensed alcohol beverage caterer who additionally holds a valid retail license to sell malt beverages or wine by the package or by the drink for consumption on the premises may apply to the city manager for an event permit to distribute malt beverages or wine by the drink off-premises within the city at authorized catered functions. Applications shall be supported by evidence of all required licenses in good standing, and proof of payment of excise and occupation taxes, if applicable. 
(b)  Any licensed alcohol beverage caterer who additionally holds a valid retail license to sell distilled spirits by the package or by the drink for consumption on-premises may apply to the city manager for an event permit to sell distilled spirits by the drink off-premises within the city at authorized catered functions. Applications shall be supported by evidence of all required licenses in good standing and proof of payment of excise and occupation taxes, if applicable. 
(c)  A licensed alcohol beverage caterer shall apply to the city manager for an event permit on forms prescribed for that purpose. The application shall include the name of the licensee and, if applicable, the name of the food caterer who will be serving the event, together with a copy of the current license(s) and occupation tax certificate(s); the date, time and duration of the event; and the name, address and telephone number of the event host or sponsor, and, if different, the address of the location where the event will be held. The application shall be signed by the licensed alcoholic beverage caterer and the event host or sponsor. If the event host or sponsor is not the owner of the venue at which the event will be held, then the owner of the venue, or the owner's authorized agent, shall also sign the application consenting to the distribution of alcoholic beverages at that location. Each event permit shall require payment of a fee of $25.00 per day; provided, however, if the licensed alcohol beverage caterer does not maintain a place of business within the city, in addition to the above fee, there is hereby levied an excise tax upon the total quantity of alcoholic beverages brought into the city for such event. At all times during which an authorized catered function is taking place, the original alcohol beverage caterer's license and the event permit shall be conspicuously posted and made available for inspection upon request by any city police, tax, or licensing officer; in addition, at all times while alcoholic beverages are being transported within the city, the licensee shall maintain a copy of the alcohol beverage caterer's license and event permit in the vehicle(s) used for transporting the alcoholic beverages. No event permit shall be issued for more than three consecutive days and a full permit fee shall be assessed for each day of the event. 
(d)  Licensed alcohol beverage caterers shall be subject to the regulations set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-11-4. Any licensed alcohol beverage caterer distributing or selling alcoholic beverages off-premises within the city, except in connection with an authorized catered function within the scope of the event permit shall be in violation of this article; if convicted, upon citation to the municipal court, violators shall be punished in the manner provided in this Code. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-179. - Employees. 
(a)  No licensee under this chapter shall permit any person under the age of 18 within his employment to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for alcoholic beverages; provided, however, this provision shall not prohibit employees under the age of 18 who are employed in grocery stores, discount/general merchandise department stores, convenience stores, or drugstores from handling or carrying sealed packages of alcoholic beverages either within the licensed premises or to customers' vehicles when parked adjacent thereto as a part of employment responsibilities so long as such employees under age 18 do not dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  No licensee under this chapter shall permit any person to sell, dispense, serve or take orders for alcoholic beverages while that person is currently serving a sentence, including probation or parole, based upon a conviction in any state or federal court or the United States or in any foreign country for any felony, or any misdemeanor ordinance violating relating to the manufacture, sale, use or distribution of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or controlled substances, gambling, sexual offenses, or crimes of moral turpitude. No licensee shall employ within its business for the purpose of selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages any person convicted within five years immediately prior to the application for employment of any felony or within two years immediately prior to the application for employment of any misdemeanor or ordinance violation relating to the manufacture, sale, use or distribution of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or controlled substances, gambling, sexual offenses, or a crime of moral turpitude. This provision shall not prohibit employees who have been convicted or have a criminal history, when employed in supermarkets, convenience stores or drugstores, from handling or carrying alcoholic beverages either within the licensed premises or to customers' vehicles when parked adjacent thereto as a part of employment responsibilities. 
(c)  No public club/bar licensee shall allow or require an individual under the age of 21 to serve as a bouncer on the premises or in an establishment where alcoholic beverages are dispensed, served, or sold. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to ascertain that all employees are eligible for employment under this chapter. The city reserves the right to obtain fingerprints from and conduct a criminal history check of any licensee's employees at any time. Upon request by the city, the licensee shall cause the employee to appear at the city police department and shall pay the requisite fee in the amount of $20.00. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to train all employees whose duties shall include the sale, dispensing, serving or taking of orders for alcoholic beverages in the requirements of this chapter and applicable state laws and regulations. Each licensee shall establish written policies, a copy of which shall be posted within the licensed premises, governing the sale and dispensing of alcoholic beverages in accordance with state law and this chapter. Licenses are encouraged to adopt disciplinary sanctions for employees who fail to meet the standards of law as violations by employees may constitute grounds for revocation, suspension or denial of a license under this chapter. The degree of training, supervision and discipline of employees by the licensee may be considered by the hearing officer in determining action on any license. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-180. - Days and hours of operation. 
(a)  No retail package dealer of distilled spirits shall open his place of business or furnish, sell, or offer for sale, any distilled spirits at any time on any day when sales are prohibited by state law. Sales are permitted on election days; provided, however, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established during the hours the polls are open. No retail package dealer of distilled spirits shall operate his place of business at any time prior to 8:00 a.m. or after 11:45 p.m. on Monday through Saturday, or prior to 12:30 p.m. or after 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. No retail package dealer of distilled spirits shall be in, or permit his employees to be in, his place of business at any time prior to one hour before opening time or later than 30 minutes past closing time, except for the purpose of responding to emergency situations; provided, however, when taking inventory, making repairs, renovating or similar business needs cannot reasonably be carried out during normal business hours with customers present, the dealer may apply to the city manager for a specific exception from this limitation. The city manager shall be authorized to impose reasonable terms and conditions on the exception. It shall be the duty of a retail package dealer of distilled spirits to post on all entrances to the premises a sign reading "CLOSED - NO CUSTOMERS ALLOWED ON PREMISES" at all times outside of allowed hours of operation. 
(b)  No retail package dealer of malt beverages and/or wine only, including licensees of divided stores meeting the requirements of applicable state laws and regulations, shall furnish, sell, or offer for sale, any malt beverages and/or wine on any day when sales are prohibited by state law. Sales are permitted on election days; provided, however, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established during the hours the polls are open. No retail package dealer of malt beverages and/or wine only shall furnish, sell, or offer for sale, any malt beverages and/or wine at any time prior to 6:00 a.m. or after 11:45 p.m. on Monday through Saturday, or prior to 12:30 p.m. or after 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. 
(c)  No on-premises consumption licensee shall furnish, sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages on any day when sales are prohibited by state law. Sales shall be permitted on election days during the hours polls are open. No licensee for on-premises consumption shall furnish, sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverage between the hours of 1:55 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Mondays through Saturdays, or between the hours of 1:55 a.m. and 12:00 Midnight on Sundays; provided, however, in any licensed eating establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment and in any licensed hotel which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging, alcoholic beverages may be sold for consumption on premises on Sundays from 11:00 a.m. until 12:00 Midnight. 
(d)  Notwithstanding subpart (c) above, in any year in which December 31 (New Year's Eve) falls on a Sunday, every establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, including bars and public clubs, shall be authorized to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises only between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 Midnight. 
(e)  A distillery, a brewery, and a domestic farm winery tasting room located within a special entertainment district within the city, shall be authorized to sell its product on the same days and within the same hours as an on-premises consumption licensee. 
(f)  In all establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, tables shall be cleared of all drinks containing alcohol by not later than 30 minutes following the latest time at which alcoholic beverages may be legally sold. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 ; Ord. No. 18-11, § 1, 6-19-2018, eff. 11-20-2018 )  
Sec. 6-181. - Furnishing to, purchase of, or possession by persons under 21 years of age of alcoholic beverages; use of false identification. 
(a)  Except as otherwise authorized by law: 
(1)  No licensee, employee of such licensee, or any person acting on behalf of, or with the knowledge of such licensee, shall give, sell, offer to sell, furnish, cause to be furnished, or offer to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person who is under the lawful drinking age established by Georgia law. 
(2)  No licensee, employee of any licensee, or any person acting on behalf of any licensee shall furnish, sell, or give alcoholic beverages to any person on any day or at any time when the sale of same is prohibited by Georgia law or this ordinance. 
(3)  No person under 21 years of age shall purchase, drink, sell or possess alcoholic beverages. 
(4)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatsoever for the purpose of obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(5)  No person knowingly or intentionally shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under 21 years of age. 
(6)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  The prohibitions contained in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the sale, purchase, or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption for medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state, at a religious ceremony, or when the parent or guardian of the person under age 21 gives the alcoholic beverage to such person when possession is in the home of the parent or guardian while such parent or guardian is present. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of every person seeking to purchase or possess alcoholic beverages from a licensee within the city to furnish, upon request, proper identification showing that the person is 21 years of age or older. For purposes of this section, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a physical description of the person, such person's photograph, and giving such person's date of birth, and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or any identification card authorized by O.C.G.A. § 40-5-100. 
(d)  It shall be the affirmative duty of every licensee, employee of the licensee, or any person acting on behalf of the licensee, to check the proper identification of every person when selling or otherwise furnishing an alcoholic beverage to such person, or to permit, within the licensee's premises, any person in possession of an alcoholic beverage who is under the lawful drinking age established by Georgia law. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-182. - Open containers. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "open container" means any container, containing alcoholic beverages, which is immediately capable of being consumed from or the seal of which has been broken. 
(b)  No person shall possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage within the passenger compartment of a motor vehicle. Closed containers of alcoholic beverages may be transported in any part of a vehicle. Open containers shall be placed in a locked glove box, locked trunk or locked storage container. 
(c)  No person shall possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage while walking, standing or otherwise occupying any public street, road, or highway, sidewalk adjacent thereto, public parking lot, or other property owned or leased by the city; provided that where the city commission has approved, by resolution, a city-owned or leased building, location or facility as one where alcoholic beverages may be consumed, this section shall not apply to the otherwise lawful possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages at the location or in the area(s) so designated. The prohibition of this section shall not apply within a special entertainment district, as designated by the board of commissioners between the hours of 4:00 p.m. until Midnight; provided all alcoholic beverages shall be in clear, plastic cups no greater than 16 ounces, displaying a boundary map of the special entertainment district. 
(d)  No person shall possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any retail package dealer, including parking lots adjacent thereto, at any time. 
(e)  Unless otherwise authorized by this section, no person shall enter or leave the premises of any dealer licensed to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises with an open container of any alcoholic beverage; provided, however, any restaurant which is licensed to sell wine for consumption on the premises may permit a patron to remove one unsealed bottle per patron for consumption off the premises if the patron has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine with such meal on the restaurant's premises. The partially consumed bottle of wine shall be recorked or securely sealed by the licensee or its employees and placed in a bag or other container, with a dated receipt for the wine and meal attached to the container. If the licensee charges a recorking fee, such fee shall not exceed $3.00 per bottle of wine. If transported in a motor vehicle, the container with the resealed bottle of wine shall be placed in a locked glove compartment, a locked trunk, or the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. The prohibition of this section shall not apply within the special entertainment district, as designated by the board of commissioners between the hours of 4:00 p.m. until Midnight; provided all alcoholic beverages shall be in clear, plastic cups no greater than 16 ounces, displaying a boundary map of the special entertainment district. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-183. - Brownbagging. 
Brownbagging, as defined in this chapter, is prohibited within the city. Any person who brownbags, participates in consumption of any alcoholic beverage being brownbagged, or any licensee or employee of a licensed establishment in whose presence brownbagging knowingly or with reckless indifference occurs, shall be in violation of this section. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-184. - Purchases to be made only from licensed wholesalers. 
Except when licensed as a distillery, brewery, brewpub, or winery retail package licensees and retail consumption licensees shall not buy nor accept deliveries of alcoholic beverages from any person other than a wholesaler dealer or distributor licensed by the state department of revenue. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-185. - Storage of alcoholic beverages at retail. 
Retail package dealers and retail consumption dealers shall store all alcoholic beverages on the premises for which the license was issued and at no other place. All stock shall be available at all times for inspection by any duly authorized representative of the city. Any alcoholic beverages found in any licensee's stock which was not sold or distributed in accordance with laws of the state to make sales and deliveries in the city shall be deemed contraband and subject to immediate confiscation. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-186. - Nonprofit civic organizations; temporary permits. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "bona fide nonprofit civic organization" means a nonprofit corporation or entity which is exempt from federal income tax pursuant to the provisions of subsections (c), (d) or (e) of 26 U.S.C. § 501. 
(b)  Bona fide nonprofit organizations may qualify for a temporary permit from the commissioner of the department of revenue to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises for a period not to exceed three days. No more than six such permits may be issued to a single qualified organization in any calendar year. 
(c)  An authorized representative of a bona fide nonprofit organization may apply to the city manager for a letter certifying the date, time and event location as a condition for seeking a temporary permit from the commissioner. The city shall impose no fee or charge for such letter. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-187. - In-room sales in hotels. 
Licenses obtained by hotels shall include the right to deliver alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages to registered guests' rooms when such beverages have been ordered by such guests and/or to provide a cabinet or other facility in a hotel guest's room which contains alcoholic beverages for which licensed, and which is provided upon written request of the guest, and which is accessible by lock and key only to the guest, and for which the sale of the alcoholic beverages contained therein is final at the time requested, except for a credit which may be given to the guest for any unused and unopened portion. All alcoholic beverages sold or distributed under this section shall be obtained by the hotel directly from a licensed wholesaler or distributor and shall be stored on the premises of the hotel until sold or served. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-188. - Malt beverage and wine tastings. 
(a)  An ancillary tasting license may be issued in conjunction with a retail consumption license for alcoholic beverages, including brewpubs, or a retail package license for malt beverages and/or wine only, and a valid current license from the state. 
(b)  No tasting shall be conducted on the premises of any place of business licensed to sell distilled spirits in the unbroken package. 
(c)  A tasting license shall allow the licensee to offer malt beverage or wine samples in connection with an educational or appreciation class. A tasting license is intended to allow such activity on a limited basis and shall not be a part of the core operations of such establishment. Such events shall be limited to no more than six per week and shall not exceed two consecutive hours in length. No more than three classes may be held in any consecutive 24-hour period. 
(d)  A tasting licensee shall be subject to all laws, rules and regulations of the city and state, and shall be subject to license revocation for violation thereof. 
(e)  Tasting licensees shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  No customer shall receive more than eighteen ounces of wine from the licensee per class, and the licensee shall not serve any individual portion that exceeds three ounces. 
(2)  No customer shall receive more than 32 ounces of malt beverage from the licensee per class, and the licensee shall not serve any individual portion that exceeds eight ounces. 
(3)  Only the licensee or an employee thereof shall open, handle, and serve opened packages or bottles of wine, and individual samples shall only be poured by the licensee or an employee thereof. 
(4)  Customers shall not remove opened packages or unsealed bottles from the premises. 
(5)  Customers may not attend more than one class in a single day. 
(6)  The educational and appreciation classes shall consist of at least one hour of lecture on craft malt beverages or wines, including a lecture on responsible alcohol consumption. 
(7)  Tasting licensees are prohibited from conducting tastings at any location where motor fuel is sold or dispensed on the premises. No ancillary tasting license shall be granted to any retail package dealer in distilled spirits. 
(8)  Attendance at classes may be limited on a "first come" basis and reasonably restricted to available seating space. 
(9)  No licensee shall charge more than $20.00 for a person to attend a class, inclusive of the cost of the malt beverage or wine sampled at the event, unless the event is held as a fundraiser for a charity or nonprofit cause. If held for charitable purposes, the licensee shall conspicuously display a sign at the event identifying the name of the charity and provide a written receipt. Records shall be maintained showing the amount raised, the cost of putting on the event, and the actual amount remitted to the charity. 
(10)  A distillery, brewery, or winery that conducts tours on the premises where its product is manufactured, including providing samples to tour participants, is not required to hold an ancillary tasting license. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Secs. 6-189—6-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR RETAIL PACKAGE DEALERS 
 
Sec. 6-201. - Merchandise restrictions. 
(a)  No retail package dealer of distilled spirits shall operate such business in connection with any other mercantile establishment, except that a package dealer may sell or display or keep in stock for retail sale the following inventory: 
(1)  Distilled spirits, wines, malt beverages, provided the dealer is separately licensed for each. 
(2)  Tobacco products, limited to tobacco, cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, snuff, cigarette papers, lighters and matches which do not carry or refer to the name of any licensed dealer or the location of his place of business. 
(3)  Beverages containing no alcohol and commonly used to dilute distilled spirits. 
(4)  Ice and ice chests. 
(5)  Paper, styrofoam or plastic cups. 
(6)  State-approved lottery tickets and related lottery materials but only if the dealer is a state-approved retail lottery dealer location. 
(7)  Bar supplies, limited to corkscrews, openers, straws, swizzle sticks, and bar-related glassware and ceramic ware, cocktail olives, onion, cherries, lemons and limes. 
(b)  Beverages containing no alcohol and commonly used to dilute distilled spirits may be dispensed through the use of vending machines, but no beverage alcohol shall be dispensed through such vending machines. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-202. - Merchandise and sales restrictions in specialty package retailers, grocery stores, discount/general merchandise department stores, and convenience stores. 
(a)  Where malt beverage or wine sales are licensed in conjunction with a specialty package retailer, grocery store, discount/general merchandise department store, or convenience store, no licensee shall sell or offer to sell any firearms, ammunition, or weapons of any character. 
(b)  During those hours and on those days when alcoholic beverages are not permitted to be sold, it shall be the duty of the licensee to remove all alcoholic beverages from its shelves or otherwise secure the inventory in such manner as to notify customers that these products are not available for sale at that time. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-203. - Sale or delivery to unlicensed premises. 
No package dealer shall make or allow to be made any deliveries of alcoholic beverages beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-204. - Name of liquor licensee to be displayed. 
Each premises licensed for the package sale of distilled spirits shall have printed on the front window or door thereof the name of the licensee in uniform letters, not less than four nor more than eight inches in height and the words "Liquor," "Liquor Store" or "Package Store." 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-205. - Liquor prices to be conspicuously displayed. 
Each package dealer of alcoholic beverages shall conspicuously display within the interior of the licensed premises a printed price list of the alcoholic beverages offered for sale or, in lieu thereof, shall place the price of each item on the container or on the shelf where the container is exhibited for sale. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-206. - Games of chance; coin-operated devices on premises. 
Gambling, betting, or the operation of games of chance, punchboards, slot machines, lotteries or tickets or chances (other than official games of the Georgia Lottery Commission), or other such scheme or device involving the hazarding of money or any other thing of value in any licensed place of business, or in any room adjoining or connected with the same and owned, leased or controlled by the alcohol beverage licensee, shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the license; provided that licensed coin-operated amusement devices and vending machines for dispensing soft drinks and tobacco products are permitted. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-207. - Regulation of craft beer sales and wines; samples. 
(a)  Except for brewpubs which manufacture their own craft beers on the premises, licensees who offer for sale craft beers shall purchase their product from licensed wholesalers in kegs only; craft beers sold and distributed for off-premises consumption shall be sold in growlers or in the original package if the licensee's location meets the requirements of section 6-31(c). Growlers shall be filled from a tapped keg, upon the customer's order, and may not be pre-filled or available in a cooler for later sale or delivery. All growlers shall be sanitized by the licensee or its employees and securely sealed using heat-shrink technology at the time of delivery to the customer. When sealed in this manner, the growler shall be deemed an "unbroken" package. 
(b)  Except for eating establishments that may allow a customer to remove an open, unfinished bottle of wine from the premises, licensees who offer for sale wines shall deliver the product to customers for off-premises consumption only in original packages with the seal unbroken. 
(c)  Licensees may offer customers samples of craft malt beverages and wines under the following conditions: 
(1)  Samples may be provided only upon a customer's request and limited to product available for sale within the licensed establishment. 
(2)  Samples may not exceed two ounces and no customer may consume, in total, more than eight ounces of product. 
(3)  No open container containing a sample may be removed from the premises. 
(4)  No charge shall be imposed on the customer for the sample. 
(5)  Samples shall only be served by the licensee or its employee. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-208. - Security cameras required. 
(a)  All retail business establishments licensed by the city to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package for off-premises consumption are required to install and maintain in proper working order security cameras in accordance with this section. 
(b)  To meet the requirements of this section, cameras must be capable of producing a retrievable image on film, tape, or digital media that can be made a permanent record and can be enlarged through projection or other means. Cameras and video equipment, whether digital or analog, shall be maintained in proper working order at all times and shall be periodic inspection by order of the chief of police or his designee. Initial location and placement of all such cameras shall be approved by the chief of police or his designee. 
(c)  Cameras shall be placed at all points of entry/egress of the building, and at all cash registers or points of sale. Where feasible cameras shall also be place on the front, rear, and sides of the building to cover approaches to the building, including parking areas. 
(d)  Video cameras shall be capable of producing sharply detailed, still frame video images in color, and have minimum specifications of 1 TB, 960 × 480 resolution, with 100' night vision. 
(e)  Still cameras shall meet the following minimum specifications: 
(1)  Automatic still frame; 
(2)  Capable of being concealed where feasible; 
(3)  Remote activation; 
(4)  Quiet activation; 
(5)  Must be digital format of at least four megapixels quality; 
(6)  Capable of producing good quality color photographs; 
(7)  Automatic focus; 
(8)  Easily accessible for film loading and maintenance; 
(9)  Capable of showing signs or signals of activation covertly; and 
(10)  Have wide-angle capability. 
(f)  Upon the occurrence of a criminal act at or near the licensee's business establishment, the licensee (as a condition of its license) shall make accessible to law enforcement the film, video, or digital media upon request and under procedures established to assure the chain of custody of such film or video in a manner that it may be used as evidence in a case. The licensee shall cooperate with law enforcement to confirm the authenticity of such evidence for use at trial. 
(g)  For purposes of this section only, when a licensee is required by this Code section to install security cameras, and maintain the same in proper working order, the failure to install such cameras or the failure to maintain cameras in proper working order shall be a violation of this section, returnable upon citation to municipal court, and upon conviction, punishable by a monetary fine only. The police department shall conduct periodic inspections of all premises of licensed retail establishments subject to this section; upon finding a violation, the licensee shall be issued a citation and have 20 days from the date of citation to install or maintain security cameras in accordance with this section; should the licensee fail or refuse to comply with such period, for a first offense the maximum fine shall be $50.00; the second offense within a two-year period shall be $100.00; and a third or subsequent offense within the two-year period shall be $250.00; provided, however, each day following the 20 day grace period from which citation issues in which cameras are not installed or placed in proper working condition shall be deemed a separate offense of this section, resulting in a maximum fine of $1,000.00 per day. Violation of this section shall also constitute grounds for revocation or non-renewal of a license. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Secs. 6-209—6-226. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR RETAIL CONSUMPTION DEALERS 
 
Sec. 6-227. - Other mercantile businesses prohibited. 
A retail consumption dealer of distilled spirits shall not operate such establishment in connection with any other mercantile business, trade, or profession, except a hotel, eating establishment, brewpub, Georgia farm winery tasting room, bar, public club, fraternal organization, or bona fide private club as defined in this chapter. It shall be a violation of this section for any on-premises consumption licensee to sell, offer to sell, or keep on the premises with intention to sell, any item not commonly associated with such type establishment, including but not limited to guns, ammunition, knives, weapons of any character, gambling paraphernalia including playing cards or dice, and non-immediately consumable food items including groceries. Non-alcoholic beverages, packaged chips, snacks, tobacco products and accessories, and logo'ed merchandise including clothing, shall be considered commonly associated items for sale in such establishments. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-228. - Premises to be well lighted. 
The exterior of each building in which alcoholic beverages are sold for on-premises consumption shall contain sufficient lighting so that all sides of the buildings and all entrances thereto are clearly visible at all times when the premises are open for business. Also, the lounge and restaurant area, including all tables, booths, and other areas where customers are served, and all passageways for customers shall be sufficiently well illuminated so that they may be viewed by those in the premises. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-229. - Disturbances of the peace; security of premises. 
No licensee shall knowingly permit any disturbance of the peace, or act of obscenity or public indecency on its premises. Repetitive or continuous breaches of the peace at the licensed premises or in parking areas adjacent thereto may constitute a nuisance and be subject to abatement, including suspension or revocation of the alcohol license(s). It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to provide reasonable measures to safeguard patrons and employees while on their premises. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-230. - Bars and public clubs; special requirements. 
A bar or public club, as defined in this chapter, not meeting the definition of an eating establishment as defined herein, shall have a minimum seating capacity for not less than 40 persons, as certified by the fire marshal under applicable building, fire and life safety codes, with all seating provided at tables, booths, bars, and counters unobstructed and open to view. Prior to opening, a bar or public club shall obtain a certificate of occupancy from the building official certifying compliance with all applicable building and construction codes and regulations. It shall be the duty of the licensee to strict enforce occupancy limits at all times. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 6-231. - Nudity and partial nudity prohibited. 
(a)  The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are prohibited upon the premises of any establishment licensed to sell, serve, dispense or distribute alcoholic beverages for consumption on such premises: 
(1)  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcohol beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva and genitals. 
(2)  Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in paragraph (1) of this section or where such person(s) perform(s) acts of or acts which stimulate any of the following: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual act which is prohibited by law; 
b.  The caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals; or 
c.  The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. 
(3)  The holding, promotion, sponsoring or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1) and (2) above; provided, however, that nothing contained in subsection (2) shall apply to the premises of any mainstream performance house, museum or theatre which derives less than 20 percent of its gross annual income from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
( Ord. No. 17-12, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26. 
State Law reference— State licensing of coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq.; authority to license, tax and regulate billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2; exchange of free replay for anything of value unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(c); Amusement Ride Safety Act, O.C.G.A. § 34-12-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, adopted Aug. 28, 2007, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 10-31—10-62, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1968, § 2A-1—32; Ord. No. 01-21, adopted Jan. 8, 2002. 
State Law reference— Nudity and related acts on premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-41; employee solicitation of patrons for drinks on premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-42. 
 
Sec. 10-31. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate the adverse, secondary effects found to exist in association with adult entertainment/sexually-oriented businesses. Such effects are found to be increased criminal activity (including prostitution and other sex-related crimes, disorderly conduct, alcohol and drug offenses), the spread of sexually-transmitted diseases, and reduced property values and increased urban blight. It is recognized that regulation cannot approach the de facto prohibition of adult entertainment/sexually-oriented businesses, as such have been judicially recognized as a protected form of expression under the First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States. This article represents a balancing of competing interests, after due and careful legislative considerations. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 8-28-2007)  
Sec. 10-32. - Definitions. 
The following terms used in this article shall have the express meaning indicated in this section: 
Adult means a natural person over the age of 18 years. 
Adult business means any business conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and to which minors are specifically excluded by the owner or operators of such business, including any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade distinguished or characterized by emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas of the human body, or an establishment offering live performances by nude or partially nude performers with an emphasis on sexuality and eroticism for commercial gain or profit. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Nude means the showing or display of the nipple and areola of the female breast, or any portion of the human genitals, pubic hair, anus, vulva, or lower two-thirds of the cleft of the buttocks. 
Specified anatomical areas means and shall include human genitals or pubic region, buttocks, or areola of the female breast, when not completely and opaquely covered; and male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and shall include actual or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, oral/anal copulation, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, flagellation, or other sexual acts prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 8-28-2007) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-33. - Adult businesses; license required. 
(a)  License required. No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other business entity shall conduct or operate an adult business, as defined by this article, within the city, without first filing with the city manager a completed application, on forms provided by the city, with full supporting information, and paying the requisite license fee. Upon payment of the fee, filing of the application, and verification of its completeness, the city manager shall issue a provisional license, good for 45 days. The applicant may then commence business activities. 
(b)  Required records. An adult business shall require and maintain for not less than three years, the names, addresses, dates of birth, social security numbers, or, if such person is not a U.S. citizen, pertinent visa information, on all employees. For purposes of this article, independent contractors hired as dancers, performers, managers, servers, and security personnel for the establishment shall be considered as employees regardless of the actual business relationship with the licensee. Such records shall be made available for inspection by the city manager or his designee upon reasonable request. 
(c)  Age and qualification of employees. No licensee shall employ or contract with any person under the age of 18 years to work in, or dance or perform in an adult business licensed under this article. The licensee shall, prior to hiring an employee, or securing the services of an independent contractor as a dancer or performer, obtain a criminal background check on such person, based on the submission of fingerprints to the Georgia Crime Information Center through a local law enforcement agency. No person shall be hired or services retained if such person has, within the prior five years, been convicted of a felony, a crime involving moral turpitude, a drug crime, or a sexual offense. For purposes of this article, the term "convicted" shall include adjudication of guilty or a plea of nolo contendre, or the forfeiture of a bond. It shall be the duty of the licensee to maintain proper documentation showing the qualification of all employees and independent contractors rendering services for the establishment. 
(d)  Admittance of patrons. No person under the age of 18 years of age shall be admitted as a patron to any adult business licensed under this article. It shall be the affirmative duty of the licensee to verify the age of patrons by requiring the possession of a government-issued picture identification card, such as a driver's license, at the point of admission. Persons under the age of 18 may be admitted to the premises outside of business hours when engaged in cleaning, maintenance and repairs, provided no normal activity of the business is being conducted within the premises. 
(e)  Days and hours of operation. No licensee shall open or operate its establishment to patrons between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Mondays through Saturdays. Licensees shall remain closed, after 2:00 a.m. on Sundays, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. Premises may be opened for cleaning, maintenance, and acceptance of deliveries between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., provided no normal activity of the business is being conducted within the premises. 
(f)  Alcoholic beverages on premises prohibited. No alcoholic beverages shall be possessed or consumed within the premises of an adult business licensed under this article. No licensee shall authorize or permit any employee, independent contractor, patron or other person to bring alcoholic beverages onto the premises for purposes of consumption or distribution, either for themselves, other employees or patrons. No open containers of beverages, regardless of content, shall be brought onto the premises past the point of initial admission. 
(g)  Firearms and deadly weapons. No licensee shall authorize or permit any patron or customer to bring into the licensed premises any firearm or other deadly weapon. Signs shall be posted in the parking area and at all patron entrances to the establishment notifying that persons are subject to search, including searches of any bags in their possession, warning that weapons are prohibited and subject to confiscation. 
(h)  Security. It shall be duty of the licensee during all times of business operation to have on premises reasonable security to protect patrons, employees and independent contractors, including prevention of property crimes in the immediate vicinity of the business. Where video cameras are used to monitor the premises, signs shall be posted warning the premises are under video surveillance. 
(i)  Cleanliness of premises; health, fire and life safety inspections. It shall be the duty of the licensee to maintain the premises at all times in a clean and sanitary condition. Trash, food wastes and garbage shall not be allowed to accumulate and shall be properly disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. The fire marshal, the county health inspector, or their designees, shall make periodic sanitary, fire and life safety inspections of the licensed premises and shall record their findings, in writing. Any violations shall be brought to the immediate attention of the city manager. 
(j)  Display of license required; inspections. All establishments licensed under this article shall conspicuously display, near the main door or entrance to the premises, the license issued by the city under this article. As a condition for holding a license, the licensee shall consent to inspection of the premises and books and records of the business by the city manager or his designee, at any time during operating hours and at such other times as reasonably requested. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 8-28-2007)  
Sec. 10-34. - Special regulations for erotic dancing establishments. 
(a)  All performances by dancers and erotic entertainments shall be presented only on a stage, elevated no less than 24 inches above the normal floor height surrounding the stage. Table dancing and lap dancing shall be prohibited. The use of interior rooms within the establishment for private patronage, such as VIP rooms, is prohibited. 
(b)  Physical touching or contact between patrons and dancers or performers is prohibited. Patrons shall not be allowed to exchange money with or tip dancers or performers. Under no circumstances shall patrons be allowed to make physical contact with a dancer or performer by inserting tips into specified anatomical areas of the dancer or performer's body. 
(c)  Patrons shall remain seated in front of the stage area during all performances. The nearest seating shall be no closer than three feet from the edge of the stage. 
(d)  Dancers and performers shall not engage in, perform, or simulate, any act constituting a specified sexual activity as defined by this article and shall not knowingly and intentionally touch, caress or fondle any of the specified anatomical areas of their own body or that of other dancers or performers in a manner that constitutes a specified sexual activity prohibited by this article. 
(e)  Erotic dance establishments shall be located only in commercial districts zoned "planned commercial district" under the city's zoning ordinance, and shall not be permitted within any residential district or the central business district (CBD) of the city. Erotic dance establishments shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any residential district, church, school (not to include a college, adult technical school, other institution of specialized or post-graduate learning, or private commercial schools, such as martial arts, dance, or music studio), licensed day care center, or public park and shall not be located closer than 500 feet of any licensed adult entertainment business or establishment licensed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 8-28-2007)  
Sec. 10-35. - Location of adult businesses other than erotic dance establishments. 
Every licensed adult business under this article, other than an erotic dance establishment, shall be located within a commercial district zoned "planned commercial district" under the city's zoning ordinance and shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any residential district, church, school (not to include a college, adult technical school, other institution of specialized or post-graduate learning, or private commercial schools, such as martial arts, dance, or music studio), licensed day care center, or public park. No new adult business shall be located closer than 500 feet from any licensed adult business or establishment licensed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 8-28-2007)  
Sec. 10-36. - Applications; fees; application contents; decision on license; appeal. 
(a)  All applications for a license under this article shall be submitted to the city manager, or his designee, on forms provided by the city for that purpose. All applications shall be sworn to or attested by the applicant as to the truth of material statements contained therein, and that no material information is misstated or omitted as to cause the application to be misleading or false. Prior to acceptance, the application form shall be complete as to contents and required attachments, including required inspection reports of the business premises. All applications shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $500.00 for processing the initial application, plus the annual license fee of $1,000.00. Licenses shall be good only for the calendar year in which issued; if a license is issued after July 1 of the current year, the initial fee shall be $500.00. 
(b)  Every application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full, true name of the applicant and any other names or aliases used by the applicant; 
(2)  Applicant's date of birth, place of birth, and social security number; if the applicant is not a U.S. citizen, but holds a visa status entitling the applicant to work in the U.S., such information shall be provided; 
(3)  Applicant's current address, telephone number(s) and other contact information, such as email address; 
(4)  All addresses at which the applicant has resided during the previous five-year period; 
(5)  Certified birth certificate or other legal evidence showing the applicant to be at least 21 years of age; 
(6)  Applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair; 
(7)  Two photographs of the applicant, suitable for passport use; 
(8)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(9)  Certified business license history of the applicant, if any, in every jurisdiction in which the applicant was subject to licensing for the five years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(10)  Georgia Crime Information Center report on applicant's criminal history, including arrests and pending cases, in this or any other state or territory, for the five years immediately preceding the date of application, based upon the submission of fingerprints to a law enforcement agency; 
(11)  Address of premises to be licensed, accompanied by plat of survey showing all structures situated thereon and a scaled floorplan of the interior of the premises to be operated as an adult business; plat shall show minimum distances, by most direct route of travel on the ground, from nearest residential zoning district boundary, occupied residence, church, school, day care center, or public park; 
(12)  Certified copy of deed or other title instrument showing applicant to be the owner of the real property location for which a license is sought; if the applicant is not the owner, certified copy of deed or other title instruments showing the true owner of record, accompanied by written lease agreement and contact information for the true owner; 
(13)  Certificate of occupancy from city building official, fire marshal and county health department showing compliance of the structure with all minimum construction codes, occupancy and use regulations, fire and life safety regulations, and health codes, based upon physical inspections conducted not more than 30 days prior to the date of submitting the application; 
(14)  At least five character references on applicant from individuals not related to applicant and who will not benefit financially in any way if license is granted; references shall not have been convicted of any felony or crime involving moral turpitude within the last five years prior to the date of submitting the application; full names, addresses, telephone numbers and other contact information for references shall be provided. 
(c)  When the applicant is a partnership, all partners shall submit personal information as required in (b) above, together with evidence of a written partnership agreement; when applicant is a corporation or other form of business entity, all individuals having five percent of more equitable ownership in the entity shall provide personal information as required in (b) above, together with evidence of the corporation's articles of incorporation, bylaws, and resolution to seek a license; upon reasonable request, the city manager may inspect and copy minutes, financial records, and other documentation of the entity needed to make a licensing decision. 
(d)  No license shall be issued to any applicant who: 
(1)  Has been convicted of a felony or crime involving moral turpitude within the five-year period immediately preceding submission of the application; for purposes hereof, a plea of nolo contendre or bond forfeiture shall be deemed a conviction; 
(2)  Has had a similar license for operation of an adult business revoked or suspended in this or any other jurisdiction within the past five years prior to filing application; 
(3)  Is legally not entitled to conduct a business in accordance with laws, regulations and ordinances of the United States, this state, or this city; 
(4)  Has not paid current all taxes and license fees due and owing to the city or for the premises sought to be licensed; 
(5)  Has made a material false statement or misrepresentation in any license or renewal application; or 
(6)  Has not reasonably cooperated with the city manager in the investigation of a license or renewal application. 
(e)  Upon receipt of an application submission, the city manager shall promptly examine the application for completeness; if a completed application has been submitted, together with a tender of the requisite fees, the city manager shall issue a provisional license, good for 45 days, under which the applicant may commence operation of the business; the city manager shall diligently investigate the applicant(s) and verify all required information, within the 45-day period; applicants may be required to appear, in person, before the city manager, for examination; on or before the 45th day, the city manager shall either (a) deny the license, stating in writing all objective grounds or lack of qualifications found, or (b) grant the license. Written notice of action shall be promptly issued to the applicant at the address shown in the application, by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(f)  Whenever an application for a license is denied under this article, the aggrieved applicant shall have 30 days from the date of receipt of the written notice of denial to petition the superior court of Spalding County, Georgia, for a writ of certiorari; upon grant of the writ and motion by the petitioner for expedited hearing, the city attorney will consent to hear the matter as promptly as possible. 
(g)  Applications for future renewals of a license issued under this article shall be accepted by the city manager on or after October 1 of the current year for the subsequent calendar year, but not later than November 15. Renewal application forms shall be provided by the city manager and shall require the applicant to update any information as to its qualifications to possess a license, or any loss of qualifications since license issuance. All renewal applications shall be accompanied by tender of the requisite license fee for the renewal term. The fee for processing a renewal application shall be $250.00. 
(h)  Licenses issued under this article are not transferable. Any change in business ownership or location shall require submission of a new application based upon such change. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 8-28-2007)  
Sec. 10-37. - License revocation or suspension; hearing procedures. 
(a)  No license which has been issued pursuant to this article shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause and after hearing and upon prior three-day written notice to the holder(s) of the license of the time, place and purpose of the hearing and a statement of the charges upon which the hearing shall be held. 
(b)  The term "due cause" for the purposes of this section shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Conviction of, or the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere by the licensee or any person holding an interest in the license for any felony, a crime involving moral turpitude, any law, administrative regulation or ordinance involving alcoholic beverages, sexual offenses, gambling, drug offenses, or tax laws. 
(2)  Conviction of, or the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere by any of licensee's employees or any person rendering services to the licensee as an independent contractor of the business for any law, administrative regulation or ordinance involving alcoholic beverages, sexual offenses, gambling, drug offenses, or tax laws. 
(3)  Suspension or revocation of any state license required as a condition for the operation of the adult business. 
(4)  Material falsification of any fact given in an application for a license issued under this chapter or bearing upon the licensee's qualification therefore, including any renewal thereof. Any act which may be construed as a subterfuge in an effort to circumvent any of the qualifications for a license under this chapter shall be deemed a violation of the requirement attempted to be circumvented. 
(5)  Failure to meet or maintain any standard prescribed by this article as a condition or qualification for holding a license, including payment of license fees and taxes when due. 
(6)  Any other factor known to or discovered by the city manager whereby it is objectively shown the licensee, any person holding an interest in a license, or any of the licensee's employees has engaged in conduct at or involving the licensed business or has permitted conduct on the licensed premises that constitutes a violation of federal or state law, administrative regulations, or ordinance involving alcoholic beverages, sexual offenses, gambling or narcotics. With respect to this section, it shall be rebuttably presumed that the violative act was done with the knowledge or consent of the licensee; provided, however, that such presumption may be rebutted only by evidence which precludes every other reasonable hypothesis save that such licensee did not know, assist or aid in such occurrence, or in the exercise of full diligence that such licensee could not have discovered or prevented such activity. 
(c)  Notice of suspension or revocation proceedings shall be served on the person named as licensee in the application. Notice shall be in writing. The notice may be served personally or by first class mail. If by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the licensee at its address as it appears in the records of the city. The burden shall be on the licensee to provide notice, in writing, of any change of address for service of notices and process. In the case of service by mail of any notice required by this article, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Postal Service. 
(d)  The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer appointed by the chairperson of the board of commissioners. The hearing officer shall be an attorney licensed to practice in the state who is disinterested in the outcome of the proceeding. 
(e)  Hearings shall be only as formal as necessary to preserve order and shall be compatible with the principles of justice. The city attorney shall present the city's case and bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that due cause exists to suspend or revoke the license. At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to represent itself or be represented by counsel, may cross examine all witnesses offered by the city, and may call witnesses and present evidence in its own behalf. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply to hearings under this section, although the hearing officer shall have the right to exclude evidence which carries no indicia of reliability. All testimony shall be offered under oath or affirmation. 
(f)  The hearing officer shall make his final determination within ten business days of the completion of the hearing. The decision shall be placed in writing and contain the hearing officer's findings of fact, conclusions of law, and decision as to sanctions, if any. Such sanctions may include one or more of the following: immediate revocation of the license, suspension of the license for a time certain (which cannot exceed the time remaining on the license for the current calendar year), imposition of a civil monetary penalty not to exceed $5,000.00, and/or conditioning renewal of future licenses to a probationary period not to exceed two years. Progressive sanctions, depending on the severity of the violation, are encouraged but not required. Where the remaining term of the license is less than 12 months, imposition of suspension or probation for a period in excess of the term of the existing license shall be applied to any renewal license. A subsequent violation within a probationary period shall be cause for revocation and/or denial of license renewal. A total of three separate and unrelated violations within 24 months, whether or not within a probationary period, shall be grounds for permanent revocation. 
(g)  The hearing officer's decision shall be personally served or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested to the licensee and his attorney, with a copy to the city attorney, within ten business days of the close of the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall constitute final action by the city, subject to review upon petition for certiorari to the superior court, upon application filed within 30 days of notice of the decision. 
(h)  Upon receipt of notice of adverse action against the licensee under this section, the licensee may waive its right to a hearing and stipulate to a sanction, as recommended by the city manager, in consultation with the chief of police and city attorney. Any stipulation entered under this subsection shall be in writing, signed by the licensee, and nonappealable. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 8-28-2007)  
Sec. 10-38. - Violation of article; sanctions. 
(a)  Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an offense against the city, punishable upon conviction by the municipal court, as set forth in section 1-12 of this Code. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of any license issued under this article. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Any adult business operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. In addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a violation under subsection (a) above, the city may commence proceedings for abatement, pursuant to chapter 42 of this Code in the municipal court, or seek an injunction against the continued operation and maintenance of the business in the superior court. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of any license issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 8-28-2007)  
Sec. 10-39—10-62. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BONA FIDE COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT MACHINES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, adopted Feb. 14, 2017 , repealed the former Art. III, §§ 10-63—10-70, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 12-05, § 1, adopted July 24, 2012. 
 
Sec. 10-63. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
(a)  Bona fide coin-operated amusement machine means every machine of any kind or character used by the public to provide amusement or entertainment whose operation requires the payment of or the insertion of a coin, bill, other money, token, ticket, or similar object and the result of whose operation depends in whole or in part upon the skill of the player, whether or not it affords an award to a successful player pursuant to subsections (b) through (g) of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35, and which can be legally shipped interstate according to federal law. Examples of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Pinball machines; 
(2)  Console machines; 
(3)  Video games; 
(4)  Crane machines; 
(5)  Claw machines; 
(6)  Pusher machines; 
(7)  Bowling machines; 
(8)  Novelty arcade games; 
(9)  Foosball or table soccer machines; 
(10)  Miniature racetrack, football, or golf machines; 
(11)  Target or shooting gallery machines; 
(12)  Basketball machines; 
(13)  Shuffleboard games; 
(14)  Kiddie ride games; 
(15)  Skeeball machines; 
(16)  Air hockey machines; 
(17)  Roll down machines; 
(18)  Trivia machines; 
(19)  Laser games; 
(20)  Simulator games; 
(21)  Virtual reality machines; 
(22)  Maze games; 
(23)  Racing games; 
(24)  Coin-operated pool tables or coin-operated billiard tables as defined in paragraph (3) of O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1; 
(25)  Any other similar amusement machine which can be legally operated in Georgia; and 
(26)  Every machine of any kind or character used by the public to provide music whose operation requires the payment of or the insertion of a coin, bill, other money, token, ticket, or similar object such as jukeboxes or other similar types of music machines. 
The term "bona fide coin-operated amusement machine" does not include the following: 
(1)  Coin-operated washing machines or dryers; 
(2)  Vending machines which for payment of money dispense products or services; 
(3)  Gas and electric meters; 
(4)  Pay telephones; 
(5)  Pay toilets; 
(6)  Cigarette vending machines; 
(7)  Coin-operated scales; 
(8)  Coin-operated gumball machines; 
(9)  Coin-operated parking meters; 
(10)  Coin-operated television sets which provide cable or network programming; 
(11)  Coin-operated massage beds; and 
(12)  Machines which are not legally permitted to be operated in Georgia. 
(b)  Class A machine means a bona fide coin-operated amusement machine that is not a Class B machine, and meets the criteria set forth in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70(b)(3). 
(c)  Class B machine means a bona fide coin-operated amusement machine that allows a successful player to accrue points on a machine and carry over points won on one play to subsequent play or plays, and meets the criteria set forth in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70(b)(4). 
(d)  Location owner or location operator means an owner or operator of a business where one or more bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are available for commercial use and play by the public. 
( Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 2-14-2017 )  
Sec. 10-64. - Limitation on number of Class B machines at one location. 
No location owner or operator shall offer to the public more than six Class B machines that reward the player exclusively with noncash merchandise, prizes, toys, gift certificates, or novelties at the same business location. 
( Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 2-14-2017 )  
Sec. 10-65. - Owner/operator's duty to inform employees of prohibitions and penalties of law. 
It shall be the duty of every owner or operator of a business location that rewards the player exclusively as described in subsection (d) of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 to inform all employees of the prohibitions and penalties set out in subsections (e), (f), and (g) of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35. 
( Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 2-14-2017 )  
Sec. 10-66. - Duty of owner or possessor of machine to inform owner or operator of business location of prohibitions and penalties of law. 
It shall be the duty of every owner or possessor of any bona fide coin-operated amusement machine that rewards the player exclusively as described in subsection (d) of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 to inform each location owner or location operator of the business location where such machine is located of the prohibitions and penalties set out in subsections (e), (f), and (g) of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35. 
( Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 2-14-2017 )  
Sec. 10-67. - Suspension or revocation of alcoholic beverage license upon conviction of violation of law or this Code provision pertaining to bona fide coin-operated amusement machines. 
Conviction of a violation of subsections (e), (f), or (g) of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 by an owner, operator, or employee of a business location offering to the public any bona fide coin-operated amusement machine for which business location an alcoholic beverage license has been issued by the City of Griffin pursuant to chapter 6 of this Code, shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of such alcoholic beverage license, or refusal to renew such alcoholic beverage license. Any adverse action against a licensee on these grounds shall be brought in accordance with section 6-53 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 2-14-2017 )  
Sec. 10-68. - Duty of owner or operator to file verified monthly report. 
It shall be the duty of any location owner or location operator subject to paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 50-27-84 to provide to the city manager, or his designee, a copy of each verified monthly report prepared in accordance with such Code section, incorporating the provisions of such Code section herein, providing for any and all of the penalties authorized by subsection (d) of O.C.G.A. § 50-27-84, and allowing an audit of the reports from the location owner or location operator. 
( Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 2-14-2017 )  
Sec. 10-69. - Bona fide coin-operated amusement machines to be kept in plain view. 
The owner or operator of any business location at which bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are offered to the public shall place and maintain the machines in plain view in an area of the business location accessible to any person in the business location. 
( Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 2-14-2017 )  
Sec. 10-70. - Disclosure of owner of bona fide coin-operated amusement machine(s). 
The owner of every bona fide coin-operated amusement machines offered at a business location within the city shall, as a condition for doing business in the city, affix a placard or decal on each machine disclosing the name, address and telephone number of said owner. It shall be the further duty of the machine owner to keep such disclosure current for each machine. 
( Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 2-14-2017 )  
Sec. 10-71. - Duty to post notice, certificate and licenses at business location. 
It shall be the duty of every owner or operator of a business location which offers to the public one or more bona fide coin-operated amusement machines to prominently and conspicuously post a notice, in the following or substantially similar language: 
"GEORGIA LAW PROHIBITS PAYMENT OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR WINNING A GAME OR GAMES ON THIS AMUSEMENT MACHINE; PAYMENT OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR FREE REPLAYS WON ON THIS AMUSEMENT MACHINE; PAYMENT OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY WON ON THIS AMUSEMENT MACHINE; OR AWARDING ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY OF A VALUE EXCEEDING $5.00 FOR A SINGLE PLAY OF THIS MACHINE." 
In addition thereto, it shall be the further duty of the owner or operator of a business location to conspicuously post within the place of business its occupation tax certificate, any regulatory license(s) held for the business at that location including alcoholic beverage license, if any, and the name, address and contact information for the owner of any bona fide coin-operated amusement machines located upon the premises. 
( Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 2-14-2017 )  
Sec. 10-72. - Enforcement and penalties. 
The owner or operator of any business location in violation of this article shall be cited to appear before the municipal court of said city, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by a combination of such punishments. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 2-14-2017 )  
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-11, adopted May 23, 2017 , amended Ch. 14 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 14, §§ 14-31—14-38, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 04-15, § 1, adopted July 13, 2004; Ord. No. 09-08, § 1, adopted July 14, 2009. 
Cross reference— Animals at airport, § 18-13. 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to run at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7; dogfighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37; sale of dog meat for human consumption prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-160; Dead Animal Disposal Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq.; inoculation of dogs and cats against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; rabies inoculation tags, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; animal bites, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4; wild animals, O.C.G.A. § 27-5-4 et seq.; fish, O.C.G.A. § 27-4-30 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 14-1—14-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS 
 
Sec. 14-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal control board means the board created by the board of commissioners, by ordinance, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22, to hold hearings provided for in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24. The animal control board shall be composed of not less than one nor more than three members. 
Animal control officer means an employee of the city whose duties specifically include enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
Authority means an animal control board or local board of health, as determined by the board of commissioners of the city. 
Classified animal means any animal that has been classified as either a dangerous animal or vicious animal pursuant to this article. 
Dangerous animal means any animal that: 
(1)  Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; provided, however, that a nip, scratch, or abrasion shall not be sufficient to classify an animal as dangerous under this subsection; 
(2)  Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog posed an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no such injury occurs; provided, however, that the acts of barking, growling, or showing of teeth by a dog shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subsection; or 
(3)  While off the owner's property, kills a pet animal; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply where the death of such pet animal is caused by a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
Dog control officer means the chief of police and such employees of the animal control division of the police department acting under his supervision and control as he may, from time to time, designate, in writing, to perform the duties set forth in this article. 
Governing authority means the board of commissioners of the city. 
Local government means the City of Griffin, a Georgia municipal corporation. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dog or cat within the territorial boundaries of the city. In the case of a minor, the term 'owner' includes the parents or person in loco parentis with custody of the minor. 
Mail means to send by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the recipient's last known address. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping any animal, including a dangerous animal or vicious animal, while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the animal is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the animal's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the animal. 
Rabies control officer means an employee of the county board of health whose specific duties include enforcement of the rabies control rules and regulations of the county board of health within the city. 
Records of an appropriate authority means records of any state, county or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state or local court; or records maintained by the dog control officer pursuant to this article. 
Serious injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; results in death, broken, or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring multiple sutures, or disfiguring avulsions; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. 
Tethering means attaching an animal to a chain, rope, leash, tie out, or wire restraining an animal which is attached to an animal or an animal's collar or harness and is also attached to a stationary object. Tethering does not include trolleying. 
Trolleying means attaching an animal to a system containing a moving chain, rope, lease, tie out, or wire in which the animal is restrained between two points and the animal's collar or harness. 
Vicious animal means an animal that inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the animal's attack. 
( Ord. No. 17-11, 5-23-2017 )  
Sec. 14-32. - Animal control board. 
There is hereby created an animal control board, consisting of a single member. The person occupying the office of municipal court judge is hereby designated to serve and function as the animal control board for the purpose of conducting hearings as required by this article. 
( Ord. No. 17-11, 5-23-2017 )  
Sec. 14-33. - Keeping of dogs and cats; nuisances; sanitation. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner, keeper, or harborer of any dog or cat within the city to keep it from becoming a nuisance, from endangering or injuring any persons or property, or from creating a disturbance to the peace, tranquility and enjoyment of neighboring property owners. For purposes of this section, a "barking dog" shall mean a dog that barks, bays, cries, howls or makes other objectionable noise continuously and/or incessantly for a period of 15 minutes or longer at any time of day or night, while situated outside of the principal residence of its owner or keeper, if such noise may be discernable by a person of reasonable hearing at a distance of 50 feet beyond the boundary of the property where the animal is kept or confined; provided, however, a dog shall not be deemed a "barking dog" if the barking is designed to warn its owner or keeper that a person has entered or is threatening to enter onto the owner or keeper's private property (whether such entry is authorized or not), if a person has provoked or teased the dog, or if a similar legitimate cause exists to cause the dog to bark. Any violation of this section may be brought before the municipal court, upon citation to the lawful owner, keeper or harborer of the offending animal, and upon conviction punished by a fine upon the owner, keeper or harborer thereof. 
(b)  Dogs, other than those classified as dangerous dogs or vicious dogs, shall at all times: 
(1)  Be confined inside a principal residence or accessory structure on the owner's property, or contained outside within a proper fence, shelter or other enclosure so as to limit it roaming beyond the owner's property; 
(2)  Be restrained upon the owner's property by a humane physical restraint or electronic device so as to not reach any adjoining property or public right-of-way; tethering a dog by rope, wire or chain to a stationary object is unlawful, unless the dog is physically monitored by the owner; or 
(3)  While off the owner's property, be restrained on a leash, within a motor vehicle, crate or dog box, or obedient to voice or electronic commands, and accompanied by the owner or other person of responsible age; provided, however, this provision shall not apply to dogs while training or participating in lawful activities, such as hunting, obedience trials, field trials, dog shows, tracking or law enforcement work. 
(c)  Whenever a dog or cat is kept in such manner which constitutes a nuisance, a proceeding to abate the nuisance may be brought by the party aggrieved, pursuant to chapter 42, article II of this Code. An animal found by the court to constitute a nuisance may be impounded by the city if the owner, after reasonable opportunity to do so, fails to abate the nuisance as ordered by the court. 
(d)  Whenever a dog is allowed to roam free in violation of this section, impoundment of the animal is authorized. Upon identification of the owner or keeper, a citation shall be issued for violation of this section. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of any person having possession, custody or control of any dog, restrained or unrestrained, to immediately remove excrement deposited by the animal on any public right-of-way (street, sidewalk, or parkway between the street and sidewalk), on any public property, such as a municipal park, and from private property not belonging to the dog's owner or keeper. Such person shall have in their possession while controlling their dog a device or equipment for pick up and removal of the animal excrement and its proper disposal in a sanitary manner. Failure to pick up and remove animal excrement deposited off the owner or keeper's private property shall constitute a violation of this section which, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00 for each violation. 
(f)  Any outside enclosure used for the keeping of dogs shall be well-drained, free from accumulation of animal excrement and objectionable odors, and otherwise maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. All dogs which are housed and enclosed within the enclosure shall be provided a source of potable water and adequate food at all times. The enclosure shall be constructed in such a manner as to afford suitable shelter for the dog from the elements during inclement weather; enclosures shall be designed and constructed to afford the dog(s) ample room to exercise, depending upon the breed and size. Every enclosure for the keeping of less than five dogs, 90 days old or more, shall be located no closer than 20 feet from a property boundary or 100 feet from any dwelling unit on adjoining property, whichever is greater, unless the adjoining property owner gives written consent to a variance from this standard. Any enclosure for the noncommercial keeping of five or more dogs, 90 days old or more, on a property zoned or occupied for residential purposes shall be located not less than 100 feet from the nearest property boundary; there shall be no variance granted from this standard. Noncommercial enclosures for the keeping of five or more dogs may only be permitted in residential zones by special use permit, in accordance with the zoning ordinance. Puppies and dogs less than 90 days old shall be confined to the owner's premises and not allowed to run at large, except when accompanied by the owner or person of responsible age. 
(g)  Commercial animal facilities may only be constructed and operated by right on tracts of ten or more acres zoned "Industrial", and within other nonresidential zoning districts, by special use permit, as allowed by the zoning ordinance. For purposes of this section, a "commercial animal facility" means any facility, operation, or business used for the commercial boarding, breeding, buying, selling, trading, training or rearing of dogs, including guard dogs, police dogs, or similar working dogs, except for animal (veterinarian) hospitals and animal grooming facilities unconnected with such activities. All commercial animal facilities shall hold a current license from the Georgia Department of Agriculture permitting such operations and pay an occupation tax to the City of Griffin, unless exempt therefrom. 
( Ord. No. 17-11, 5-23-2017 )  
Sec. 14-34. - Inoculation; tagging of animals. 
(a)  All dogs and cats shall be inoculated against rabies in accordance with the procedures set forth in the rabies control rules and regulations of the county, as promulgated and from time to time amended by the county board of health, which by reference are expressly incorporated as a part of this section as if fully set out in this section. Violation of such rules and regulations may be enforced by the rabies control officer in the municipal court of the city, upon citation, as an offense against the city. 
(b)  The numbered vaccination tag issued by a licensed veterinarian upon inoculation shall be attached to a collar or harness and worn by the dog at all times. Proof of vaccination for cats shall be provided upon request by any animal control officer or law enforcement officer. Every dog found roaming or running free, whether tagged or untagged, shall be impounded. If an animal is impounded, and it is found not to be vaccinated, the owner may be cited for violation of this section. 
( Ord. No. 17-11, 5-23-2017 )  
Sec. 14-35. - Notice of impoundment; publication; disposition of unclaimed animals. 
(a)  All dogs and cats impounded by the city shall be held in a humane manner. The animal control division shall make a diligent effort to ascertain the owner of such animal, and shall give the owner prompt notice of the fact of impoundment. For purposes of this section, written notice to the owner by regular mail, at the address shown on the most current registration form, shall be deemed complete upon its mailing. If the owner is personally served, the notice may be left with a person of responsible age residing at the address or conspicuously tacked on the main entrance thereof. The notice shall advise the owner that the animal will be held for a period of five calendar days, exclusive of the date of service; thereafter, the animal may be disposed of in accordance with this section. The notice shall state the location and hours of the facility where the animal may be reclaimed and shall specify the cost for reclaiming the animal. 
(b)  The animal control officer shall charge and assess such fees for pickup and impoundment as set forth in a schedule approved by the governing authority, as may be from time to time amended. If the owner cannot show proof of current rabies vaccination, the animal shall be vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian before release, and the cost thereof collected from the owner. 
(c)  Any impounded animal, except a dangerous dog or vicious dog, may be disposed of after the fifth day of impoundment. Disposal of animals shall be made by adoption or by destruction in an expedient and humane manner. Animals may be held beyond the period stated if circumstances warrant. 
(d)  If any dead dog or cat is found upon the public right-of-way, the city shall remove and dispose of the animal and shall notify the owner, if known, to reclaim the animal for proper disposal; if an owner fails or refuses to reclaim the animal, a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall be charged for such service. 
(e)  Any person who voluntarily surrenders any animal to an animal control officer or law enforcement officer shall be charged a fee of $25.00 per animal. 
( Ord. No. 17-11, 5-23-2017 )  
ARTICLE III. - DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 14-36. - Exceptions. 
No animal shall be classified as a dangerous animal or vicious animal for actions that occur while the animal is being used by a law enforcement or military officer to carry out the law enforcement of military officer's official duties. No animal shall be classified as a dangerous animal or vicious animal if the person injured by such animal was a person who, at the time, was committing a trespass, was abusing the animal, or was committing or attempting to commit an offense under Chapter 5 of Title 16. 
( Ord. No. 17-11, 5-23-2017 )  
Sec. 14-37. - Investigation; notice to owner; hearings; determinations; judicial review. 
(a)  Upon receiving a report of an animal believed to the subject to classification as a dangerous animal or vicious animal within an animal control officer's jurisdiction, the animal control officer shall make such investigations as necessary to determine whether such animal is subject to classification as a dangerous animal or vicious animal. 
(b)  When the animal control officer determines that an animal is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog, the animal control officer shall mail a dated notice to the animal's owner within 72 hours. Such notice shall include a summary of the animal control officer's determination and shall state that the owner has a right to request a hearing from the authority on the animal control officer's determination within 15 days after the date shown on the notice. The notice shall provide a form for requesting the hearing and shall state that if a hearing is not requested within the allotted time, the animal control officer's determination shall become effective for all purposes under this article. If an owner cannot be located within ten days of an animal control officer's determination that an animal is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog, such animal may be released to an animal shelter or humanely euthanized, as determined by the animal control officer. 
(c)  When a hearing is requested by an animal owner in accordance with subsection (b) of this section, such hearing shall be scheduled within 30 days after the request is received, provided, however, that such hearing may be continued by the authority for good cause shown. At least ten days prior to the hearing, the authority conducting the hearing shall mail to the animal owner written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the animal owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and the authority conducting the hearing shall receive other evidence and testimony as may be reasonably necessary to sustain, modify, or overrule the animal control officer's determination. 
(d)  Within ten days after the hearing, the authority which conducted the hearing shall mail written notice to the animal owner of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the animal is a dangerous animal or a vicious animal, the notice of classification shall specify the date upon which that determination shall be effective. If the determination is that the animal is to be euthanized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-26, the notice shall specify the date by which the euthanasia shall occur. 
(e)  Judicial review of the authority's final decision may be had in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-9-30.9. 
(f)  In the event the animal control officer or law enforcement officer believes the animal poses a threat to public safety, the animal shall be immediately impounded. 
(g)  Under no circumstances shall the city or any employee or official of the city be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by an animal as a result of a failure to enforce the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 17-11, 5-23-2017 )  
Sec. 14-38. - Certificates of registration; limitation of ownership; annual renewal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner to have or possess within the city a dangerous or vicious animal without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this section. Certificates of registration shall be nontransferable and shall only be issued to a person 18 years of age or older. No more than one certificate of registration shall be issued per domicile. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specified by this section, a certificate of registration for a dangerous animal shall be issued if the animal control officer determines that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The owner has maintained an enclosure designed to securely confine the dangerous animal on the owner's property, indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to present the dangerous animal from leaving such property; and 
(2)  Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at all entrances to the premises where the animal resides. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsections (d) and (e) of this section, a certificate of registration for a vicious animal shall be issued if the animal control officer determines that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The owner has maintained an enclosure designated to securely confine the vicious animal on the owner's property, indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the vicious animal from leaving such property; 
(2)  Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides; 
(3)  A microchip containing an identification number and capable of being scanned has been injected under the skin between the shoulder blades of the animal; and 
(4)  The owner maintains and can provide proof of general or specific liability insurance in the amount of at least $50,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the vicious animal against liability for any bodily injury or property damage caused by the animal. 
(d)  No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of two or more violations of this article. 
(e)  No person shall be the owner of more than one vicious animal. 
(f)  No certificate of registration for a vicious animal shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of: 
(1)  A serious violent felony as defined in O.C.G.A. § 17-10-6.1; 
(2)  The felony of dogfighting as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37 or the felony of aggravated cruelty to animals as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; or 
(3)  A felony involving trafficking in cocaine, illegal drugs, marijuana, methamphetamine, or ecstasy as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-31 and O.C.G.A. § 16-13-31.1 from the time of conviction until two years after completion of his sentence or to any person residing with such person. 
(g)  Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of renewal of a certificate of registration for a vicious animal, an animal control officer shall verify that the owner is continuing to comply with provisions of this chapter. Failure to renew a certificate of registration within ten days of the renewal date or initial classification date shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 17-11, 5-23-2017 )  
Sec. 14-39. - Notifications by owner; change in ownership of animal. 
(a)  The owner of a classified animal shall notify the animal control officer within 24 hours if the animal is on the loose or has attacked a human and shall notify the animal control officer within 24 hours if the animal has died or has been euthanized. 
(b)  A vicious animal shall not be transferred, sold, or donated to any other person unless it is relinquished to a governmental facility or veterinarian to be euthanized. 
( Ord. No. 17-11, 5-23-2017 )  
Sec. 14-40. - Limitations on animal's presence off of owner's premises; penalty for violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous animal to permit the animal to be off the owner's property unless: 
(1)  The animal is restrained by a leash not to exceed six feet in length and is under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the animal from engaging any other human or animal when necessary; 
(2)  The animal is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate; or 
(3)  The animal is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
(b)  It is unlawful for an owner of a vicious animal to permit the animal to be outside an enclosure designed to securely confine the vicious animal while on the owner's property or outside a securely locked and enclosed, pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the vicious animal from leaving such property unless: 
(1)  The animal is muzzled and restrained by a leash not to exceed six feet in length and is under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the animal from engaging any other human or animal when necessary; or 
(2)  The animal is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate. 
( Ord. No. 17-11, 5-23-2017 )  
Sec. 14-41. - Confiscation by animal control officer; payment of costs for recovery; euthanasia 
(a)  A dangerous animal or vicious animal shall be immediately confiscated by an animal control officer or by a law enforcement officer in the case of any violation of this chapter. A refusal to surrender an animal subject to confiscation shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The owner of any animal that has been confiscated pursuant to this chapter may recover such animal upon payment of all reasonable confiscation and housing costs and proof of compliance with the provisions of this chapter, unless such confiscation is deemed to be in error by an animal control officer or an authority. All fines and all charges for services performed by a law enforcement or animal control officer shall be paid prior to owner recovery of the animal. Criminal prosecution shall not be stayed due to owner recovery or euthanasia of the animal. 
(c)  In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within 14 days of the date the animal was confiscated, such animal shall be released to an animal shelter, as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 4-14-2, or euthanized in an expeditious and humane manner. The owner may be required to pay the costs of housing and euthanasia. 
( Ord. No. 17-11, 5-23-2017 )  
Sec. 14-42. - Penalties. 
A violation of this article shall be an offense against the city and punishable, upon citation to the owner, before the municipal court in accordance with section 1-12 of the Code of Griffin. 
( Ord. No. 17-11, 5-23-2017 )  
Chapter 18 - AVIATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Authority to acquire, construct and maintain airports, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-20 et seq.; general powers of counties and municipalities as to airports, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-25; authority to enforce police regulations in airports, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-27; aviation, O.C.G.A. § 6-1-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Air operations area means any area of an airport used or intended to be used for landing, takeoff or surface maneuvering of aircraft, including but not limited to runways, taxiways, ramps and aprons. 
Aircraft means any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designed for navigation and/or flight in the air, except a parachute or other contrivance used primarily as safety equipment. 
Airport means the Griffin-Spalding Airport. 
Red demarcation line means the red line between the aircraft movement area (that area which is on the runway side of the red line that is normally used by aircraft) and the loading/parking areas (that area on the hangar side of the line normally used by motor vehicles and pedestrians.) 
(Code 1968, § 2B-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-2. - Scope of chapter. 
This chapter shall govern administration and operations at the Griffin-Spalding County Airport. Use of the airport, its property and facilities by the public is a privilege and no right is granted by this chapter. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-2)  
Sec. 18-3. - Violation of rules and regulations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person who willfully violates any rule, regulation or requirement governing the use and operation on the airport shall be guilty of an offense against the city, punishable as a violation of this chapter. Upon citation by the airport manager, his designated assistants, or any law enforcement officer of the city, such person shall be tried before the municipal court and if found guilty shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. In addition thereto, in the judgment of the court, such person's privilege to use or operate on the airport may be suspended or restricted. 
(b)  Any person who, without apparent intent, violates any rule, regulation or requirement governing the use and operations on the airport or commits negligent conduct arising from a failure to obey such rules and regulations may be subject to citation by the airport manager to appear at an administrative hearing before the manager at a certain day, time and place. The citation shall state the factual basis for its issuance and the specific rule or regulation violated. The hearing shall be informally conducted in such manner as to assure fundamental fairness. At the hearing the alleged violator shall be given an opportunity to be heard as to the conduct alleged and to confront any witnesses appearing against him. Based upon a full consideration the facts known and the explanation, if any, offered by the violator, the airport manager shall issue such administrative order as is appropriate under the circumstances, including the right to modify or restrict the violators' future use or operations at the airport. Restitution may be ordered if property damage, either to public or private property, resulted from such conduct. It is not the intent of this chapter to grant any person a property right in the use or operations on the airport. Any continuous or repetitious violations, after warning or notice from the airport manager or his designees, shall create a presumption that the violation is willful and punishable as an offense against the city. 
(c)  Any person committing an offense on the airport that is a crime, whether a felony or misdemeanor, under any federal or state law, shall be subject to arrest and punishment by a court of competent jurisdiction. The city has police jurisdiction over the airport, its property and facilities. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-3)  
Sec. 18-4. - Emergency conditions. 
The airport manager, in connection with the city manager, may modify or revoke these regulations during emergency situations, including the power to close the airport. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-5)  
Sec. 18-5. - Registration of aircraft. 
The owners of all aircraft based on the airport using tie-down areas and hangars will register their aircraft with the airport manager prior to beginning operation. Any change in the ownership of an aircraft will require reporting the change in registration, in writing to the airport manager, within five days. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-6)  
Sec. 18-6. - Certain areas restricted. 
No person shall enter upon runways, taxiways, or ramp areas, utility and service rooms or other areas as may be designated "restricted," except: 
(1)  Persons assigned to duty therein; 
(2)  Persons authorized by the airport manager; or 
(3)  Passengers, under appropriate supervision, entering the apron for the purpose of embarkation and debarkation. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-7)  
Sec. 18-7. - Red demarcation line. 
No vehicle shall cross the red demarcation line without having two-way radio communication with the Unicom and receiving prior approval of the airport manager. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-8)  
Sec. 18-8. - Underage persons. 
Persons who have not yet attained the age of 16 years must be accompanied by at least one responsible adult whenever in buildings or any air operations area. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-9)  
Sec. 18-9. - Report of hazardous conditions. 
Any person observing a condition or hazard that could jeopardize life, health, public safety or damage to property shall report it to the airport manager immediately. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-10)  
Sec. 18-10. - Accident reports. 
(a)  All persons involved in any incident involving personal injury or property damages occurring on the airport shall make a full report thereof to the airport manager as soon after the accident as possible. 
(b)  Persons involved in aircraft accidents occurring on the airport shall make a full written report thereof on available forms to the airport manager as soon after an accident as possible, which report shall include their names and addresses. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-11)  
Sec. 18-11. - Damage to lights and fixtures. 
Any person damaging any runway light or fixture shall report this damage to the airport manager immediately and shall be fully responsible for any costs required to repair or replace the damaged property. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-12)  
Sec. 18-12. - Responsibility for damage to leased premises. 
Tenants, lessees and licensees shall be fully responsible for all damages to buildings, equipment, real property and appurtenances by the carelessness of their employees, agents, customers, visitors, suppliers or persons with whom they may do business. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-13)  
Sec. 18-13. - Animals. 
All pets shall be either caged or on a leash and shall not be allowed on the operation areas of the airport. Any animal found to be roaming free on airport property will be subject to impoundment by the city. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-14) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14.  
Sec. 18-14. - Smoking prohibited in certain areas. 
No person shall smoke on the airport ramps, in any hangar or shop, service station area, gasoline storage area or in any building, or within 100 feet of any fueling or defueling operation. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-15)  
Sec. 18-15. - Firearms, explosives and flammable materials. 
No person shall carry or possess any firearm, explosive or flammable material on the airport, except by written permission of the airport manager. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-16)  
Sec. 18-16. - Interfering or tampering with aircraft. 
No person shall interfere or tamper with any aircraft, put in motion the engine of an aircraft or use any aircraft, aircraft parts, instruments or tools without permission of the owner or by specific direction of the airport manager. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-17)  
Sec. 18-17. - Outside storage. 
Objects shall not be stored outside of leasehold area, or between hangers, or in aircraft movement areas without the expressed written permission of the airport manager. Tenants shall store all property within the confines of their respective hangers. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § 1a., 4-23-2013)  
Secs. 18-18—18-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FLIGHT OPERATIONS 
 
Sec. 18-51. - Generally. 
All aeronautical activities at the airport and all flying of aircraft departing from or arriving in the airspace above the airport shall be conducted in conformity with the current pertinent provisions of the Federal Aviation Administration and orders issued by the city. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-18)  
Sec. 18-52. - Operation under the influence of alcohol and drugs. 
No person shall operate any aircraft, motor vehicle, power equipment or other device likely to cause injury, death or destruction of property on the airport while under the influence of alcoholic beverages, drugs or controlled substances. The airport, its property and facilities, are subject to the city's zero tolerance drug policies and any person or vehicle, including aircraft, entering upon the airport is subject to administrative search for drugs and controlled substances. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-19)  
Sec. 18-53. - Operation in reckless manner. 
No aircraft shall be operated in a careless or reckless manner. All aircraft shall be taxied at a safe and reasonable speed, with due regard for the safety of others. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-20)  
Sec. 18-54. - Aircraft certification required. 
No person shall operate from the airport any aircraft that is not fully certified by the Federal Aviation Administration and registered with the Federal Aviation Administration and carrying a current certificate of airworthiness. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-21)  
Sec. 18-55. - Landing, taxiing or taking off without radio contact. 
Pilots of aircraft shall not land, taxi or take off without announcing their intention by radio on the designated Unicom frequency, if the aircraft is equipped with radio. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-22)  
Sec. 18-56. - Starting engines. 
No person shall start or run an engine in any aircraft unless a competent person is in the aircraft attending the engine controls. Blocks shall always be placed in front of the wheels before starting the engine unless the aircraft is provided with adequate parking brakes. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-23)  
Sec. 18-57. - Engine warm-ups or tests. 
Aircraft at the airport shall not perform warm-up or engine test operations in any area that would result in a hazard to other aircraft, persons or property. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-24)  
Sec. 18-58. - Miscellaneous engine rules. 
No person shall run the engine of any aircraft at any location on the airport in such manner as to cause damage to other aircraft or property or in such manner as to blow paper, dirt or other materials across taxiways or runways so as to endanger the safety of operations on the airport. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-25)  
Sec. 18-59. - Aircraft equipment rules. 
No aircraft shall be operated on the airport unless it is equipped with wheel brakes, except with the permission of the airport manager. When any pilot of an aircraft that is not equipped with adequate brakes receives permission to taxi the aircraft, the pilot shall not taxi the aircraft near buildings or parked aircraft unless an attendant is at the wing of the aircraft to assist the pilot. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-26)  
Sec. 18-60. - Experimental flights and ground demonstrations. 
No experimental flights or ground demonstrations shall be conducted on the airport without the approval of the airport manager. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-27)  
Sec. 18-61. - Taxiing. 
(a)  No person shall taxi an aircraft until ascertaining that there is no danger of collision with any person or object in the immediate area by visual inspection of the area. 
(b)  Pilots shall not taxi onto or across a runway until they have announced their intention by radio on the designated Unicom frequency. 
(c)  Aircraft shall be taxied in accordance with the prescribed taxiing patterns when any particular runway is in use. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-28)  
Sec. 18-62. - Landings and take off generally. 
(a)  Fixed-wing aircraft will land and take off on the runways only. All aircraft must have a two-way radio capable of communicating with the Unicom radio. 
(b)  Procedures to be used when landing and taking off are as follows: 
(1)  Landing aircraft shall maintain traffic pattern altitude until turning onto base leg prior to commencing final approach. 
(2)  Departing aircraft shall climb out straight ahead using such techniques as are appropriate to reach an altitude of 500 feet above ground level before making a turn to depart the traffic pattern. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-29)  
Sec. 18-63. - Landings and take offs over populated areas. 
In all cases takeoffs and landings over populated areas shall be kept to a minimum in the interest of public safety and convenience. All aircraft shall climb out as quickly as possible within the safe operating limitations for the aircraft in order to minimize noise disturbance. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-30)  
Sec. 18-64. - Flight patterns. 
(a)  All flight patterns for the airport shall be established by the airport manager, in accordance with Federal Aviation Administration recommendations. 
(b)  Roto-craft shall conform to the same traffic pattern as prescribed for fixed wing aircraft in subsection (a) of this section unless otherwise instructed by the Unicom radio. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-31)  
Sec. 18-65. - Calm wind runway. 
Whenever the wind velocity is less than five knots per hour, aircraft shall ordinarily use the calm wind runway 32, unless otherwise instructed by the Unicom radio. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-32)  
Sec. 18-66. - Simulated forced landings. 
Simulated forced landings are prohibited within the airport traffic pattern without prior approval from the airport manager via Unicom radio. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-33)  
Sec. 18-67. - Angle of entering traffic pattern. 
Unless otherwise instructed by the Unicom radio, aircraft will enter the traffic pattern to the center one-third of the downwind leg at an angle of 45 degrees. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-34)  
Sec. 18-68. - Dirigibles, blimps, gliders, etc. 
Prior authorization from the airport manager is required before airships, dirigibles, blimps, gliders, free balloons, motorless aircraft, or aircraft with a total gross weight in excess of 30,000 pounds, land or take off at the airport. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-35)  
Sec. 18-69. - Parking of aircraft. 
No person shall park aircraft in any area on the airport other than that prescribed by the airport manager. No aircraft shall be left unattended in a movement area, i.e. blocking hangers, ramps, taxi lanes, taxiways or runways. Any aircraft left unattended blocking access to other aircraft may result in the issuance of a citation and be towed away at the owner's or operator's expense, without liability for damages which may result in the course of or after this moving. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-36; Ord. No. 13-03, § 1b., 4-23-2013)  
Sec. 18-70. - Conflict with flight orders. 
Should any of the rules and regulations governing flight operations be in conflict with Federal Aviation Administration regulations and/or flight orders, such Federal Aviation Administration regulations and orders shall prevail. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-37)  
Secs. 18-71—18-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - AIRCRAFT REPAIR AND SERVICE 
 
Sec. 18-91. - Removal of disabled aircraft. 
(a)  All disabled aircraft and parts thereof on the airport shall be promptly removed from the air operations areas by the owners. Unairworthy aircraft, wrecks, junkers, or parts thereof shall not be parked or stored anywhere on the airport or leased sites except in a hangar unless awaiting bona fide scheduled repairs or unless express authority is granted by the airport manager. 
(b)  If any person refuses to move an aircraft as directed by the airport manager, the aircraft may be towed away at the owner's or operator's expense and without liability for damage which may result in the course of or after this moving. This subsection shall apply to removal of a wrecked or damaged aircraft and its parts. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-38)  
Sec. 18-92. - Repair station certificate. 
Unless otherwise permitted by operating agreement, any person desiring to conduct maintenance service for the repair of aircraft engines, airframes, propellers, instruments, accessories or radios for hire shall comply with regulations established by Federal Aviation Regulations, Part 145 and shall hold a suitable valid repair station certificate issued by the administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration authorizing the repair. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-39)  
Sec. 18-93. - Where repairs to be effected. 
(a)  No person shall repair an aircraft, aircraft engine, propeller, or apparatus in any area of the airport other than that specifically designated for this purpose by the airport manager, except that minor adjustments may be done while the aircraft is on a loading ramp preparatory to take off when this adjustment is necessary to prevent a delayed departure. 
(b)  No person shall clean or make any repairs to motor vehicles anywhere on the airport other than in designated shop areas, except those minor repairs necessary to remove a motor vehicle from the airport; nor shall any person move, interfere or tamper with any motor vehicle, or put in motion the engine, or take or use any motor vehicle part, instrument or tool thereof, without the permission of the owner or satisfactory evidence of the right to do so duly presented to the airport manager. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-40)  
Sec. 18-94. - Discriminatory prices. 
No person shall engage in any aeronautical activity for furnishing services to the public at the airport unless fair, reasonable and not unjustly discriminatory prices are charged for each unit or service; provided that reasonable and nondiscriminatory discounts, rebates or other similar types of price reductions may be made to volume purchasers. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-41)  
Sec. 18-95. - Gasoline trucks generally. 
Fuel truck drivers shall remain in the vehicle cab while the vehicle is moving. Drivers shall not stand on the running board or fender while backing. Fuel trucks will block the rear wheels when not underway. Trucks will not park so as to block other vehicles and shall park in such location as will allow rapid removal in the event of an emergency. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-42)  
Sec. 18-96. - Fueling operations. 
The following rules govern the fueling and defueling of aircraft: 
(1)  No aircraft shall be fueled or defueled while the engine is running or being warmed by the application of exterior heat, or while the aircraft is in a hanger or enclosed space. "Hot Fueling"—fueling while an aircraft engine is running—is strictly prohibited for all piston engine aircraft and may only be performed by trained military or law enforcement personnel (during emergency situations only) whose agency policies allow for "hot fueling" and have a letter on file with the airport manager indicating the agency releases the airport from all liability and the agency's agreement to indemnify and hold the airport, its officers, employees, and agents, harmless from any claim, demand, or lawsuit arising out of an occurrence. 
(2)  No person shall smoke within 100 feet of an aircraft being fueled or refueled. 
(3)  No person shall operate any radio transmitter or receiver, or switch electrical appliances off or on in an aircraft during fueling or defueling. 
(4)  During refueling, the aircraft and the fuel dispensing apparatus shall be bonded to a point or points of zero electrical potential. 
(5)  No person shall use any material during fueling or defueling of aircraft which is likely to cause a spark or be a source of ignition. 
(6)  Adequate fire extinguishers shall be within ready reach of all persons engaged in fueling or defueling aircraft. 
(7)  No person shall start the engine of any aircraft where there is any gasoline on the ground under the aircraft. 
(8)  Fueling hoses and equipment shall be maintained in a safe, sound and nonleaking condition and shall be approved by the National Fire Protection Association. 
(9)  All fueling and defueling of aircraft shall be conducted at least 50 feet from any hangar or other building. 
(10)  No aircraft shall be fueled or defueled while passengers are on board the aircraft unless appropriate fire department equipment is standing by to immediately extinguishing any fire. 
(11)  Persons engaged in the fueling and drainage of aircraft shall exercise care to prevent overflow of fuel. Persons responsible will take proper measures to remove volatile liquid when it is spilled during transfer. 
(12)  Self-fueling of aircraft must be conducted in designated areas, where spill containment is provided. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-43; Ord. No. 13-03, § 1c., 4-23-2013)  
Sec. 18-97. - Storage of flammables. 
Gasoline, oil and solvent drums or receptacles shall not be stored on apron and ramp areas in excess of amounts actually needed as current stock. Any material of this type that is kept in subject areas will be kept enclosed and covered in housing of a design and type as meets the approval of the airport manager. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-44)  
Sec. 18-98. - Liquid disposal. 
No fuels, oils, dopes, paints, solvents or acids shall be disposed of or dumped in drains, basins or ditches on the airport. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-45)  
Sec. 18-99. - Open-flame operations. 
No person shall conduct any open-flame operations in any hangar or on the airport unless specifically authorized by the airport manager. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-46)  
Sec. 18-100. - Aircraft and equipment washing. 
No aircraft, ground equipment, or other vehicles, may be washed where discharge or water runoff can enter into the storm drainage system. Washing of aircraft, ground equipment, and vehicles may be performed only in approved designated areas or within the airport's "wash rack". Owners, operators, or their representatives washing aircraft, ground equipment, and vehicles in any area not designated for washing or outside the airport's wash rack, will be cited and upon conviction, fined in accordance with section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, § 1d., 4-23-2013)  
Secs. 18-101—18-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MOTOR VEHICLE OPERATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 90. 
 
Sec. 18-121. - Limitations on vehicular access to airport. 
All persons operating motor vehicles on airport property shall confine operation to designated streets and parking areas, unless written permission of the airport manager is first obtained. All operators of motor vehicles and their vehicles shall conform to licensing, registration, certification and equipment requirements of state law governing the use and operation of motor vehicles on the public streets and highways. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-47)  
Sec. 18-122. - Police jurisdiction; Uniform Rules of Road. 
(a)  All designated streets and parking areas on the airport are subject to the police jurisdiction of the city and the Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq., shall govern and control operation of motor vehicles on airport property. 
(b)  Unless otherwise posted, no motor vehicle operating on airport property shall exceed a speed of 25 miles per hour. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-48)  
Sec. 18-123. - Prohibited vehicles. 
The operation of dune buggies, all-terrain vehicles, motorcycles, dirt bicycles, and similar vehicles on airport property, other than on designated streets and parking areas, is strictly prohibited. Properly equipped carts and service vehicles may be operated in other designated areas by express permission of the airport manager. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-49)  
Sec. 18-124. - Right-of-way on aprons and taxiways. 
Where operation of motor vehicles on aprons and taxiways utilized by aircraft has been approved, aircraft and pedestrians shall have the right-of-way over motor vehicles. No motor vehicle shall be parked or left standing so as to impede the path of aircraft. No motor vehicle shall pass a moving aircraft while taxiing on an apron or taxiway. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-50)  
Sec. 18-125. - Special flags, lights, etc. 
Vehicles operating in special and infrequent instances shall display an approved nine-square-foot flag upon special permission of airport manager. Between the hours of sunset and sunrise these vehicles shall display an overhead yellow light which shall be visible from all direction and of sufficient brilliance to be seen under clear weather a distance of at least one mile with the naked eye, plus normal operating headlight and taillights in addition to two red reflectors on each side and on the rear. Nonmotor-propelled carts and trailers shall have two amber reflectors on each side and two front and two rear. All reflectors shall be visible for at least 500 feet when opposed by normal vehicle headlights. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-51)  
Sec. 18-126. - Clearance by Unicom radio to cross runways. 
No vehicles that have been permitted to operate on the airport shall proceed closer than 100 feet from the edge of the runways nor across any of the runways prior to being cleared by the Unicom radio. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-52)  
Sec. 18-127. - Parking. 
(a)  No person shall park a motor vehicle for loading, unloading or any other purpose on the airport other than in the areas specifically established for parking and in the manner prescribed by signs or other designated markings. No person shall abandon any motor vehicle on the airport by leaving the vehicle unattended for three consecutive days. No person shall park in a manner so as to obstruct roadways, nor in aircraft parking areas nor on grassed areas. 
(b)  When parking adjacent to a runway, all vehicles must park parallel to the runway and at least 100 feet to the outside of the runway lights. 
(c)  Motor vehicles parked on airport property, other than properly parked in designated parking spaces, shall be subject to tow and impoundment at the owner's expense and without liability to the city. 
(Code 1968, § 2B-53)  
Secs. 18-128—18-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SAFE, EFFICIENT USE AND PRESERVATION OF NAVIGABLE AIRSPACE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, adopted June 23, 2015 , repealed the former Art. V, §§ 18-151—18-155, and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to Griffin-Spalding County Airport and derived from Code 1968, § 2B-12(a)—(e). 
 
Sec. 18-151. - Intent. 
This article is intended to govern the development of property located adjacent to and in near proximity to the Griffin-Spalding County Airport and any future airports developed within the City of Griffin. It also governs development of property located within and under flight paths to such airports. The purpose of this article is to develop standards and criteria for development of property within airport zones, as defined herein, in a compatible manner with current regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration to protect the safety of persons and property located at or near airports, in, under or near airport flight paths and using the airport facilities within the city. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 6-23-2015 )  
Sec. 18-152. - Definitions. 
(a)  Airport: The Griffin-Spalding County Airport and any other airport now existing or that may be developed in the future which is subject to the regulations of this article. 
(b)  Airport elevation: The highest point of an airport's usable landing area as measured in feet from sea level. 
(c)  Approach surface: A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface area at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope as set forth in 14 CFR part 77 at present and as amended. 
(d)  Approach, transitional, horizontal and conical zones: These zones are set forth in FAR part 77 at present and as amended. 
(e)  Board: The board refers to the Griffin-Spalding County Airport Authority. 
(f)  Conical surface: A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one for a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet. 
(g)  Hazard to air navigation: An obstruction determined to have substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace. 
(h)  Height: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this article, the datum shall be at ground level (AGL) elevation unless otherwise specified. 
(i)  Heliport primary surface: The area of the primary surface coincides in size and shape with the designated takeoff and landing area of a heliport. This surface is a horizontal plane at the elevation of the established heliport elevation. 
(j)  Horizontal surface: A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which plane coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone. 
(k)  Larger than utility runway: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of greater than 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and jet powered aircraft. 
(l)  Nonprecision instrument runway: A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned. 
(m)  Obstruction: Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height as set forth in 14 CFR, part 77. 
(n)  Person: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or governmental entity; including a trustee, a receiver, an assignee, or similar representative of any of them. 
(o)  Precision instrument runway: A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing all instrument landing system (ILS) or a precision approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan or any other planning document. 
(p)  Primary surface: A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When a runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface is set forth in part 77. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
(q)  Runway: A defined area of an airport prepared for landing and take-off of aircraft along its length. 
(r)  Structure: An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including and without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead transmission lines. 
(s)  Transitional surfaces: These surfaces extend outward at 90 degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each one foot vertically from the sides of the primary approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach surfaces which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at 90 degrees angles to extended runway centerline. 
(t)  Tree: Any object of natural growth. 
(u)  Utility runway: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight, or less. 
(v)  Visual runway: A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 6-23-2015 )  
Sec. 18-153. - Airport zones. 
In order to carry out this article, there are hereby created and established certain zones which shall include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces and conical surfaces as they apply to the Griffin-Spalding County Airport, and any future airport developed in the city. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
(1)  Utility runway visual approach zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(2)  Utility runway nonprecision instrument approach zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 2,000 feet at a horizontal distance 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(3)  Runway larger than utility visual approach zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(4)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than ¾-mile nonprecision instrument approach zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(5)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum as low as ¾-mile nonprecision instrument approach zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 4,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(6)  Precision instrument runway approach zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(7)  Heliport approach zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 50 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 500 feet at a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet from the primary surface. 
(8)  Transitional zones: The transitional zones are the areas beneath the transitional surfaces. 
(9)  Heliport transitional zones: These zones extend outward from the sides of the primary surface and the heliport approach zones a horizontal distance of 250 feet from the primary surface centerline and the heliport approach zone centerline. 
(10)  Horizontal zone: The horizontal zone is established by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary-surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones. 
(11)  Conical zone: The conical zone is established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 6-23-2015 )  
Sec. 18-154. - Airport zone height limitations. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this article to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows: 
(1)  Utility runway visual approach zone: Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(2)  Utility runway nonprecision instrument approach zone: Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(3)  Runway larger than utility visual approach zone: Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(4)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than ¾-mile nonprecision instrument approach zone: Slopes 34 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(5)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum as low as ¾-mile nonprecision instrument approach zone: Slopes 34 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(6)  Precision instrument runway approach zone: Slopes 50 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline; thence slopes upward 40 feet horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional horizontal distance of 40,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(7)  Heliport approach zone: Slopes eight feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a distance of 4,000 feet along the heliport approach zone centerline. 
(8)  Transitional zones: Slopes seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation which is 958 feet above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90 degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
(9)  Heliport transitional zones: Slopes two feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the heliport approach zones and extending a distance of 250 feet measured horizontally from and at 90 degree angles to the primary surface centerline and heliport approach zones centerline. 
(10)  Horizontal zone: Established at 150 feet above the airport elevation or at a height of feet above mean sea level. 
(11)  Conical zone: Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation. 
(12)  Excepted height limitations: Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure, or growth of any tree to a height up to 35 feet above the surface of the land. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 6-23-2015 )  
Sec. 18-155. - Use restrictions. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this article in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 6-23-2015 )  
Sec. 18-156. - Permits. 
(a)  Future uses: All applications for permits under this section shall be made in the City of Griffin Development Services Department on forms expressly provided for that purpose. Except as specifically provided hereunder, no material change shall be made in the use of land, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be planted in any zone hereby created that exceeds the maximum height limitation unless an FAA form 7460-2 shall have been applied for and a "Notice of no presumed hazard" received from the FAA, prior to the issuance of any local permit. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of this article shall be granted. 
(b)  Existing uses: Any existing use, structure, or tree that exceeds the maximum height limitation in any zone created by this article, without the owner having received from the FAA a "Notice of no presumed hazard", shall be deemed and is hereby declared a nonconforming use. No permit shall be granted that would permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of this article. 
(c)  Marking and lighting: The owner of any existing nonconforming use, structure, or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the airport director to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the identified obstruction's owner. 
(d)  Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed: Whenever the airport director determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned, or more than 50 percent destroyed, torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such use, structure or tree to be replaced or materially repaired at a height which exceeds the applicable height limit or otherwise deviates from applicable zoning regulations. 
(e)  Obstruction marking and lighting: Any permit granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this article and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the use, structure, or tree in question to install, operate, and maintain, at the owner's expense, such markings and lights as may be necessary. If deemed proper by the Griffin-Spalding County Airport Authority, this condition may be modified to require the owner to permit the Authority, at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain the necessary markings and lights. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 6-23-2015 )  
Sec. 18-157. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the airport director to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Any violation of these regulations, for which a sanction is not specified or imposed under general law, shall constitute a violation of the Code of Griffin and be subject to enforcement in accordance with section 1-12 of said Code. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 6-23-2015 )  
Sec. 18-158. - Conflict with other development regulations. 
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this article and any other development regulations applicable to the same property, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. 
( Ord. No. 15-06, § 1, 6-23-2015 )  
Chapter 22 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 42; fire prevention and protection, ch. 46; floods, ch. 50; health and sanitation, ch. 54; planning, ch. 66; solid waste, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 94; vegetation, ch. 98. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Schedule of rates, fees and charges. 
A schedule of rates, fees and charges for permits, inspections and other services rendered by the department of development services is adopted. The intent of this section is to provide a single fee schedule and to remove from the current Code, various references to fees, rates and charges in order that a unified fee schedule may be published by the department of development services, with the approval of the board of commissioners. Such rates, fees, and charges shall be determined from time to time by the board of commissioners and set forth in such schedule of rates, fees and charges, an official copy of which shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1968, § 5-54; Ord. No. 98-12, § 1, 7-28-1998; Ord. No. 00-25, § 1, 11-14-2000)  
Secs. 22-2—22-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-31. - State minimum standard codes. 
(a)  Codes which are to be enforced by the city manager or his designated representative. The state minimum standard codes enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(I)—(VIII), to-wit: 
• International Building Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments (2014) (2015) (2017) (2018); 
• International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments (2014) (2015) (2018); 
• International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments (2014); 
• International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments (2014) (2015); 
• International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments (2014) (2015); 
• International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments (2014) (2015); 
• National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition (No Georgia Amendments); 
• International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 Edition, with Georgia Supplements and Amendments (2011) (2012); 
• International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments (2014). 
Which codes have mandatory statewide application and do not require adoption by local ordinance, shall be enforced by the city manager, his designated representative, or designee(s) thereof, in accordance with the procedures hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  Adoption of optional codes; enumeration. There is hereby adopted within the city the permissive state minimum standard codes enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(IX)—(XI), to-wit: 
• Disaster Resilient Building Code IBC Appendix (2013); 
• Disaster Resilient Building Code IRC Appendix (2013); 
• International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments (2015); 
• International Existing Building Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments (2015); 
• National Green Building Standard, 2008 Edition, with Georgia Amendments (2011). 
(c)  The codes provided in subparts (a) and (b) of this section shall mean the current edition of such codes as approved by board of community affairs, including any new edition of any such code as provided in subsection of code [O.C.G.A.] 8-2-23(b); and provided, further, that any such codes may hereafter be amended or revised as provided in subsection of code [O.C.G.A.] 8-2-23(a). All references to "State Minimum Standard Codes" shall include the Georgia State Amendments promulgated by the board of community affairs and any local amendments approved by said board. 
(d)  Whenever the International Fire Code (ICC), as approved by the board of community affairs, is applicable, any state minimum standard code provision shall not be less restrictive than the Georgia State Fire Code, as adopted by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13. 
(e)  The city manager or his designee shall make copies of relevant sections of the codes enforced or adopted in this section available to members of the general public, in printed or written format, at such price as it deems reasonable, to defray the costs of publication and handling. Due to copyright limitations, copying or duplication of some codes may be restricted. 
(f)  In applying the aforesaid state minimum standard codes, the following standards may also be applicable: 
(1)  Part X of ANSI A17.1-1984, the American National Standard Practice for Inspection of Elevators, Escalators and Moving Walks, Inspector's Manual ANSI A17.2, the safety standards for manlifts ANSI A90.1a-1976, the safety standard for construction hoists ANSI A10.4-1981 and ANSI A10.5-1981, the safety standard for conveyors and related equipment ANSI B20.1-1984, or the latest revised rules and regulations adopted by the state commissioner of labor; 
(2)  Part 3, Fire Escapes, of O.C.G.A. Title 8, Chapter 2 (O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-50—8-2-52) shall apply to all buildings within the city which are not used as private residences and which are three or more stories in height; and 
(3)  Article 3 of O.C.G.A. Title 8, Chapter 2, "The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings" (O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-200—8-2-222) is hereby incorporated by reference and shall be used by the city manager or his designated representative whenever there exists the need to utilize compliance alternatives to any provisions of the rules, regulations, codes, or standards herein imposed or adopted. 
(Code 1968, § 5-14; Ord. No. 98-12, § 1, 7-28-1998; Ord. No. 01-19, § 1(22-1), 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 02-16, § 1, 10-8-2002; Ord. No. 03-01, § 1, 1-28-2003; Ord. No. 04-03, § 1, 4-27-2004; Ord. No. 12-03, § 1, 6-12-2012; Ord. No. 17-02, § 1, 2-11-2017 ; Ord. No. 18-02, § 1, 2-27-2018 )  
Sec. 22-32. - Duties and responsibilities of city manager or his designated representative. 
(a)  Primary administration and enforcement of construction codes is vested in the city manager, who may appoint one or more building inspectors and delegate such functions as the manager, in his discretion, deems appropriate. Where more than one building inspector is employed, the manager may designate a chief building inspector to administratively head the department of building and code enforcement. The manager, and his designated representatives, shall have and exercise the following duties and responsibilities in the enforcement of state minimum standard codes: 
(1)  To interpret, enforce, and administer the state minimum standard codes within the city in accordance with the provisions and procedural requirements of this article; 
(2)  To inspect all existing buildings and structures as required by such codes and to permit and inspect new construction and the renovation, alteration, modification and repairs to existing structures to assure compliance with applicable state minimum code standards; 
(3)  Under the budget and personnel regulations of said city, to employ inspectors and other personnel necessary for the proper enforcement of such codes and to provide for the authority, functions, and duties of such inspectors; 
(4)  To bring enforcement actions, prosecute complaints and citations in the appropriate court and to appeal those decisions adverse to the best interest of the city; 
(5)  To study and make recommendations to the board of commissioners on ordinances relating to the administration and enforcement of state minimum standard codes; and 
(6)  To perform all other duties and functions imposed upon the chief administrative officer, by whatever name or title referred, in the state minimum standard codes. 
(b)  Pursuant to the authority contained in the O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26, self-inspection of water and sewer projects by master plumbers or utility contractors shall be applicable in the city. 
(c)  The duties and responsibilities of the manager and his designated representatives, set forth in this section, may, by private or intergovernmental contract approved by the board of commissioners, be exercised and performed by an independent contractor or by the city manager or his designated representative of any county or other municipal corporation of this state. When such contract has been entered and spread upon the official minutes of the commission, the acts of such contractor shall be deemed the acts of the city as if fully performed directly by the city, its officers and employees. 
(Ord. No. 01-19, § 1(22-2), 12-11-2001)  
Sec. 22-33. - Limitation of liability for code enforcement; no special duty created. 
It is the intent of this article to protect the public health, life safety and general welfare of properties and occupiers of buildings and structures within the city in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or without the boundaries of the city. Approval of a permit and inspection of a property shall in no manner guarantee or warrant to the owner or occupants thereof that said property has been constructed, maintained, or operated in conformance with applicable codes, laws and regulations. The city reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the city, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. To the extent any federal or state law, regulation, or ordinance requires compliance as a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit, plan or design approval, inspection or other activity by the city, its officers, employees and agents, issuance of such permit, approval, or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver or estoppel of the condition precedent, and it shall remain the obligation and responsibility of the owner, his design professional(s), and contractor(s) to satisfy such legal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 01-19, § 1(22-3), 12-11-2001)  
Sec. 22-34—22-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 22-51. - Permits. 
(a)  Required. No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, convert or demolish any building or structure within the city, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a permit for such building or structure from the city. Separate permits are required for grading, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and low-voltage. 
(b)  Fees. Permit fees shall be established in accordance with a schedule approved by the board of commissioners, as may be revised from time to time. 
(c)  Term. Permits shall generally be good for six months from date of issuance; provided, that if the work is not completed within the initial permit term, but has been diligently pursued, the permit may be extended, without additional charge, for successive three-month terms, so long as the work continues to be diligently prosecuted. 
(d)  Revocation for suspension or abandonment. If work authorized by a permit is suspended or abandoned, after the initial term, for a period of 30 days, without good cause shown to the city manager or his designated representative, the permit may be revoked upon written notification to the permit holder. Revocations of permits for abandonment are not appealable to the board of commissioners. 
(e)  State licensing required. Persons engaging in electrical, plumbing, mechanical, low-voltage or utility contracting on any work within the city are required to possess a license issued by the state construction licensing industry board as a condition for performing the work; provided, however, the owner of a single-family dwelling performing work (other than utility contracting) within a dwelling occupied by him as his personal residence, shall be exempt from state licensing. Where a state license is required, every applicant for a permit shall furnish proof, at time of application, that he or the person contracted to do the work holds a valid state license in good standing. Failure to meet this requirement may be grounds for revocation of the permit. 
(f)  Permits issued for structures with revoked certificates of occupancy. If a certificate of occupancy has been revoked for a structure, the permit issued for that structure is valid for either 90 days or for the amount of time ordered in the relevant order issued by the Griffin Municipal Court, whichever is longer. 
(g)  Indebtedness to city. Unless prior arrangement has been made to satisfy the debt owed, no permit under this chapter shall be issued to any applicant if any person holding a beneficial interest in the property or the business applying for the permit owes any delinquent fines or other assessments to the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-19, § 1(22-4), 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 03-20, § 1, 7-28-2003; Ord. No. 17-06, § 1, 3-14-2017 )  
Sec. 22-52. - Written documentation; payment of fee required for issuance. 
Prior to issuance of any permit, in addition to the information requested on the permit application, the city manager or his designated representative may require tests, plans and specifications, plats, and other written documentation from engineers, architects, surveyors, and other professionals to assure that full compliance with all permitting requirements of the state minimum standard codes and applicable laws have been met. No permits shall issue on any project where the structure to be built or improved thereon is a "special hazard structure" or the use to be conducted therein is a "special hazard use", without first obtaining the approval of building plans by the state fire marshal's office. Where a project is subject to permitting under the state soil erosion and sedimentation control law, no permit shall issue for any land-disturbance activity unless approved plans are received from the district soil conservation office and all required stabilization facilities are in place, and ready for inspection. All buildings and structures intended for human occupancy shall have a safe source of drinking water and sanitary disposal; no permit shall issue for any building or structure which does not have access to public water and sewer unless plans for a well and/or septic tank have been approved by the county health department. All permits shall be conditioned upon the application and supporting data, which is deemed incorporated into and made a material part or term of the permission granted. No permit shall issue until all requisite fees have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 01-19, § 1(22-5), 12-11-2001)  
Sec. 22-53. - Cessation of work. 
Upon notice from the city manager or his designated representative, work on any building, structure, system or component therein, that is being done contrary to the provisions of the state minimum standard codes, or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, or in violation of any other applicable law, rule, or regulation, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be given in writing, directed to the owner of the property and to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency situation exists, the city manager or his designated representative shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(Ord. No. 01-19, § 1(22-6), 12-11-2001)  
Sec. 22-54. - Revocation of permit for false statement or misrepresentation. 
The city manager or his designated representative may revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this article in the event he finds there has been a false statement or misrepresentation as to any material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. The city manager or his designated representative may also revoke a permit upon determining that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, or demolition of the building or structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of state minimum standard codes; provided, the work was stopped in accordance with section 22-53 and the permittee has not met the conditions for resuming the work after a reasonable period for compliance has been granted. 
(Ord. No. 01-19, § 1(22-7), 12-11-2001)  
Sec. 22-55. - Inspections; right of entry. 
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the state minimum standard codes, or whenever the city manager or his designated representative has probable cause to believe that there exists in any building or structure or upon any premises within the city any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, or premises, unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the city manager or his designated representative, may enter such building, structure, or premises, at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed by this article; provided, if such building, structure, or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry from the building's owner or occupant. If such building, structure or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or person having charge or control of the building, structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the city manager or his designated representative may apply to the judge of the municipal court of the city for an administrative search warrant. 
(Ord. No. 01-19, § 1(22-8), 12-11-2001)  
Sec. 22-56. - Service of orders, rulings, etc.; appeals. 
All decisions, orders and rulings of the city manager or his designated representative shall be in writing and served upon the applicant, permit holder, owner of property affected or his agent, and, if applicable, persons in possession or occupancy of affected premises. Where such decisions cannot be personally served, service shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the party's last known address as shown on official government records. Any party aggrieved by a decision, order or ruling of the city manager or his designated representative may seek review thereof by filing a written petition for certiorari, within 30 days, with the superior court of the county; provided, however, in any case where the city manager or his designated representative has issued an order for the repair, closing or vacating of a building or structure on grounds it is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous so as to constitute a public nuisance, no review may be had until the municipal court has entered its final order in the nuisance abatement proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 01-19, § 1(22-9), 12-11-2001)  
Sec. 22-57. - Variances. 
In those limited circumstances where the state minimum construction codes allow a local variance based upon hardship, the board of commissioners may, upon finding that strict enforcement of the state minimum standard codes would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of such codes and the public interest, grant a variance, subject to finding, in writing, all of the following: 
(1)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure, or system involved and which are not applicable to others similarly situated; 
(2)  That the special condition and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant; 
(3)  That granting a variance will not confer on the applicant any special privileges that are denied by the codes to other buildings, structures, or service systems; 
(4)  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure, or service system; and 
(5)  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of such codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Applications for variance shall be advertised not less than 15 days prior to conducting an evidentiary hearing before the board of commissioners. Such hearing shall be informally conducted, with the applicant having the burden of proof. Each decision of the board of commissioners shall recite the factual findings underlying its decision and the reasons for such decision. In granting a variance, the board of commissioners may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the codes, including a reasonable time limit in which the variance is required to be commenced or completed, or both. A copy of the board of commissioners's written decision shall immediately be filed in its minutes of the hearing at which the variance was considered and a copy promptly served upon all affected parties. Decisions of the board of commissioners shall be final, subject to review by petition for certiorari to the superior court, filed within 30 days of entry of the written decision. 
(Ord. No. 01-19, § 1(22-10), 12-11-2001)  
Sec. 22-58. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate any provision of the state minimum standard codes, or the permissive codes and construction standards adopted by this article, or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished any building, structure, or system therein in violation of this Code section shall be cited to appear before the municipal court of this city. Upon trial, if convicted, such violation shall carry a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per day. Each and every day, or portion thereof, during which any violation of this article is committed or continued shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. Continuing violations of this article are hereby further declared to be public nuisances, harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare; and, in addition to all other remedies provided by law, are subject to abatement or injunction by a court of appropriate jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 01-19, § 1(22-11), 12-11-2001)  
Sec. 22-59. - Definition of terms. 
For purposes of interpretation of the state minimum standard codes, the definitions of terms found in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 shall control over the definitions of the same or similar terms as found in such codes or this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-19, § 1(22-12), 12-11-2001)  
Secs. 22-60—22-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING NUMBERING 
 
Sec. 22-111. - Display of street numbers required. 
Every house, mobile home, apartment, business or other building having a street number assigned to it under the system of numbering in the city shall display such number in a readily visible manner and in compliance with the requirements of this article. Mobile home parks and apartment complexes shall also be required to have each individual pad, lot number or apartment number displayed in a readily visible manner and in compliance with the requirements of this article. Such lot, pad or apartment numbers shall be in sequence unless directional signs are provided for numbers not in sequence. 
(Code 1968, § 20-24(a)) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78.  
Sec. 22-112. - Method of display. 
(a)  Assigned street numbers may be affixed to the house, apartment, business or other building itself, provided that such house, apartment, business or other building is not more than 50 feet from the curbline, pavement edge or edge of the travel way of the street in front of the house, apartment, business or other building, and the number is readily visible from the street by persons traveling along the street in each direction. Street numbers may also be placed on mailboxes or signs located on the premises in front of the house, apartment, business or other building, provided such signs are of a durable type and are located not more than 50 feet from the curbline, pavement edge or edge of the travel way of the street in front of the property, and provided that the numbers on such sign shall be readily visible from the street by persons traveling along the street in each direction. 
(b)  If the house, apartment, business or other building to be numbered is more than 50 feet from the curb, pavement edge or edge of the travel way of the street in front of the property, or if for any reason a street number affixed to the building would not be readily visible from the street by persons traveling along the street in each direction, the street number shall not be displayed on the building, but must be displayed on a sign or mailbox complying with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1968, § 20-24(b))  
Sec. 22-113. - Size, condition of numbers. 
Street numbers affixed to buildings or signs shall be a minimum of four inches in height. Those affixed to mailboxes in the manner specified in this article shall be a minimum of two inches in height. All such signs shall be of a color contrasting to the background so as to be clearly visible. Street numbers and signs to which they are affixed shall be maintained at all times in good condition. 
(Code 1968, § 5-24(c))  
Sec. 22-114. - Duty of owner; violations. 
The obligation of complying with the provisions of this article shall be upon the owner of the property. The property owner shall have 30 days from the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives to comply with the provisions of this article. If the provisions of this article shall be found to have been violated, notice shall be given to the owner of the property, or his agent, specifying the manner in which this section is being violated, and giving the owner ten days to bring the property into compliance. Each day a violation of this article continues after the expiration date of such ten-day period shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as provided by law. 
(Code 1968, § 20-24(d))  
Sec. 22-115. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The responsibility for making the inspections provided for in this article, and for the enforcement of the provisions hereof, shall rest upon the city inspection department, and the agents and employees of such department are hereby authorized and empowered to make cases and issue summonses for violations. However, all law enforcement agencies providing services in the city are authorized to write warnings to the property owner in violation of this article. Any such warnings issued shall be forwarded to the inspection department for appropriate action. 
(Code 1968, § 20-24(e))  
Sec. 22-116. - Permit required to maintain opening or stairway. 
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any public street or sidewalk or alley without a permit from the city. All such lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable strong cover or railing, constructed to the approval of the city engineer. 
(Code 1968, § 20-25)  
Secs. 22-117—22-199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - UNFIT BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-11, § 1, adopted Aug. 8, 2006, amended art. IV in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former art. IV derived from Ord. No. 04-20, § 1, adopted July 27, 2004. 
 
Sec. 22-200. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
Applicable codes means any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, chapter 2 as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property-maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. title 25, chapter 2; and any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, chapter 2 after October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real-property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. title 16, chapter 13, article 2, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act". 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this article, the term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Graffiti means any inscriptions, words, figures, paintings, or other defacements that are written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by means of any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush, or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any surface without prior authorization from the owner or occupant of the property. 
Governing authority means the Board of Commissioners of the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
Interested party means: 
(1)  The "owner"; 
(2)  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(3)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(4)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; and 
(5)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the municipality or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of court; provided, however, interested party shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected. 
Municipality means the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Public authority means any member of the governing authority, any director of a public housing authority, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of government (municipal, county or state) relating to health, fire, life safety, building regulations, or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures, or use of private property within the city. 
Public officer means the city manager, who is authorized to exercise the powers prescribed by article, and any officer or employee of the city to whom he delegates such authority. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. 06-11, § 1, 8-8-2006; Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, 7-24-2007)  
Sec. 22-201. - Duty of owners of real property and structures thereon. 
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or private property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city or such laws and ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on private property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or use private property in violation of such codes, laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 06-11, § 1, 8-8-2006)  
Sec. 22-202. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
Every dwelling, building, or structure within the city which (i) is constructed or maintained in violation of applicable codes in force within the city; (ii) is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use or occupancy due to inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air, sanitation, or open spaces; (iii) poses an imminent harm to life or other property due to fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm or other natural catastrophe; (iv) is vacant and used in the commission of drug crimes; (v) is occupied and used repeatedly for the commission of illegal activities, including facilitating organized crime or criminal enterprises, after written notice to the owner of such activities conducted therein; (vi) is abandoned; or (vii) otherwise constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, is hereby declared a public nuisance. Every private property within the city on which is being regularly conducted any activity or land use in violation of applicable laws and ordinances, including the zoning ordinance of this city, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Property which may be deemed esthetically substandard or deteriorating shall not meet the definition of a public nuisance unless the overall condition or use of the property results in impaired health, safety, transmission of disease, infant mortality, or crime. 
(Ord. No. 06-11, § 1, 8-8-2006)  
Sec. 22-203. - Powers of city manager or his designee. 
(a)  In carrying out his duties pursuant to this article, the city manager or his designee to whom his authority is assigned shall, in addition to those powers otherwise conferred upon or delegated to him by the Charter and other ordinances of the city, be empowered to: 
(1)  Investigate and inspect the condition of dwellings, buildings, structures, and private property within the city to determine those structures and property uses in violation of this article. Entries onto private property shall be made in a manner so as to cause the least possible inconvenience; provided, however, the public officer shall not enter into any occupied dwelling or structure without first having obtained the consent of the owner or a person in possession. In those cases where consent to entry is denied after reasonable request, the public officer may apply to the municipal court for an administrative search warrant upon showing probable cause that a violation exists. 
(2)  To retain experts including certified real estate appraisers, qualified building contractors, and qualified building inspectors, engineers, surveyors, accountants, and attorneys. 
(3)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers and employees of the city as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(4)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers, employees and agents as he may designate. 
(b)  In addition to the procedures set forth in this article, the city manager or his designee(s) may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions declared to constitute a public health or safety hazard or general nuisance, and to seek enforcement of such citations before the municipal court prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by other summary proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 06-11, § 1, 8-8-2006)  
Sec. 22-204. - Complaint in rem in municipal court; procedure; lien; appeal. 
(a)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the municipality charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property and make a written report of his findings. Such officer shall be guided in his investigation by documenting conditions, which include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair by failure to conform to applicable codes and ordinances; 
(5)  Structural defects which render the structure unsafe for human habitation or occupancy; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; or 
(7)  The presence of graffiti which is visible from adjoining public or private property. 
(b)  If the public officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall file a complaint in rem in the municipal court of the city against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court at a date and time certain and at a place within the county or municipality where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(c)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state, in writing, findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation; and, if applicable, to secure by closing the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered; and, provided further, that if the unsatisfactory condition is limited solely to the presence of graffiti, the dwelling, building or structure shall not be ordered demolished or closed, but its owner may be ordered to repair the same by cleaning or removal of the graffiti. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43, chapter 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(d)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer shall cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and closed, or demolished within 270 days of the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to subsection (c) of this section or any equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action shall commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(e)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(f)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(g)  The lien provided for in subsection (e) shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in Spalding County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (a). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall, within 90 days of the completion of repairs, demolition or closure, forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. 
(h)  It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. § 48-4-5; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply; provided, further, that redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. The tax commissioner may initiate enforcement of liens imposed under this section at any time following receipt of the final determination of costs from the public officer. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(i)  The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the municipality whose ordinance is being enforced. The tax commissioner may retain an amount equal to the cost of administering collection of the lien. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of the county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(j)  The governing authority may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(k)  Review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(Ord. No. 06-11, § 1, 8-8-2006; Ord. No. 07-03, § 2, 7-24-2007)  
Sec. 22-205. - Service of complaints or orders upon owners and parties in interest. 
(a)  Summons and copies of the complaint shall be served in the following manner: 
(1)  In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, structure, or property within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(2)  At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint and summons by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are readily ascertainable. Copies of the complaint and summons shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants, if any; 
(3)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing; and 
(4)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in which the dwelling, building, structure, or property is located at the time of filing the complaint in municipal court. 
(b)  The public officer shall cause an affidavit of service to be filed of record in the municipal court prior to the hearing showing compliance with the service requirements of this section. Such affidavit shall constitute a prima facie showing of minimum procedural due process and shall constitute sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(c)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on every interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 06-11, § 1, 8-8-2006)  
Secs. 22-206—22-219. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - LICENSING OF HOME INSPECTORS 
 
Sec. 22-220. - "Home inspector" defined. 
As used in this chapter, the term "home inspector" shall mean any person, except an employee of a county, municipality, or political subdivision while engaged in the performance of the duties of his or her employment, who, for consideration, inspects and reports on the condition of any home, single-family or multifamily dwelling or structure, or apartment, or the grounds, roof, exterior surface, garage or carport, structure, attic, basement or crawl space, electrical system, heating or air-conditioning system, plumbing, on-site sewage disposal system, pool or hot tub, fireplace, kitchen, appliances, or any combination thereof for the owner, seller, prospective purchaser, or any agent thereof. 
(Ord. No. 04-21, § 1, 7-13-2004)  
Sec. 22-221. - Minimum qualifications of home inspector. 
No person shall engage in the business of a home inspector, as defined in this article, without first securing a license from the city. As a condition for licensing, such person must demonstrate to the city manager or his designee that the person possesses the certification from the SBCCI for a "qualified inspector" as set forth at O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26.1. A licensed home inspector may inspect only those areas of a home or structure for which he or she is duly certified. 
(Ord. No. 04-21, § 1, 7-13-2004)  
Sec. 22-222. - Licenses. 
Licenses shall be issued for the calendar year and shall expire at midnight on December 31 of each year. Applications for licenses shall be on such form as required by the city manager or his designee. Renewal applications for the subsequent year shall be accepted after November 1 and shall be accompanied by the annual license fee. License fees shall be $10.00 per year; provided that if the license is initially issued on or after July 1, the fee shall be $5.00. 
(Ord. No. 04-21, § 1, 7-13-2004)  
Sec. 22-223. - Documentation. 
Every home inspector shall provide to the person on whose behalf a home or structure is being inspected a written report, in duplicate, specifying: 
(a)  The scope of the inspection, including those structural elements, systems, and subsystems inspected; 
(b)  The date and time of the inspection; 
(c)  The address of the property where the inspection was conducted, with tax map, block and lot reference (if more than one structure is situated upon the lot, the report shall further identify the structure inspected); 
(d)  That the inspection was conducted by the inspector personally or the name and address of the inspector who actually conducted the inspection; and 
(e)  Any defects noted based on minimum construction, housing and/or fire codes enforced in the city, together with a recommendation for corrective action needed. Where defects are noted, the report shall state the specific code, section and edition of the code involved. 
(Ord. No. 04-21, § 1, 7-13-2004)  
Sec. 22-224. - Penalty. 
Any person engaging in the business of home inspections within the city without having first secured a license for that purpose and paid the applicable regulatory fee shall be guilty of an offense against the city and subject to citation to appear before the municipal court. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished as provided in subsection 1-12(a) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 04-21, § 1, 7-13-2004)  
Secs. 22-225—22-229. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PRE-OWNED MANUFACTURED HOMES 
 
Sec. 22-230. - Compliance. 
All pre-owned manufactured homes relocated to or within the jurisdiction of the city shall comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-01, § 1, 1-25-2011)  
Sec. 22-231. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. 
Applicant means any person seeking to install a pre-owned manufactured home in the city limits of the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
Building official means the person appointed, employed, or otherwise designated as the director of planning, permits and inspections; the municipal building official or any of his or her assistants. 
Certificate of occupancy means a document issued by the building official certifying that a pre-owned manufactured home is in compliance with applicable requirements set forth by this article, and indicating it to be in a condition suitable for residential occupancy. 
Guarantee of condition bond means a surety bond to guarantee that the affidavit and photographs required by paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (a) of section 22-233 of this article reasonably portray or represents the existing condition of the pre-owned manufactured home proposed for relocation. In lieu of the bond, a cash deposit may be deposited with the city. 
Install means to construct a foundation system and to place or erect a manufactured home on such foundation system. Such term includes, without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, or anchoring such manufactured home and connecting multiple or expandable sections of such manufactured home. 
Jurisdiction means the areas within the city limits of the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq. 
Pre-owned manufactured home means any manufactured home that has been previously used as a residential dwelling and has been titled. 
(Ord. No. 11-01, § 1, 1-25-2011)  
Sec. 22-232. - Conditions. 
All pre-owned manufactured homes located in the jurisdiction shall bare a label certifying it was constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq. (the HUD code) and shall be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 11-01, § 1, 1-25-2011)  
Sec. 22-233. - Permitting, inspection, certificate of occupancy and fees. 
A permit shall be required to locate a pre-owned manufactured home in the jurisdiction. 
(a)  Permit. To obtain a permit, applicants shall provide to the building official: 
(1)  An affidavit signed by the applicant that the pre-owned manufactured home meets health and safety standards required by this Act; 
(2)  Photographs of the interior and exterior of the pre-owned manufactured home providing evidence that home meets the minimum health and safety standards of section 22-234; 
(3)  A $1,000.00 refundable guarantee of condition bond or $1,000.00 refundable cash deposit; and 
(4)  The permit and inspection fee required by subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)  Inspection. Upon receipt of a permit, applicants may relocate the manufactured home on a residential site for the purposes of inspection. Applicant shall arrange for an inspection to be held once the installation of the manufactured home is complete. 
(c)  Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued to the applicant at such time that the building official certifies that the requirements of this article have been met. 
(d)  Fee. A permit and inspection fee of $150.00 shall be charged to the applicant to cover the cost to the city to process the permit application and inspect the pre-owned manufactured home. Such fee shall cover the initial inspection and one follow-up inspection. The applicant shall be charged $75.00 for each additional follow-up inspection that may be necessary. 
(e)  Alternative inspection. At the request of the applicant, the building official may, at his or her discretion, inspect a pre-owned manufactured home prior to it being relocated if the home is then located at another site within the city. 
(Ord. No. 11-01, § 1, 1-25-2011)  
Sec. 22-234. - Minimum health and safety standards. 
All pre-owned manufactured homes shall comply with the following before being issued a certificate of occupancy by the building official: 
(a)  HUD code: Every pre-owned manufactured home located in the jurisdiction shall be in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. 5401-5445 (the HUD code) and shall not have been altered in such a way that the home no longer meets the HUD code. 
(b)  Interior condition. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in sound condition. Doors and windows shall be operable, watertight and in good working condition. The floor system shall be in sound condition and free of warping, holes, water damage, or deterioration. 
(c)  Exterior condition. The exterior of all pre-owned manufactured homes shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects that might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
(d)  Sanitary facilities. Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in a sanitary working condition when properly connected, and shall be free from leaks and obstructions. Each home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathroom shall contain a lavatory and water closet. At least one bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures shall be checked upon being connected to ensure they are in good working condition. 
(e)  Heating systems. Heating shall be safe and in working condition. Un-vented heaters shall be prohibited. 
(f)  Electrical systems (switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed and wired and shall be in working condition. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers, with all unused openings covered with solid covers approved and listed for that purpose. The home shall be subject to an electrical continuity test to assure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain a water heater in safe and working order. 
(g)  Hot water supply. Each home shall contain a water heater in safe and working condition. 
(h)  Egress windows. Each bedroom of a manufactured home shall have at least one operable window of sufficient size to allow egress if necessary. 
(i)  Ventilation. The kitchen in the home shall have at least one operating window or other ventilation device. 
(j)  Smoke detectors. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain one operable battery-powered smoke detector in each bedroom and in the kitchen, which must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 11-01, § 1, 1-25-2011)  
Sec. 22-235. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Permanent connection to utilities shall not be approved until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Owners of pre-owned manufactured homes that are not in compliance upon a third inspection shall have their permit revoked and shall be required to remove the home from the jurisdiction at their own expense. 
(c)  The guarantee of condition bond or cash deposit will be forfeited after 90 days from the date of inspection, unless all conditions and standards are met prior to the end of the 90 days or an extension has been issued in writing by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 11-01, § 1, 1-25-2011)  
Sec. 22-236. - Penalties. 
Failure to remove a pre-owned manufactured home from the jurisdiction upon failure to receive a certificate of occupancy shall be punishable by a fine of $1,000.00. Each day any violation under this article continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 11-01, § 1, 1-25-2011)  
Sec. 22-237. - Conformity to zoning and land use regulations. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to permit the location of manufactured homes in areas where they are not authorized by applicable zoning and land use regulations. 
(Ord. No. 11-01, § 1, 1-25-2011)  
Chapter 26 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; taxation, ch. 82; excise tax on hotels, § 82-61 et seq.; financial institutions business license tax, § 82-91 et seq.; occupational taxes and administrative fees, § 82-150 et seq.; telecommunications, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 94; vehicles for hire, ch. 102; licensing for towing and storage firm businesses, § 102-33. 
State Law reference— Local taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, adopted Feb. 14, 2017 , repealed Art. II, §§ 26-31—26-49, which pertained to occupation taxes and administrative fees and derived from Code 1968, § 12-1—12-19; Ord. No. 13-12, §§ 1, 2, adopted Nov. 26, 2013; Ord. No. 16-14, § 1, adopted Sept. 27, 2016 . The user's attention is directed to § 82-150 et seq. 
 
Secs. 26-31—26-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX ON TELEPHONE COMPANIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Limitation on expanding the power of municipal regulation over any business activity regulated by the Public Service Commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(5). 
 
Sec. 26-71. - Tax levied; payment. 
(a)  Each telephone company operating in the city shall pay an occupational license tax in the amount of three percent of the recurring local service revenues received by such company from subscribers located within the city. 
(b)  The occupational license tax shall be paid in quarterly installments, each of which shall be due on or before the last day of the second month following the end of each calendar quarter and shall be based on recurring local service revenues billed during such calendar quarter. The first payment under this section shall be based on the revenues billed between the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived and the end of the calendar quarter in which such effective date falls. Any amount of license tax previously paid and absorbed by a telephone company which is applicable to any period subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be credited against the amounts imposed in this section or by subsequent ordinance as used in this section. 
(c)  The term "recurring local service revenues" means: 
(1)  Monthly charges for local exchange service, including: 
a.  Charges for additional listings and joint users; 
b.  The guarantee portion of the charge for semi-public pay station services; 
c.  Charges for local message rate service, including mobile service local messages; and 
d.  Subscriber station revenues from teletypewriter exchange service. 
(2)  Charges for Morse transmission, signaling, data transmission, remote metering and supervisory control, where both terminal points are within the city limits. 
(3)  All charges for local private line services (except audio and video program transmission services) where both terminals of the private line are within the city limits. 
(4)  Nothing in this definition shall preclude the charging of a separate franchise fee for the transmission of audio or video programs to customers by CATV companies. 
(Ord. No. 71-17, § 1(12-200), 9-28-1971)  
Chapter 30 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-07, § 1, adopted June 14, 2016 , repealed the former Ch. 30, §§ 30-1—30-7, 30-31—30-35, 30-51—30-59, 30-76—30-79, 30-96—30-107, 30-126—30-142, and enacted a new Ch. 30 as set out herein. The former Ch. 30 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1968, §§ 6-1—6-7, 6-18—6-22, 6-33—6-41, 6-47—6-50, 6-56—6-67, 6-78—6-94. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Georgia Cemetery Act of 1983, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-130 et seq.; abandoned cemeteries and burial grounds, O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1 et seq.; criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-20 et seq.; disposition of unclaimed dead bodies, O.C.G.A. § 31-21-20 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Purpose and intent of regulation. 
The care accorded the remains of deceased persons reflects respect and regard for human dignity as well as cultural, spiritual, and religious values. The General Assembly of Georgia has declared that human remains and burial objects are not property to be owned by the person or entity which owns the land or water where human remains and burial objects are interred or discovered, but human remains and burial objects are a part of the finite, irreplaceable, and nonrenewable cultural heritage of the people of Georgia which should be protected. It is the intent of this chapter that the regulations contained herein be construed to require respectful treatment of human remains in accord with the equal and innate dignity of every human being and consistent with the identifiable ethnic, cultural, and religious affiliation of the deceased individual as indicated by the method of burial or other historic evidence. 
( Ord. No. 16-07, § 1, 6-14-2016 )  
Sec. 30-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the term: 
Abandoned cemetery means a cemetery or known burial ground which shows signs of neglect including, without limitation, the unchecked growth of vegetation, repeated and unchecked acts of vandalism, or the disintegration of grave markers or boundaries and for which no person or entity can be found who is legally responsible for and financially capable of the upkeep and maintenance of such cemetery or burial ground. 
Burial ground means an area used for interment of human remains, outside of a dedicated cemetery as hereinafter defined. 
Burial object means any item reasonably believed to have been intentionally placed with human remains at the time of interment, or any memorial, tombstone, grave marker, or shrine which may have been added subsequent to interment. Such term shall also include any coping, curbing, enclosure, fencing, pavement, shelter, wall, stonework, pottery, or other grave object erected or deposited incident to or subsequent to interment. 
Cemetery means any land or structure within the city dedicated to and used for interment of human remains. It may be either a burial plot for earth interments, a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments, a columbarium (a structure consisting of multiple spaces or "niches" for the permanent storage of cremated remains or "ashes"), or a combination thereof. Cemeteries shall either be publicly-owned by the federal, state, or a local government, privately-owned by an entity licensed by the state to operate a perpetual care cemetery, or by a church or religious institution who is legally responsible for and financially capable of the upkeep of such cemetery. Private, family-owned cemeteries are no longer permitted in the city. All new cemeteries, other than those owned by the city, shall be permitted in accordance with the Unified Development Code of Griffin, Georgia. 
Human remains means the bodies of deceased human beings in any stage of decomposition, including cremated remains. 
( Ord. No. 16-07, § 1, 6-14-2016 )  
Sec. 30-3. - Burial in cemetery required; disinterment or disturbance without permit prohibited. 
(a)  No human remains shall be interred at any place within the corporate limits of the city other than in the cemeteries established by the city, a church cemetery, or a perpetual care cemetery licensed by the State of Georgia. 
(b)  No person, including the owner or occupier of land on which a cemetery or burial ground is located, or immediately adjacent thereto, shall knowingly disturb a cemetery, burial ground, human remains, or burial objects, unless a permit is first obtained from the board of commissioners of the city, under the procedure set forth in Chapter 72 of Title 36, O.C.G.A. 
(c)  Any willful or knowing violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature, punishable upon conviction in the Superior Court of Spalding County, by a fine not to exceed $5,000.00, and incarceration not to exceed six months, or both. 
( Ord. No. 16-07, § 1, 6-14-2016 )  
Sec. 30-4. - Authority to preserve and protect abandoned cemeteries and burial grounds. 
Whenever the board of commissioners of the city finds and determines that a cemetery or burial ground within the city has become abandoned, it shall be within the authority of the city manager or his designee to preserve and protect such abandoned cemetery or burial ground, through the expenditure of public funds, to keep it safe from destruction, peril, or other adversity. Such action may include the placement of fencing, signs, markers, or other appropriate features so as to identify the site as a cemetery or burial ground and may include the periodic cleaning, maintenance, and upkeep of the site so as to aid in its preservation and protection. The city manager is authorized to retain the services of an archeologist, a genealogist, attorney, or accountant, as required, to determine the person or entity legally responsible for the upkeep and maintenance of the cemetery or burial ground and whether or not that person or entity is financially capable of doing so. If such person or entity is determined to be legally responsible and financially capable, the city manager shall seek reimbursement from such person or entity, using all legal means at his or her disposal. 
( Ord. No. 16-07, § 1, 6-14-2016 )  
ARTICLE II. - RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR CITY-OWNED AND MAINTAINED CEMETERIES 
 
Sec. 30-31. - Applicability. 
The rules and regulations in this article shall apply to all city cemeteries, except where otherwise specified. 
( Ord. No. 16-07, § 1, 6-14-2016 )  
Sec. 30-32. - Designation of city cemeteries. 
The city owns and maintains the cemeteries known as Oakhill Cemetery, Rest Haven Cemetery, Veterans Memorial Cemetery, and the Historic Confederate Cemetery. The original cemeteries were laid out by the city and burial lots were sold, in fee simple, as evidenced by the delivery of deeds to those lots; many of those deeds were never recorded in the land records, which in many cases has today caused their legal ownership to become unclear or uncertain. 
By ordinance, enacted February 28, 1961, no future lot sales were to be made in the city cemeteries and all burial spaces sold thereafter, including in future portions of the existing cemeteries and any new cemeteries, were to be perpetual care, evidenced by a burial rights contract delivered to the buyer. Provision was made in said ordinance for the owners of existing cemetery lots to convert their lots to perpetual care by redelivering title to the lot to the city and payment of a perpetual care fee. Perpetual care fees from the sale of burial rights, including conversion of existing cemetery deeds, are deposited into the City of Griffin Cemetery Trust Fund. 
While many lot owners took advantage of the opportunity to place their lots under perpetual care, many others did not. At this time, the city provides a consistent level of general maintenance throughout its cemeteries, without distinction as to ownership of the underlying fee. This board of commissioners finds and concludes that individual ownership of lots remains scattered throughout the older, original sections of Oakhill Cemetery and Rest Haven Cemetery, where those persons buried in said lots no longer have descendants now living and therefore, no person or entity is now legally responsible and financially capable of providing for their upkeep and maintenance. Thus, this board concludes that those lots in its cemeteries which were earlier sold to buyers in fee simple, but for which no conversion later occurred under the ordinance of February 28, 1961, are deemed the equivalent of an abandoned cemetery, thus warranting the use of public funds for future upkeep and maintenance. 
( Ord. No. 16-07, § 1, 6-14-2016 )  
Sec. 30-33. - Rules and regulations; amendments. 
The board of commissioners may, from time to time, adopt, by resolution, such rules and regulations as they shall deem necessary for the use and maintenance of the city's cemeteries. Such regulations may be amended or repealed, as needed. When the board has adopted rules and regulations as established by this section, a copy thereof shall be maintained in the city manager's office and in the cemetery office for public inspection and copying. 
( Ord. No. 16-07, § 1, 6-14-2016 )  
Chapter 38 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-08, § 1, adopted July 24, 2012, repealed the former chapter 38, §§ 38-1, 38-2, and enacted a new chapter 38 as set out herein. The former chapter 38 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 4-27-2004. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 58; traffic and vehicles, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Contracts to furnish municipal court services authorized, O.C.G.A. § 15-7-80 et seq.; establishment of municipal courts authorized and jurisdiction thereof, Ga. Const. art. VI, § I, § I; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq.; agreements between private entities and municipal court judges for probation services, O.C.G.A. § 42-8-102; powers of presiding officer in court of a municipal corporation to bind over or commit criminal offenders to jail, O.C.G.A. § 17-7-22; jurisdiction of municipal courts and magistrate courts to abate nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
 
ARTICLE I. - MUNICIPAL COURT FOR THE CITY OF GRIFFIN, GEORGIA 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Municipal court, established. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1, there is hereby established a municipal court for said city having jurisdiction over the violation of municipal ordinances and over such other matters as are by general law or ordinance made subject to the jurisdiction of municipal courts. Said court shall be styled as "The Municipal Court for the City of Griffin, Georgia" and shall be a continuation of the court, by whatever name or style given, created and functioning under prior laws or ordinances of said city. In addition, the judge of said court shall have and may exercise the same powers and authorities as magistrates in the matter of and pertaining to criminal cases of whatever nature in the several courts of this state. 
(Ord. No. 12-08, § 1, 7-24-2012)  
Sec. 38-2. - Maximum punishment established by general law. 
In exercising its jurisdiction, the municipal court, unless otherwise limited by a general or local law, or by ordinance, shall be authorized to impose any punishment up to the maximums specified by general law, expressly including but not limited to the maximums specified in O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2)(B) and (C); provided, however, the court shall not impose any punishment of confinement, probation (including community service work), or other loss of liberty, or impose any fine, fee, or cost imposed by ordinance of a penal nature unless the court provides to the accused the right to representation by a lawyer, or provides to those accused who are indigent the right to counsel at no cost to the accused. Such representation shall be subject to all applicable standards adopted by the Georgia Public Defender Standards Council for representation of indigent persons in this state. The right of representation shall include all committal hearings conducted when the judge of the court is sitting as a magistrate, regardless of whether the court has jurisdiction to try or dispose of the charges. 
(Ord. No. 12-08, § 1, 7-24-2012)  
Sec. 38-3. - Trial upon citation or accusation; bench trials, appeals. 
Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, misdemeanor offenses or ordinance violations may be tried upon a uniform traffic citation or accusation. All trials shall be bench trials at which the judge serves as finder of fact. Unless a direct appeal is provided by law, alleged errors of law shall be brought before the superior court on petition for writ of certiorari within 30 days of a final adjudication. 
(Ord. No. 12-08, § 1, 7-24-2012)  
Sec. 38-4. - Evidence and procedure. 
The rules of criminal and civil procedure, and rules of evidence, shall conform as nearly as practicable to the rules of procedure and evidence in the superior and state trial courts; provided, however, there shall be no trials by jury and no civil discovery unless allowed by the judge, by order, to prevent manifest injustice. Subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses and production of evidence at trial shall be issued by the municipal court clerk, upon timely application of a party or defendant. 
(Ord. No. 12-08, § 1, 7-24-2012)  
Sec. 38-5. - Terms of court. 
By order of the judge, regular terms of court shall convene in the W. Elmer George Municipal Hall (Courtroom), 2d Floor, One Griffin Center, 100 S. Hill Street, Griffin, Georgia, at a day and time certain; special sessions may be convened, as needed, as set by order of the court. Whenever, necessity requires, the court may convene at any time or place in, or without, the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-08, § 1, 7-24-2012)  
ARTICLE II. - BONDS AND RECOGNIZANCES 
 
Sec. 38-6. - Bail bonds; acceptance of driver's license in lieu of bond. 
As used in this section, the term " bail " shall include the releasing of a person on such person's own recognizance. Except for those offenses bondable only before a judge of the superior courts of this state, the judge of the municipal court shall have all the power and authority of a magistrate in the matter of and pertaining to criminal cases of whatever nature, including the authority to set and accept bail as provided in O.C.G.A. Title 17, Chapter 6. 
For misdemeanors and ordinance violations returnable to the municipal court for trial, the arresting officer shall give due consideration to release on the person's own recognizance bond or the acceptance of the person's driver's license in lieu of bail; in all other cases, a property, surety, or cash bond may be accepted in an amount sufficient to assure the person's appearance in court. The judge shall prepare and, from time-to-time revise, by order, a schedule of cash bonds for all offenses and penal or traffic ordinance violations triable before the municipal court. Such order shall designate the chief of police or municipal court clerk to accept cash bond payments. The officer assessing and accepting a cash bond shall issue a written receipt for the bond to the person charged; if accepted by an officer other than the municipal court clerk, bond proceeds shall be immediately transmitted to the municipal court clerk, who shall enter payment upon a docket of cash bond payments. Proceeds shall be deposited by the clerk into a separate bank account from other funds and receivables of the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-08, § 1, 7-24-2012)  
Sec. 38-7. - Failure to appear; bench warrants. 
Any person charged with a violation of a misdemeanor offense or ordinance violation returnable to the municipal court who gives a cash bond for his personal appearance in court at a designated date, time and place and who fails to appear on said date and at such time and place shall forfeit the cash bond upon the call of the case for trial. It shall not be necessary for the city to take any further action to forfeit the cash bond. Entry of a cash bond forfeiture shall be made by the municipal court clerk on the cash bond docket; periodically, funds representing forfeited cash bonds shall be transferred from the cash bond account to the general fund of the city. In the discretion of the court a bench warrant may issue for the arrest of the accused. Forfeiture of a cash bond shall not be a bar to a subsequent prosecution of the accused for the violation. 
Where a driver's license has been accepted in lieu of bail and the person fails to appear and answer to the charges against him or her, the municipal court clerk shall immediately forward to the department of motor vehicle safety the name and driver's license number for suspension of the driver's license and driving privileges of the accused, until the person appears and fully disposes of the charges against him or her. In addition thereto, the court may issue a bench warrant for arrest of the accused. 
Upon the failure of a person released upon his own recognizance to appear for trial, if the release is not otherwise conditioned by the court, the court may summarily issue a bench warrant for arrest of the accused which shall be enforced as in cases of forfeited bonds. 
(Ord. No. 12-08, § 1, 7-24-2012)  
Sec. 38-8. - Bond forfeitures. 
Where a property or surety bond has been posted, bond forfeiture shall follow the procedures set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70, et seq., which by reference is made a part hereof as if fully set out herein. It shall be the duty of the municipal court clerk to issue notice to sureties as provided in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70(b). 
(Ord. No. 12-08, § 1, 7-24-2012)  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS OF THE COURT 
 
Sec. 38-9. - Municipal court judge. 
The board of commissioners shall appoint a municipal court judge to hold and preside over the municipal court. The municipal court judge shall be licensed to practice law in the State of Georgia and have served at least seven years as an active member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia. The judge shall serve a term of one year, commencing on January 1 of each calendar year, and until a successor is appointed, subject to removal from office as provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-32-2.2. The board of commissioners shall set the compensation for the office in advance of said term, by resolution. The person appointed to the office of Municipal Court Judge shall satisfactorily complete the required training for such office. Before assuming the duties of the office, the person appointed shall subscribe to the following oath: "I swear (or affirm) that I will well, faithfully, and impartially and without fear, favor, or affection discharge my duties as judge of the Municipal Court for the City of Griffin, Georgia." 
The governing authority may also appoint one or more associate municipal court judges to hold and preside over the municipal court in the absence, disability, or disqualification of the municipal court judge, for a one year term, and establish the compensation thereof by resolution. Associate judges shall possess all qualifications and satisfy all training requirements for the office of municipal court judge. While presiding, the associate municipal court judge(s) shall have and may exercise all powers and duties of the municipal court judge as granted by law or Charter of the City of Griffin. 
In addition to the powers and duties granted by law or Charter of the City of Griffin, the judge and associate judge(s) of the municipal court shall have and may exercise the same powers and authorities as magistrates in the matter of and pertaining to criminal cases of whatsoever nature returnable to the several courts of this state. 
(Ord. No. 12-08, § 1, 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 16-06, § 1, 5-24-2016, eff. 7-1-2016 )  
Sec. 38-10. - Solicitor. 
The part-time office of solicitor, as established by section 3.6 of the Charter of the City of Griffin, Georgia, shall be the prosecuting attorney of the municipal court and shall represent the City of Griffin, Georgia, in all matters pertaining to ordinance violations, misdemeanor offenses triable in municipal court, and such other duties as set forth in law, particularly in O.C.G.A. §15-18-96. The person appointed as solicitor shall be licensed to practice law in this state; shall have been a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia for at least three years, and admitted to practice before the trial and appellate courts of this state. The solicitor shall serve at the pleasure of the governing authority, who shall set his or her compensation by resolution, and shall satisfactorily complete any required training for such office. Before assuming the duties of the office, the person appointed shall subscribe to the following oath: "I swear (or affirm) that I will well, faithfully, and impartially and without fear, favor, or affection discharge my duties as Solicitor of the Municipal Court for the City of Griffin, Georgia." 
If the solicitor is disqualified from engaging in the prosecution of a particular case or is unable to perform the duties of said office due to illness or incapacity, the city attorney, or his designee, shall serve as substitute prosecuting attorney until such time as the solicitor is available or an assistant solicitor appointed. 
(Ord. No. 12-08, § 1, 7-24-2012)  
Sec. 38-11. - Municipal court clerk. 
In accordance with section 3.7 of the Charter of the City of Griffin, Georgia, the office of municipal court clerk shall be the primary person most directly responsible for the administration of the municipal court other than the judge of said court. The municipal court clerk or his or her deputy clerks shall attend all sessions when the court is convened and perform the duties set forth in the Charter and laws, or as delegated by order of the court. The person appointed as clerk shall be at least eighteen years of age, a graduate of a state-accredited high school or possess an equivalent diploma, and satisfactorily complete the required minimum training prescribed by the Georgia Municipal Courts Training Council. The clerk shall serve at the pleasure of the governing authority, who shall set the compensation for the office by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 12-08, § 1, 7-24-2012)  
Sec. 38-12. - Costs of mandatory training. 
Whenever an officer of the municipal court is required by law to complete and/or maintain training from the Georgia Municipal Courts Training Council or Prosecuting Attorneys Council of Georgia, the cost of training (registration, travel, lodging and meals) shall be paid from city funds as an expense and shall not be considered additional compensation paid to the officer. 
(Ord. No. 12-08, § 1, 7-24-2012)  
ARTICLE IV. - FINE ADD-ONS 
 
Sec. 38-13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-10, § 1, adopted August 27, 2013, repealed § 38-13, which pertained to technology surcharge and derived from Ord. No. 12-08, § 1, adopted July 24, 2012.  
Chapter 42 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Aviation, ch. 18; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; floods, ch. 50; littering, § 58-11; health and sanitation, ch. 54; parks and recreation, ch. 62; planning, ch. 66; solid waste, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 94; vegetation, ch. 98. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 42-1. - Environmental council; established. 
The environmental council (hereafter called the "council") is established to act as a volunteer citizen body charged with advising the board of commissioners on policies and procedures that the city may pursue to protect and preserve Griffin's natural resources for future generations. 
As a full-service city providing water, sanitation, and electricity, the City of Griffin is well-placed to promote good stewardship of our land, air, water, and energy resources through the pursuit of environmentally sustainable development. The city recognizes that the challenges of sustainable urban development are many and multi-faceted. To meet these challenges successfully the city must draw on its most important resource—the diverse knowledge and skill sets of its citizens. 
(Ord. No. 13-07, § 1, 5-28-2013)  
Sec. 42-2. - Environmental council; duties and responsibilities. 
The council will be charged with the following responsibilities and shall: 
(1)  Provide the board of commissioners with recommendations on policies and procedures that the city can pursue to preserve and protect Griffin's natural resources for future generations; 
(2)  Provide the public a means to bring forward ideas that promote environmental sustainability within the City of Griffin; 
(3)  Facilitate public participation in the setting of goals and benchmarks for the city in its efforts to be a good steward of its environment and natural resources; 
(4)  Assist city staff with identifying and working with stakeholder groups in furthering programs that promote environmental sustainability; 
(5)  Assist city staff with public education and outreach activities that promote environmental sustainability; 
(6)  Provide recommendations for internal program evaluation and reporting, and assist city staff in periodically reporting to the board of commissioners on program effectiveness. 
(7)  Provide oversight in management of the city's urban forestry program, to include approving or disapproving requests to plant, prune and remove publicly-owned trees; 
(8)  Draft or recommend administrative guidelines for tree conservation and planting within the city; 
(9)  Examine plans for work on public lands pursuant to the administrative guidelines and monitor compliance therewith. 
(Ord. No. 13-07, § 1, 5-28-2013)  
Sec. 42-3. - Environmental council; organization. 
(a)  The council shall consist of seven members appointed by the board of commissioners. Appointees shall be 18 years of age or greater, a resident of Spalding County, and persons who have demonstrated a knowledge of or strong interest in environmental protection. Initial appointments to the council shall be three members to serve a one-year term, three members to serve a two-year term, and one member to serve a three-year term. Thereafter, each member shall serve a three-year term. Members may be reappointed to succeed themselves. 
(b)  The council shall elect one member to serve as chair and one member to serve as vice-chair; the council may also create and fill such committees as it may deem necessary, and appoint the committee chair. The term of the chair and vice chair shall be one year, with eligibility for re-election to succeeding terms. Director of public works and utilities, or his designee, shall serve as secretary. 
(c)  The environmental council shall establish and post a regular monthly meeting schedule to be conducted in accordance with the Georgia Open Meetings Law. Called meetings may occur more frequently, if noticed in the manner provided by law. All council meetings shall be open to the public, and reasonable notice of the time, place, and location of meetings, together with an agenda of intended business and action items, thereof shall be noticed in accordance with City of Griffin policies and state law. The secretary shall keep minutes of all meetings, in accordance with Georgia Open Meetings Law. A quorum of the council shall consist of a majority of its members. The vote of a simple majority of a quorum shall be necessary to take any official council action. 
(d)  Any member of the council who misses more than three consecutive meetings within a calendar year shall be replaced by the board of commissioners. Absence due to sickness, death of a family member or close friend, or other emergencies of like nature may be recognized as excused absences and shall not affect the member's status on the council. 
(e)  A public comment period shall be allowed at each meeting to allow citizens the opportunity to be heard regarding environmental issues and concerns. The method, timing and duration of such public comment period shall be determined by the council. The council may conduct its business once the public comment period is closed. 
(Ord. No. 13-07, § 1, 5-28-2013)  
Secs. 42-4—42-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, adopted Feb. 12, 2002, deleted former art. II of this chapter in its entirety and added new provisions as art. II as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 42-31—42-35, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1968 Code, §§ 14-1—14-5. 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5; limits on sound volume produced by radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 46-6-14; sale of muffler which causes excessive noise prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71(c). 
 
Sec. 42-31. - Public nuisances. 
(a)  Any activity, conduct or occurrence of a continuing or reoccurring nature which tends to the immediate annoyance of the public in general, is manifestly injurious to the public health or safety, or tends greatly to corrupt the manners and morals of the public shall be deemed a public nuisance and abated by order of the municipal court. 
(b)  Any activity, conduct or occurrence within the city which constitutes an endangerment to the environment, public health, or safety as a result of its creation or maintenance and which has been declared a public nuisance by other provisions of this Code. 
(c)  Proceedings relating to unfit buildings or structures or uses of private property in violation of applicable construction codes shall be brought under article IV of chapter 22 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 2-12-2002)  
Sec. 42-32. - Jurisdiction. 
The municipal court of the city shall have jurisdiction to try issues concerning the existence and abatement of public nuisances existing or occurring within the limits of the city. Private citizens may not generally seek to have a public nuisance abated; however, a public nuisance may be abated upon filing of a petition by any private citizen specially injured or by petition of the city filed by the city attorney, as verified by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 2-12-2002) 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5.  
Sec. 42-33. - Petition; service of process. 
(a)  The petition shall name as respondent(s) the person or persons alleged responsible for maintenance of the public nuisance. Where the alleged public nuisance involves a condition or activity existing upon private property, the owner(s) of such property, and any interested party shall also be named as a respondent. For purposes of this article, "owner of private property" shall mean the holder of the title in fee simple and holder of every mortgage, deed to secure debt, lien or judgment, as recorded in the title records of the county. "Interested party" shall mean an interested party as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-4-77 and persons in possession of said property and premises. 
(b)  The petition shall plead with specificity all facts necessary to show the existence and location of the alleged public nuisance, its duration or frequency of reoccurrence, and, when brought by a private person, the special injuries suffered. The petition shall be verified by the person or persons in whose name it is brought, or, if brought on behalf of the city, by the city manager. 
(c)  A copy of the petition and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
(1)  Personal service upon each owner and interested party if such parties are residents of the county. Service shall be perfected at least ten days prior to the date of hearing. 
(2)  Parties residing in the state outside of the county shall be served pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 4, art. 5, or by statutory overnight delivery, mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of hearing. 
(3)  Nonresidents of the state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or overnight statutory delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents whose mailing address is unknown, a notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall be published in The Griffin Daily News as a legal advertisement once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(4)  In the event a party is a minor, estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or personal representative of such person shall be served. If such person has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected upon the probate judge of the county, who shall appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
In addition, where the alleged public nuisance involves a condition or activity existing upon private property, the petitioner shall cause notice of the filing of the petition, together with date, time and place of hearing, to be served upon the tax commissioner of the county. Personal service under this article may be made by any law enforcement officer of the city or the county, or any citizen over the age of 18 years specially appointed by the judge of the municipal court, and an affidavit of return of service shall be executed by such person and filed with the clerk of the municipal court prior to the date of hearing. 
(d)  Upon filing of a petition, the clerk of the municipal court shall issue a summons notifying the respondent(s) that a hearing will be held before the court at a date, time and place certain. Such hearing shall be scheduled not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of the petition, with the date thereof to be determined based upon the manner in which the petition must be served. The summons shall notify respondent(s) of the right to file an answer to the petition and to appear, in person or by attorney, and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 2-12-2002)  
Sec. 42-34. - Trial procedure; appeal. 
(a)  The burden at trial shall be upon the petitioner to prove the existence of a public nuisance by a preponderance of the evidence. A written finding by any governmental officer, environmental enforcement officer, public health officer, fire inspector, life safety inspector, or building inspector, based upon physical inspection, that real property or a structure or condition existing upon real property is a health, safety, or environmental hazard shall constitute prima-facie evidence that such property, structure, or condition constitutes a public nuisance. 
(b)  Proceedings to abate a public nuisance under this article are an action at law and shall not require the intervention of equity. The question of whether or not a public nuisance exists is neither criminal or quasi-criminal in nature and therefore the court shall not impose a fine as a condition of its order to abate the existence or continuance of the nuisance. The order of abatement shall define with particularity the condition or occurrence found to constitute the nuisance and provide specifically for its cessation or removal within a reasonable time period. The municipal court is empowered to enforce its judgments by contempt. 
(c)  Any final judgment entered by the municipal court under this article is subject to review by certiorari in the superior court of the county, upon application filed within 30 days of the service of said order upon the respondent(s). 
(d)  Proceedings under this article cannot be brought for the recovery of money damages; however, upon appropriate findings, the court may order payment of restitution for special injuries proved. Costs of the proceedings shall be imposed upon the respondent(s) in all cases wherein the court finds the respondent responsible for the maintenance of a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 2-12-2002)  
Sec. 42-35. - Causes of action; examples of public nuisances. 
Conditions or activities occurring on private property that may constitute public nuisances may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Dwellings, buildings or structures which due to dilapidation, age or obsolescence have defects which increase the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or where other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structures unsafe or unsanitary; 
(2)  Real property on which there has been allowed to accumulate weeds, trash, junk, filth, and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions inimical to the health, safety, and welfare of its residents and occupants of adjoining properties; 
(3)  Any building, structure, or place used for the purpose of lewdness, prostitution, sodomy or other unlawful sexual purposes; 
(4)  Any dwelling, building, or structure that is vacant and unsecured so as to prevent unauthorized use or entry in which drug crimes are being committed; and 
(5)  Any discharge of pollutants (whether air or water borne) off the real property on which the discharge originates, except pursuant to a NPDES permit and discharges resulting from fire suppression activities. For purposes of this section, "pollutants" shall include but not be limited to: soils, solid wastes, sewage, chemicals, pesticides and fertilizers (except when applied in accordance with generally accepted agricultural practices), sludge, biological materials, radioactive materials, scrap or discarded equipment, or other industrial, municipal and agricultural waste. 
(Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 2-12-2002)  
Secs. 42-36—42-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. Ord. No. 17-17, § 1, adopted Nov. 28, 2017 ), repealed the former Art. III, §§ 42-61—42-69, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 16-13, § 1, adopted August 23, 2016 . 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968, O.C.G.A. § 12-4-70 et seq. 
 
Sec. 42-61. - Title. 
This article will be known as the City of Griffin Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 17-17, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Sec. 42-62. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best Management Practices (BMP's) means sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia", published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Coastal marshlands means the same as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means a certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources ("DNR"). 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design Professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District means the Towaliga Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources (EPD). 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Ephemeral stream means a stream that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has its channel located above the groundwater table year round; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity. 
Erosion, sediment and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Title 12, Chapter 7, that includes, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 42-63(c) of this article. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscaped areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state water or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in paragraph (5) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17. 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the City of Griffin, Georgia, which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8. 
Maintenance means actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design. 
Major buffer impact means any impact that does not meet the definition of a "minor buffer impact." 
Minor buffer impact means an impact that upon completion yields no additional above ground, man-made materials or structures within the buffer, maintains the original grade, and results in less than 5,000 square feet of buffer impacts per stream crossing and/or less than 5,000 square feet of buffer impacts per individual area of encroachment for each project. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440, et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidy units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
Notice of intent (NOI) means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
Notice of termination (NOT) means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the stormwater pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body, or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means subparts or segments of construction projects where the subpart or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual), published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device, such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice, or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sediment control plan approved in writing by Towaliga Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice, or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System general permit or permits for storm-water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30. 
State waters includes any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state, which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Stream bank means the confining cut of a stream channel and is usually identified as the point where the normal stream flow has wrested the vegetation. For nontrout waters, the normal stream flow is any stream flow that consists solely of base flow or consists of both base flow and direct runoff during any period of the year. Base flow results from groundwater that enters the stream channel through the soil. This includes spring flows into streams. Direct runoff is the water entering stream channels promptly after rainfalls or snow melts. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control measures mean practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative measures mean measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continually or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Water quality means the chemical, physical, and biological characteristics of the State's water resources. 
Wetlands mean those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
( Ord. No. 17-17, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Sec. 42-63. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of this article and the state general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article under section 42-64 shall be prepared and approved before the land-disturbing activity takes place. The minimum requirements of section 42-65(c) and the state general permit shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation, and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity until the site is finally stabilized in accordance with requirements of this article and the state general permit. 
(b)  Best management practices required; minimum standards: 
(1)  Best management practices shall be required for all projects involving land-disturbing activities, including those exempt from permitting and/or requiring an approved plan under section 42-64. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or local issuing authority or to any other allegation of noncompliance with this article, paragraph (2) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-5, or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30. As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and/or maintained shall constitute a separate violation of this article, any land-disturbing permit issued by the local issuing authority, or any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout streams. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, and/or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of this article, any land-disturbing permit issued by the local issuing authority or any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30 for each day on which such failure occurs; provided, however, the fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall not, without corroborating evidence, constitute proof of or create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of a permit issued hereunder. For purposes of this paragraph, maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to its specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
(4)  The director or local issuing authority may require reasonable and prudent monitoring and reporting of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  Neither the approval of any permit under the provisions of this article nor failure of the local issuing authority, division, or director to enforce compliance with the provisions of this article or any permit issued hereunder shall relieve any person from legal liability for damages to others caused by such person's land-disturbing activity, nor create any right of action against or impose any liability upon the local issuing authority, division or director for damages to any persons or property. 
(6)  No provision of this article shall authorize any person to violate Article 2 of Chapter 5 of O.C.G.A. Chapter 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", or to pollute any waters of the State of Georgia as defined herein. 
(c)  Minimum requirements. For the purpose of regulating land-disturbing activities, every person shall be required, at a minimum, to follow protections at least as stringent as the state general permit and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia", as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion. 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum. 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential. 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented. 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum. 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable. 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development. 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practicable. 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surface of fills. 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property. 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners. 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum. 
(14)  Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent properties and waters beyond the levels specified in section 42-63(b). 
(d)  Establishment of buffer; exceptions; variance of buffer width; land-disturbing activities within buffers. Buffers on state waters are valuable in protecting and conserving land and water resources; therefore, minimum mandatory buffers should be established and protected. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b)(15), there is hereby established a minimum 25-foot natural, undisturbed buffer along the banks of all state waters within the jurisdiction of the City of Griffin, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action; provided, however, that where it is not readily evident that vegetation has been wrested from the stream bank, the buffer shall be measured horizontally from the stream bank as defined in this article. Excepted from this minimum buffer requirement are state waters meeting those conditions: (i) as provided by paragraphs 16 and 17 of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 23-7-6; (ii) where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment in accordance with Rules and Regulations of the Department § 391-3-7-.05; (iii) where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8; (iv) where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented; (v) along any ephemeral stream, or (vi) where shoreline or streambank stabilization structures are installed to prevent erosion under a plan or pursuant to a permit issued by the city. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, following completion of construction and stabilization of the land-disturbing activity site, a buffer of at least 25 feet shall remain in place, subject to the uses and limitations imposed thereon by law, unless the director issues a variance, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b)(15)(A)(ii). The city as local issuing authority has no power to waive the requirements of this section or issue any variance therefrom. 
The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
(1)  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within any buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed, except as otherwise provided by this section. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a property owner may apply to the city for a permit to thin or trim vegetation within the buffer as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural tree canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
(2)  Permitted land uses or activities within the buffer are as follows: 
a.  A project involving the construction or repair of an existing infrastructure project or a structure that, by its nature, must be located within the buffer. Such structures include, but are not limited to, dams, public water supply intake structures, detention/retention ponds, wastewater discharges, docks including access ways, boat launches including access ways, and stabilization of areas of public access to water; 
b.  A project that will result in the restoration of or an enhancement to improve water quality and/or aquatic habitat; 
c.  Buffer intrusion necessary to provide reasonable access to a property or properties; 
d.  Buffer intrusion for water and sewer lines that cannot reasonably be placed outside the buffer, under generally accepted engineering practices, provided that stream crossings occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; they cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented; 
e.  Buffer intrusions and stream crossings for other utilities, including but not limited to gas, liquid, power, telephone, telecommunications, and other pipelines, provided that the number of crossings and the amount of vegetative disturbance are minimized and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented; 
f.  Recreational foot trails and viewing areas (non-pervious), provided that impacts to the buffer are minimal; 
g.  Projects where the proposed land-disturbing activity within the buffer has been permitted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineer under Sec. 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendment of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, and the Corps of Engineers has approved a mitigation plan to be implemented as a condition of such permit; or 
h.  Projects and activities for which a plan has been approved by the division that shows that, even with the proposed land-disturbing activity within the buffer, the completed project will result in maintained or improved water quality downstream of the project; 
(3)  Where the use or land-disturbing activity within the buffer has been otherwise permitted or exempted through rules and regulations of the board of the department of natural resources. 
( Ord. No. 17-17, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Sec. 42-64. - Exemptions from permitting requirements of this article. 
The permit required by this article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land within the City of Griffin, except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining: Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying: Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Minor land-disturbing activities: Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion, provided the result of such activity is not to materially alter any finished grade incorporated into an approved erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan, drainage plan, grading plan, or approved development or construction plan for a project which has been implemented, or otherwise alters, obstructs, impedes or renders ineffective any drainage structure from performing as designed; 
(4)  Single-family residences: The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in section 42-63 and this paragraph, and shall not materially alter any finished grade incorporated into any approved development or construction plan which has been implemented, or otherwise alter, obstruct, impede or render ineffective any drainage structure from performing as designed. For single-family residence construction exempted by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters of at least 25 horizontal feet, in which no land-disturbing activities shall take place nor shall any permanent structures be erected or impervious surface constructed, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. 
(5)  Agricultural operations: Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3 to include those practices involving the establishment, cultivation, or harvesting of products of the field or orchard; the preparation and planting of pasture land; farm ponds; dairy operations; livestock and poultry management practices; and the construction of farm buildings. 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including timber harvesting: All tree harvesting and forestry management activities performed in accordance with generally accepted forestry land management practices; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established by O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b)(15) and section 42-63(d) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after the completion of such forestry practices. 
(7)  Natural resource conservation service projects: Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Projects involving less than one acre: Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with an overall planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves any land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located; 
(9)  Public works projects: Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of the notice of intent shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, and the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if the permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Electrical system projects: Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system a defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoirs. 
Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating development, including land disturbing activities, of a project not specifically exempted from permitting under this article within the foregoing categories. Furthermore, the exemptions of this section shall apply only to permitting requirements imposed by this article and shall not exempt a project under other regulations imposed by the city. 
( Ord. No. 17-17, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Sec. 42-65. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  Generally. No land-disturbing activity shall be conducted within the City of Griffin, except those land-disturbing activities exempted from permitting in accordance with section 42-64, without the operator first securing a permit from the local issuing authority and/or providing notice of intent to the division, with a copy submitted to the local issuing authority. Before undertaking any land-disturbing activity, the property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans, ordinances and requirements of the local issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the areas surrounding it. They shall review the Unified Development Code, stormwater management regulations and permitting requirements, flood damage prevention regulations, this article, and any other codes and ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Griffin. 
(b)  Application requirements: 
(1)  The application for a permit shall be made only in the name of the owner and/or operator; provided, however, if the operator is not the owner holding record legal title to the property on which the land-disturbing activity is to occur, the name, mailing address and telephone number of the owner shall be stated in the application. Every operator, who is not the owner, shall provide written designation of his authority. Applications shall be submitted to the director of planning and development, in proper form, and must include five copies of the applicant's proposed erosion, sediment and pollution control plan, with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sediment and pollution control plans shall conform to the provisions of section 42-63(c). All applications shall contain a certification stating the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. Incomplete applications and plans, which on their face fail to conform to this section, shall be promptly returned to the applicant. 
(2)  A local permitting fee, in the amount of $20.00 shall be charged for each acre, or fraction thereof, in the project area, regardless of actual size of land-disturbing activity on the project site; provided, however, for any project of 500 acres or more, the fee shall be $10.00 per acre or fraction thereof. No application shall be deemed complete unless the requisite fees are paid to the local issuing authority at time of filing. This fee shall be retained by the local issuing authority and shall cover the cost of plan review and permit issuance. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5)(a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23, provided such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development of each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land-disturbance permit. One-half of the fees levied under this subsection shall be remitted by the primary permittee directly to the division; the other half shall be submitted to the local issuing authority to cover the costs of inspections and enforcement. 
(4)  Upon receipt of a complete application and plan in proper form, and payment of all required fees, the director of stormwater management shall immediately refer the application and plans to the district for its review and approval, or disapproval, concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be promptly forwarded, in writing, to the local issuing authority. No permit shall be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 42-63(c), if required, and bonding have been obtained. District review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into a written agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. A local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits (either in this or any other jurisdiction), of this Article, or the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application, or condition its approval on the posting of a performance bond. 
(6)  The local issuing authority shall require the permit applicant to post a performance bond, in the form of a surety bond issued by a company licensed in the State of Georgia and returnable to the City of Griffin, government security, cash, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, as a condition for issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond, or any part thereof, to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(7)  Where the local issuing authority intends to revoke or suspend a permit and call the bond (or a portion thereof) to be forfeited, notice of such action shall be given in writing to the permit holder. The aggrieved party is entitled to request, in writing, within five business days of receipt of notice, a hearing before the city manager, or his designated hearing officer. Such hearing shall be informally conducted, but held in such manner as to afford the applicant fundamental due process. A hearing record shall be prepared by the city. Any person aggrieved by a final determination of the city manager or his designee shall be entitled to file a petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Spalding County, Georgia, within 30 days of written notice of such final action. 
(c)  Plan requirements: 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 42-63(c) of this article and the state general permit. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the State Soil and Water Conservation Commission as a guide; or through the use of alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article, and may be referenced over the Internet at "www.gaswcc.org". The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. 
(2)  Data required for the site plan shall include all information requested on the appropriate Erosion, Sediment and Pollution Control Plan Review Checklist, established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits: 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application and payment of all applicable fees, provided bonding and variances, where necessary, are obtained. Failure to act within 45 days of receipt of a completed application shall be considered an approval of the permit. The permit shall expressly state all conditions or restrictions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sediment and pollution control plan has been approved by the district or the local issuing authority, and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 42-63(c) are obtained, bonding requirements are met and all codes, ordinances and other applicable rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority have been satisfied. If the permit is denied, the reason(s) for denial shall be stated, in writing, setting forth specifically wherein the application or plan is deficient, and served by regular U.S. mail upon the applicant, with notice of the right to appeal. 
(3)  If the project is to be developed in phases, a phased development schedule may be agreed to, in writing, with the director of stormwater management. In most cases the entire project site shall be required to permit and install erosion and sediment control measures for the entire site prior to any land-disturbing activities. Where phasing is permitted, a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(4)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in title is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any purchaser of any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit, and all current and future maintenance obligations imposed thereon, whether under this article or related ordinances. 
(5)  A permit issued under this article shall not be valid for work commencing more than six months after its issuance date. Where work is not timely commenced, or work on the project is suspended for more than three months after commencement, the local issuing authority shall automatically suspend the permit, until the applicant provides an affidavit from a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control, certifying that, based upon diligent investigation, including an on-site inspection, no material changes have occurred since the erosion and sediment control plan was originally approved. 
(6)  Any change or amendment of design and construction plans for the project which may materially impact or negate the permit based on original approval of an erosion, sediment, and pollution control plan shall require a permit amendment. All amendments shall be applied for in writing and follow the same procedure as original applications for a permit. 
(7)  Any land-disturbing activities by the City of Griffin shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other laws and ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the city. Erosion, sediment and pollution control plans for the local issuing authority shall be submitted to the district for review and approval or disapproval. 
( Ord. No. 17-17, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Sec. 42-66. - Inspections and citations. 
(a)  Inspections. Inspections and compliance monitoring, pursuant to this article, shall be conducted by the stormwater management department, and their designated inspectors. The inspector shall periodically inspect the site of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in a land-disturbing activity as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article or O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1, et seq., a written notice to comply shall be served immediately upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. Except as provided in section 42-67, the inspector may require that all land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action and mitigation have been taken. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  Inspection authority. The local issuing authority shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(c)  Right of entry for inspection. No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division, who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
( Ord. No. 17-17, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Sec. 42-67. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  Mandatory stop-work orders; injunctive relief. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining a required permit, fails to maintain a required buffer of state waters, or significant amounts of sediment (as determined through inspection by the local issuing authority, the commission, the district or the division) have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed and maintained, a stop-work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority. Such stop-work order shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall remain in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop-work order shall apply to all work being performed or undertaken on the site, including non-land-disturbing activities, with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls necessary to bring the project into compliance. If the person to whom such order is directed fails to comply, the person shall be subject to injunction of the project, work or activity from the superior court of the county where such person resides, or in the case of a non-resident of this state, from the Superior Court of Spalding County; provided, however, where exigent circumstances exist, the local issuing authority may apply to the Superior Court of Spalding County for a temporary restraining order without the necessity of showing an adequate remedy at law exists. 
(b)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply setting forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and stating the time within which such measures must be completed has been given, and the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, posted under the provisions of section 42-65. The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance with the plan and this article. 
(c)  Monetary penalties. In addition, and cumulative of the above, any person who violates the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Law, O.C.G.A. Title 12, Chapter 7, or the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, any provision of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any stop-work order of the local issuing authority shall be subject to appear, upon citation, before the Municipal Court of the City of Griffin. Each day during which the violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. The general limitations of law on the jurisdiction of municipal courts notwithstanding, any person found liable in the municipal court for violating any provision of law or this article, or who violates any permit condition or limitation, or negligently or intentionally fails or refuse to comply with any stop-work order issued by the local issuing authority, shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day for each violation, together with forfeiture or revocation of any regulatory license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority's jurisdiction. 
( Ord. No. 17-17, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Sec. 42-68. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent upon their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have a minimum of one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet the educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
( Ord. No. 17-17, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Sec. 42-69. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with conditions of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan, or that the holder is no violation of permit conditions, or that the holder is in violation of any related environmental ordinance or development requirement, shall entitle the person holding the permit to a hearing before the city manager, within five business days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a written notice requesting to be heard. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a final decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhaustion of his administrative remedies, shall have the right to petition the Superior Court of Spalding County, Georgia, for a writ of certiorari. 
( Ord. No. 17-17, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Secs. 42-70—42-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-11, adopted Oct. 9, 2007, repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 42-91—42-96-B, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 03-08, § 1(1)—(6-B), 3-11-2003. 
 
Sec. 42-91. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent nonstormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the municipal separate storm sewer system; and 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the corporate area of City of Griffin. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other article, rule, regulation, other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other article, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other article, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(d)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter. 
(e)  Responsibility for administration. The city manager shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. The city manager is authorized to designate, in writing, another officer or employee of the city to perform and carry out the duties under this chapter, provided such designation is accepted, in writing, by the designee. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § (1), 10-9-2007)  
Sec. 42-92. - Definitions. 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
Best management practice or BMP means both structural devices to store or treat stormwater runoff and nonstructural programs or practices which are designed to prevent or reduce the pollution of state waters. 
Clean Water Act or CWA means the Federal Clean Water Act (formerly known as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act) (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to NPDES permits for stormwater discharges from sites associated with construction activities and land disturbances involving one acre or greater as regulated by the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act and local ordinance. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing, grubbing, excavating, filling, and demolition. 
Control measure refers to a best management practice used to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to state waters. 
Discharge refers to the discharge of a pollutant, as defined in 40 CFR Part 122.2. 
Discharge-related activities includes activities which cause, contribute to, or result in stormwater point source pollutant discharge, and measures to control stormwater discharges, including the siting, construction and operation of BMPs to control, reduce or prevent stormwater pollution. 
Illicit connection means either of the following: 
(a)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the municipal storm sewer system, including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water, to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(b)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the municipal separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except those discharges authorized under an NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit for discharges from the city's MS4) and discharges resulting from fire fighting activities. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14). 
Municipal separate storm sewer system or MS4 means any facility, conveyance, or system of conveyances designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(a)  Owned or maintained by the City of Griffin; 
(b)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(c)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Nonstormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this chapter, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended), heat, wrecked or discarded equipment and parts thereof, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, or drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snow melt and surface drainage. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § 1(2), 10-9-2007)  
Sec. 42-93. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the City of Griffin as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or administrative order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the federal environmental protection agency or state environmental protection division, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  Prohibition of illicit connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illicit connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the municipal separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this chapter must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved on-site wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the city wastewater department. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city manager requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § 1(3), 10-9-2007)  
Sec. 42-94. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city manager prior to allowing discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § 1(4), 10-9-2007)  
Sec. 42-95. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
The city manager shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the City of Griffin. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the city manager ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The city manager shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city manager to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The city manager may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the city manager. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the city manager and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city manager access to a facility is a violation of this article. 
(7)  If the city manager has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city manager is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the city manager may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § 1(5), 10-9-2007)  
Sec. 42-96. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or nonstormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the municipal separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the City Manager, City of Griffin, P.O. Box T, Griffin, Georgia 30224, within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § 1(6), 10-9-2007)  
Sec. 42-97. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. 
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the City of Griffin is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The City of Griffin is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection 42-97(e). 
(b)  Notice of violation. Whenever the City of Griffin finds that a violation of this article has occurred, the City of Griffin may order compliance by written notice of violation. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
(2)  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; and 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed, if not corrected. Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Enforcement measures. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, within ten days, then the city manager is authorized to file a complaint for abatement of a public nuisance in the municipal court. The court is authorized to order the owner or occupant of the property to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property within a reasonable time, and may impose a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. If the owner/occupant fails or refuses to abate the violation within the time allowed by the court, the order shall authorize the city to enter upon the premises and perform the necessary abatement action. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(d)  Costs of abatement of the violation; lien for special assessment. Within 45 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including court and administrative costs. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the City of Griffin by reason of such violation. 
(e)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and willful violations of this chapter, the City of Griffin may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear before the municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment of six months, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § 1(7), 10-9-2007)  
Secs. 42-98, 42-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - NOISE CONTROL 
 
Sec. 42-100. - Purpose and intent; definition; sound measurement standard. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. This article is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Griffin, Georgia, through the control of noise, a recognized form of environmental pollution. It is the intent of this article to establish objective standards that will reduce excessive community noises, which are harmful and otherwise detrimental to individuals and to the community in the enjoyment of life and property and in the conduct of business. It is not the intent of this article to regulate noise based upon its source, but based upon objective volume limitations at objective distances from the source, which for purposes of this article intentionally vary based upon the time of day and reasonable expectations of persons occupying the area during the relevant time period. It is not the intent of this article to regulate speech, under either the Federal or Georgia Constitutions. This article has been narrowly tailored as a content-neutral time, place, and manner regulation to serve a significant governmental interest [5] while leaving open ample opportunity for communication. 
(b)  Definition of "noise". For purposes of this article, "noise" means a sound or sounds of any kind, that is repetitive or continuous, and of sufficient duration, that a person of reasonable auditory sensitivity would consider loud, unpleasant, unexpected, or undesirable. 
(c)  Sound measurement standards. For the purposes of this article, "plainly audible" shall mean any sound emanating from a specific sound-producing source which can be heard from the distances set forth below, using the following sound measurement standards: Measurement shall be by the auditory senses of a person standing at a distance no less than the required minimum distance from the source of the sound. Inasmuch as the limitation on noise is neutral as to the content of the message, if any, generated or conveyed by its source, words and phrases need not be discernable. For music and other noise, bass reverberations are included. 
( Ord. No. 17-09, § 1, 5-9-2017 ) 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Note— In Grady v. Unified Gov't of Athens-Clarke County , 289 Ga. 726 (2011), the Georgia Supreme Court recognized "the significant government interest in protecting both the community in general and individual citizens from noises which may affect their comfort, repose, health, or safety." 
 
Sec. 42-101. - Restrictions of 300 feet for 7:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 7:00 a.m. through 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
(a)  Except when noise emanates from a source exempted by this article, it is a violation of this article for any person or persons to sing, yell, shout, hoot, whistle, or play a musical instrument, on the public streets or sidewalks or on private property so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet or more from the building, structure, or vehicle from which the sound is emanating, or when generated outdoors on real property, 300 feet beyond the boundary or property limits on which the person is located, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
(b)  Except when noise emanates from a source exempted by this article, it is a violation of this article for any person or persons to play, use, or operate any machine, appliance, tool, or device for the producing, reproducing, or amplifying of sound and/or noise at such a volume and in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noise or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet or more from the building, structure, or vehicle from which the sound is emanating, or when generated outdoors on real property, 300 feet beyond the property limits on which it is located, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
( Ord. No. 17-09, § 1, 5-9-2017 )  
Sec. 42-102. - Restrictions of 100 feet for 11:00 p.m. through midnight on Sunday through Thursday and 12:00 midnight through 7:00 a.m. daily. 
(a)  Except when noise emanates from a source exempted by this article, it is a violation of this article for any person or persons to sing, yell, shout, hoot, whistle, or play a musical instrument, on the public streets or sidewalks or on private property so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the building, structure, or vehicle from which the sound is emanating, or when generated outdoors on real property, 100 feet beyond the boundary or property limits on which the person is located, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight to 7:00 a.m. daily. 
(b)  Except when noise emanates from a source exempted by this article, it is a violation of this article for any person or persons to play, use, or operate any machine, appliance, tool, or device for the producing, reproducing, or amplifying of sound and/or noise at such a volume and in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noise or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the building, structure, or vehicle from which the sound is emanating, or when generated outdoors on real property, 100 feet beyond the property limits on which it is located, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight to 7:00 a.m. daily. 
(c)  Except for persons operating within properly licensed or permitted non-residential enterprises that have an adjoining property line or boundary with a residential dwelling unit, during the days and hours set forth in this section, it is a violation of this article for any person to make, cause, or continue to make any noise in such a manner as to be plainly audible to any other person a distance of five feet beyond the adjoining wall or boundary of any apartment, condominium, townhouse, duplex, or other such residential dwelling units with adjoining points of contact. For the purposes of this section, "wall or boundary" shall mean an imaginary line drawn through the points of contact of (1) adjoining apartments, condominiums, townhouses, duplexes or other such residential dwelling units with adjoining points owned, rented, or leased by different persons; or (2) adjoining common areas or adjoining exterior walls. Said property line or boundary includes all points of a plane formed by projecting the property line or boundary including the ceiling, the floor, and the walls. 
( Ord. No. 17-09, § 1, 5-9-2017 )  
[Sec. 42-103. - Reserved.]  
Sec. 42-104. - Excluded sources of noise. 
The prohibitions of this article shall not apply to the following sources of noise: 
a.  Noises and/or sounds caused to be made by manufacturing, industrial, governmental, or commercial entities in the normal course of their business; 
b.  Noises and/or sounds emanating from any official event on property owned by a federal, state, or local government, or any official event on Griffin-Spalding County School District or private school property; 
c.  Noises and/or sounds that are permitted by a license or permit issued by the city; provided, however, that the producer or coordinator of the event must strictly comply with the terms, restrictions and conditions of the permit; 
d.  Noises or sounds made by birds and animals; 
e.  Noises or sounds normally made by cars, trucks, trains, airplanes, helicopters, buses and similar vehicles, when properly equipped with noise-limiting devices required by law; 
f.  Sound volumes produced by radio, CD or tape player, or other mechanical sound making device or instrument from within a motor vehicle while on a public street or highway, which sound is controlled by the O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; 
g.  Noises or sounds from property maintenance activity conducted on or within 100 feet of any residential dwelling unit between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.; 
h.  Noises or sounds from construction activities conducted on or within 100 feet of a property zoned for single-family or multi-family residential use between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. (does not apply within commercial or mixed use zoning classifications); 
i.  Noises or sounds made by law enforcement and other public safety officials performing their public functions; or 
j.  Lawful ignition or discharge of fireworks during days and times authorized by state law. 
Where a partial exemption under this section imposes a day or time limitation, a variance from the above-referenced hours of operation may be requested, in writing, at least 48 hours prior to a proposed event, activity, or operation, for consideration by the city manager. Such a request shall state: 
(1)  The reasons that support a claim of urgent need based on specific loss or inconvenience for such a variation from the allowable work hours; 
(2)  The impact that the denial of this request would have on the applicant's activity, project or event, and the surrounding properties; 
(3)  The steps which have been taken by the applicant to communicate those needs and impacts to owners of surrounding and nearby properties; 
(4)  The steps that have or will be taken to limit the impact of the proposed activity upon surrounding and nearby properties; and 
(5)  The possible risks to public health and safety. 
If the city manager finds that the application adequately demonstrates the urgent need for a variance from the above allowable work hours, adequately provides for mitigation of the impact upon surrounding and nearby properties, and poses no additional risk to public health and safety, then permission shall be granted for a variance to alter the allowable work hours during one ten-day period. 
The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to government road, water, sewer, stormwater construction or maintenance projects or to Georgia Department of Transportation road construction or maintenance projects. 
( Ord. No. 17-09, § 1, 5-9-2017 )  
Sec. 42-105. - Registration of outdoor entertainment events. 
Registration is required of all outdoor entertainment events that have live or recorded musical entertainment and/or that use electronic amplification. Registration of the event must be at least 72 hours prior to the event, and must be by the person or persons responsible for the event. Registration is to be with the City of Griffin Tax and License Department, Monday through Friday, from 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., on an application specified by the city and shall include the name, address, telephone number or other contact information for the person or organization sponsoring the event, the location, the date and time of the event, and security provisions. No fee shall be charged for registration and the city may make provision for registration by telephone or online through the city's website. Unless expressly approved by the city manager, registration shall not be accepted for events that include the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight Sunday through Thursday, and between 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. daily. Failure to register an event may result in a fine, forfeiture of the right of future registrations, or both. Registration does not exempt the person or persons registering the event from ensuring that the event complies with the requirements of this article. Failure to register shall be a violation of this article. 
( Ord. No. 17-09, § 1, 5-9-2017 )  
Sec. 42-106. - Penalties. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be cited to appear before the municipal court, and upon conviction punished as provided by section 1-12 of this Code; provided, however, a violation of section 42-105 for failure to register an outdoor entertainment event shall be punished only by a fine not to exceed $100.00. 
( Ord. No. 17-09, § 1, 5-9-2017 )  
Chapter 44 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-02, § 1, adopted June 12, 2012, added a new chapter 44 to read as herein set out. Subsequently, Ord. No. 12-11, § 1, adopted August 28, 2011, repealed the former chapter 44, §§ 44-1—44-7, and enacted a new chapter 44 as set out herein. The former chapter 44 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 12-02, § 1, 6-12-2012. 
 
Sec. 44-1. - Regulations continued in effect. 
All laws, ordinances, rules and regulations in force in the City of Griffin inconsistent with article 1 through article 3 of chapter 3, Emergency Management, of O.C.G.A., Title 38, and any law, rule, regulation, or executive order issued by the governor pertaining to civil defense, emergency management and disaster relief, shall be suspended from enforcement during any period of a declared state of emergency for so long as such state of emergency continues to exist. All other laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of said city, not inconsistent with the aforesaid articles, shall continue in full force and effect during any declared state of emergency; provided, however, the powers and function of the city shall be exercised in light of the exigencies of the emergency situation, including without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law and pertaining thereto. All acts of the governing body of this city and its officers shall be presumed valid, binding and enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 12-11, § 1, 8-28-2012)  
Sec. 44-2. - Emergency management and response powers. 
(a)  Emergency powers. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27(b), following a declaration of emergency and during the continuance of such state of emergency, the city manager, or his designee(s), is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation under control. In exercising this authority, the city manager may cause to become effective any of the following sections of this chapter as appropriate: section 44-5 (overcharging prohibited), section 44-6 (registration of building and repair services, and section 44-7 (closed or restricted areas and curfews). If an administrative order is entered directing implementation of any of these sections, the same shall be filed in the office of the city manager and shall remain in effect until the state of emergency has terminated, unless ordered otherwise by action of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Additional emergency powers. The city manager (see subsection 44-2 (a)) shall have and may exercise for such period as the declared emergency exists or continues, the following additional emergency powers: 
(1)  To direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area, for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery; 
(2)  To prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destinations in connection with evacuation; 
(3)  To make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing, emergency shelters and/or emergency medical facilities; 
(4)  To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of any city departments and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 
(5)  To utilize all available resources of the city and subordinate agencies over which the city has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
(6)  To commandeer or utilize public or private property when necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster or when there is compelling necessity for the protection of lives, health and welfare; and/or the property of citizens; 
(7)  To suspend any law, code provision or regulation prescribing the procedures for conduct of city business, or the orders, rules or regulations of any city agency, if strict compliance with any ordinance, resolution, order, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster, provided that such suspension shall provide for the minimum deviation from the requirements under the circumstances and further provided that, when practicable, specialists shall be assigned to avoid adverse effects resulting from such suspension; 
(8)  To provide welfare benefits to citizens upon execution of an intergovernmental agreement for grants to meet disaster-related necessary expenses or serious needs of individuals or families adversely affected by an emergency or disaster in cases where the individuals or families are unable to meet the expenses or needs from other means, provided that such grants are authorized only when matching state or federal funds are available for such purposes; 
(9)  To perform and exercise such other functions, powers and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, including individuals with household pets and service animals prior to, during, and following a major disaster or emergency; provided, however, this provision shall not authorize the city manager or his designee(s) to regulate in any manner firearms or the possession, ownership, transport, carrying, transfer, sale, purchase, licensing, or registration of firearms or components of firearms, firearms dealers, or dealers in components of firearms. 
(c)  Contracts with local governments. In addition to the normal agreements embodied in the local emergency operations plan for mutual emergency assistance, the city may contract with any municipality or county for the administration of a local emergency response program. 
(Ord. No. 12-11, § 1, 8-28-2012)  
Sec. 44-3. - Enforcement and remedies. 
(a)  Law enforcement. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-4, the city police department shall be authorized to enforce the orders, rules and regulations contained in this chapter and/or as implemented by the city manager during a declared emergency. 
(b)  Penalties. Failure to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the regulations contained in this chapter, or with any law, order, rule or regulation made effective by upon or after the declaration of an emergency shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who violates any provision in this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months if the fine is not paid, for each violation. Each day during which a violation or failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-5, in addition to the remedies prescribed in this section, the city manager is authorized to seek an injunction to restrain violation of laws, ordinances, orders, rules and regulations which are contained in the Georgia Emergency Management Act and/or this Code, and/or which are implemented within the local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(Ord. No. 12-11, § 1, 8-28-2012)  
Sec. 44-4. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  City business. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or other proper authority, the affairs and business of the city may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual location, within or outside of the city, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the city, all actions taken by the city governing authority shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the city. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Public works contracts. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or other proper authority, the city may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that the emergency must be of such nature that immediate action is required and that the action is necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the city as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-91-22(e). 
(c)  Purchasing. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the Governor or other proper authority, the purchasing ordinances, regulations or policies may be suspended. City officials shall continue to seek to obtain the best prices during the state of local emergency. 
(d)  Code enforcement. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or other proper authority, the city governing authority may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the codes and ordinances of the city, or any portion thereof, where the emergency is of such nature that immediate action outside the code is required, such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(e)  Fees. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or other proper authority, the city may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" include fees or rates charged by the city for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" does not include fees collected by the city on behalf of the state or federal government or fees charged by the city pursuant to a state or federal statute or regulation. 
(f)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or other proper authority, the city manager or his designee(s) may issue temporary permits for manufactured housing, trailers, recreational vehicles, or other temporary dwelling structures in any zoning district, even though not otherwise permitted by the Unified Development Code, while the primary dwelling is being repaired. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration, unless extended by the city governing authority. Upon expiration of the temporary permit and/or extension, the temporary dwelling must be removed. 
(Ord. No. 12-11, § 1, 8-28-2012)  
Sec. 44-5. - Overcharging prohibited. 
To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health or safety of persons or property within a designated area upon the declaration of emergency or disaster, it shall be unlawful, during the duration of the emergency or subsequent recovery period, for any person, firm or corporation located or doing business in the city to overcharge for any goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses sold or rented within the county. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  " Overcharging " means charging prices for goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses, which exceed the customary charges by at least 25 percent or, in applicable cases, which exceed by at least 25 percent the suppliers' or providers' costs for such goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a 25 percent or greater increase in the price at which the merchandise or rate, fee or cost/rental of housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency or disaster, but shall not include increases in cost to the supplier directly attributable to the higher cost of material, supplies and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
(2)  " Subsequent recovery period " means that period during which the emergency or disaster continues to cause disruptions in the area designated in the declaration of emergency, but shall not exceed six months after the declaration has been terminated, unless extended by action of the city governing authority. 
(b)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the issuance of an administrative order by the city manager, stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the administrative order or otherwise modified by the governing authority of the city, the provisions of this Code section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recovery period of three months. 
(Ord. No. 12-11, § 1, 8-28-2012)  
Sec. 44-6. - Registration of building and repair services. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56, before building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures or fixtures within an area in the city designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity must register with the city manager and secure a building permit that is posted at the work site. Each day any such entity does business in the city without complying with this ordinance constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  The cost of registration fees in a declared emergency or disaster is fixed at $50.00 per annum. Registration is nontransferable. The cost of the emergency building permit shall be equal to the cost for a building permit under existing regulations. The permit shall only be authorized for repairs. 
(c)  When registering, any person, partnership, corporation or other entity making application must, under oath, complete an application, providing the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Permanent address and phone number of applicant; 
(3)  Applicant's Social Security Number or Federal Employer Identification Number; 
(4)  If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
(5)  Tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business; 
(6)  List of cities and/or counties where the applicant has conducted business within the past 12 months; 
(7)  Georgia sales tax number or authorization; 
(8)  Georgia contractor's license number, if applicable. 
(d)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the issuance of an administrative order by the city manager, stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the administrative order or otherwise modified by the city governing authority, the provisions of this Code section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recover period of six months. 
(Ord. No. 12-11, § 1, 8-28-2012)  
Sec. 44-7. - Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
(a)  To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons, or their property, within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any other place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the city manager until the curfew is lifted. 
(b)  To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the city manager shall have discretion to impose reentry restrictions on certain areas. The city manager shall exercise such discretion in accordance with the local emergency operations plan, which shall be followed during emergencies. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
(1)  Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; 
(2)  Authorized and essential health care providers; 
(3)  Authorized and essential personnel of the city or other public entity; 
(4)  Authorized National Guard or Federal Military personnel; 
(5)  Authorized and essential firefighters; 
(6)  Authorized and essential emergency response personnel; 
(7)  Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through an emergency management agency (EMA); 
(8)  Authorized and essential utility repair crews; 
(9)  Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; 
(10)  Other authorized and essential persons as designated on a list compiled by the city manager or his designees. 
(d)  Enforceability. This section shall be enforced by law enforcement officers or any personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during the emergency. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under state law. 
(e)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the issuance of an administrative order by the city manager stating this section is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 12-11, § 1, 8-28-2012)  
Chapter 46 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-15, § 1, adopted Dec. 11, 2018 , repealed the former Ch. 46, §§ 46-31—46-40, 46-50, 46-60, 46-61, and enacted a new Ch. 46 as set out herein. The former Ch. 46 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1968, §§ 9-21—9-25; Ord. No. 03-15, § 1, adopted May 27, 2003; Ord. No. 04-26, § 1, adopted Nov. 9, 2004; Ord. No. 16-05, § 1, adopted May 24, 2016 ; Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, adopted March 14, 2017 . 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; civil emergencies, ch. 34. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); statewide application of Standard Fire Prevention Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a); The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200; fire escapes in buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; local fire safety standards authorized, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; Georgia Firefighter Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1 et seq.; mutual aid resource pacts, O.C.G.A. § 25-6-1- et seq.; Georgia Fire Academy Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-7-1 et seq.; fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; false fire alarms, O.C.G.A. §16-10-27; obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; impersonating a public officer or employee, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-23; smoke detector requirements, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-40; crossing fire hose, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-248; following fire apparatus or emergency vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-247; Georgia Fire Sprinkler Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-11-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 46-1—46-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION 
 
Sec. 46-31. - Code adopted. 
The city hereby adopts, for the purposes of fire prevention, enforcement of minimum fire and life safety standards, the state minimum fire safety standards, as promulgated pursuant to the rules and regulations of the safety fire commissioner of the state, under authority contained in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq., including all subsequent revisions thereof. These standards shall henceforth be the code for fire and life safety within the jurisdiction of the city and the fire chief and the local fire marshal shall apply such code in performing the duties of their offices. 
( Ord. No. 18-15, § 1, 12-11-2018 )  
Sec. 46-32. - Inspections for fire hazards. 
It shall be the responsibility of the fire chief to inspect, or cause to be inspected by the local fire marshal, as often as may be necessary, all buildings and structures within the jurisdiction of the city, except those buildings and structures listed in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13 and those buildings which are owned, occupied or operated by the state. Fire safety inspections shall be routinely conducted at least annually in all commercial and industrial buildings and all structures occupied by a business licensed by the city under chapter 82, article VII of this Code. Private residences shall only be inspected upon the fire chief or local fire marshal first having probable cause to inspect for violations of the fire and life safety codes. 
( Ord. No. 18-15, § 1, 12-11-2018 )  
Sec. 46-33. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Written notice of violation; contents, time period for compliance. Upon inspection and discovery of a violation of the state minimum fire safety standards within any building or structure within the jurisdiction of the city, the fire chief or local fire marshal shall serve written notice of the violation upon the owner or his designated agent, and upon all tenants of the structure. Such notice may either be personally served, by statutory overnight delivery, or served by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall state that the owner shall have 30 calendar days in which to correct or repair the violation and to bring the building or structure into compliance with code standards. Upon good cause shown, the fire chief may extend the period for compliance if the owner demonstrates, in good faith, reasonable effort to correct or repair the violation. 
(b)  Failure to correct violation; citation. If the owner fails or refuses to correct or to repair the violation within the time provided, the fire chief or local fire marshal shall cite the owner, or his designated agent, in accordance with the procedure for abatement of nuisances under chapter 42, article II of this Code or under the State Minimum Fire Safety Standards with Modifications. 
(c)  Abatement of nuisance; failure or refusal to comply; penalty Upon hearing and determination that a nuisance exists by the judge of the municipal court, the court shall allow the owner a reasonable time within which to abate the nuisance. If the owner fails or refuses to comply with the order to abate, the court may cite the owner for contempt and impose a fine up to $200.00 for each day the owner allows the nuisance to continue unabated, order the owner to be imprisoned for up to 20 days, or both. 
(d)  Additional remedies; abatement of nuisance by city at owner's expense; notice. In addition to enforcing the fine and/or imprisonment against the owner, the city may cause the building or structure to be repaired, any hazardous materials removed, or the dangerous conditions remedied, as the case may be, at the expense of the city. The city manager shall cause written notice of the amount of the expense to be mailed to the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the owner, within 30 days, after notice in writing of the amount of such expense fails, neglects, or refuses to repay the city the expense incurred, the city shall issue a fi. fa. against the owner of the property for the expense actually incurred. 
( Ord. No. 18-15, § 1, 12-11-2018 )  
Sec. 46-34. - Compliance with state requirements. 
(a)  Plans and specifications submitted and approved prior to issuance of building permit, etc. No building permit shall be issued or construction started on any proposed building or structure listed in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13 until the plans and specifications have been submitted to and approved by the state fire marshal. Any existing building or structure listed in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13(1)(b) shall be deemed a proposed building in the event such building or structure is subject to substantial renovation, a fire or other hazard of serious consequence, or a change in the classification of occupancy. 
(b)  Posting of certificate of occupancy; enforcement of occupancy load. Every building and structure for which the state fire marshal has issued a certificate of occupancy shall post the certificate in a prominent location within the business establishment or building. The occupancy load, as established by the certificate of occupancy, shall be strictly enforced at all times by the owner and business establishment. Failure to strictly enforce the occupancy load shall be deemed an offense against the city, punishable in the municipal court. 
( Ord. No. 18-15, § 1, 12-11-2018 )  
Sec. 46-35. - Open burning. 
(a)  General. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit open burning in any area of the city without a special permit issued by the fire marshal pursuant to standards established by the fire department, except as follows: 
(1)  Open burning in a reasonable fashion for the purpose of cooking food for immediate human consumption, provided; however, except for one and two-family dwellings, it shall be unlawful to use charcoal burners or other open flame cooking devices on combustible balconies or within ten feet of combustible construction; 
(2)  Fires set for the purpose of training firefighting personnel of the city fire department, or for the purpose of teaching fire safety techniques to industrial fire brigades or civilians who reside or work within the city, provided that such training is being conducted by city personnel; 
(3)  Subject to compliance with the Georgia State Minimum Standard Fire Code and other rules and regulations adopted herein, operation of devices using open flames such as candles, lanterns, tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters, and other flame-making equipment where approved safety measures are used; and 
(4)  Warming fires in a barrel of 55-gallon capacity or less, other commercially sold outdoor fireplace devices, or fire pits no more than three feet in diameter and two feet in height provided that: 
a.  The fire does not produce dense smoke or obnoxious odors; 
b.  The fire is attended by an individual over the age of 17 years of age; and 
c.  Untreated wood or lumber is the only material or substance allowed in the warming fire. 
(b)  Standards. Allowable open burning as set forth above shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Materials such as heavy oils, gasoline, asphaltic materials, plastic, items containing natural or synthetic rubber, or any other material producing dense smoke and/or obnoxious odors shall not be used in an open fire; 
(2)  All burning shall be located on private property so as not to interfere with any traffic on public streets or sidewalks; 
(3)  No burning shall be allowed in violation of restrictions imposed by the federal environmental protection agency or the state environmental protection division or other rules and regulations adopted herein, including the state minimum fire safety standards; and 
(4)  Open burning specially permitted by the fire marshal shall be in accordance with other standards established by the fire department. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person who violates the provisions shall be cited for such violation and, upon conviction, shall be punished by fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment, or both. 
( Ord. No. 18-15, § 1, 12-11-2018 )  
Sec. 46-36. - Schedule of rates, fees and charges. 
A schedule of rates, fees and charges for permits, inspections and other services rendered by the fire chief or his designee is hereby adopted. Such rates, fees, and charges shall be determined from time to time by the board of commissioners and set forth in such schedule of rates, fees, and changes, an official copy of which shall be on file in the office of the city manager. 
( Ord. No. 18-15, § 1, 12-11-2018 )  
Sec. 46-37. - Private hydrant obstruction and maintenance. 
(a)  For private fire hydrants located at one-family and two-family dwellings, including townhouses and condominiums, the fire chief shall have the authority to enforce all codes with regards to fire hydrants including, but not limited to, location, inspections, maintenance, flow test, and obstructions. These private hydrants shall comply with the applicable codes, standards, and local ordinances currently adopted by the city. 
(b)  All private hydrants shall be painted silver, as needed. Reflective tape a minimum of one-inch wide shall be placed around the entire circumference of the bonnet with the ends overlapping a minimum of one inch. White reflective tape shall be used on all public fire hydrants. Painted tape or worn tape shall be replaced. 
(c)  Hydrants other than those owned and/or maintained by the City of Griffin shall have general maintenance performed annually in accordance with the currently adopted edition of NFPA 25. Maintenance records shall be maintained on the premises for inspection by the fire marshal. 
(d)  Hydrants other than those owned and/or maintained by the City of Griffin shall be flow tested every three years. Flow testing shall be done in accordance with requirements in the American Water Works Association M17 manual, "Installation, Field Testing, and Maintenance of Fire Hydrants". A site map showing flow and residual hydrants, numbered accordingly, shall be provided with each report. 
( Ord. No. 18-15, § 1, 12-11-2018 )  
Secs. 46-38—46-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PLACES OF ASSEMBLY 
 
Sec. 46-40. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning hereinafter defined: 
Place of assembly means any building, or portion of a building or structure, other than a building or structure under the jurisdiction of the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner as described in paragraph (b)(1) of O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13, which, because of floor area, height, location, type of construction, use or intended use as a gathering place for groups of 40 persons or more in a single room or assembly hall, constitutes a special hazard to property or to the life and safety of persons on account of fire or overcrowding, or fear of fire or overcrowding. 
Overcrowding means the gathering or assembly at any given time of more persons that the place of assembly has been certified for maximum occupancy by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner or local fire marshal. 
( Ord. No. 18-15, § 1, 12-11-2018 )  
Sec. 46-41. - Compliance with construction, fire and life safety codes. 
(a)  Every place of assembly shall comply with all applicable fire, life safety, and construction codes in force in the city. No place of assembly shall be used or occupied until inspected by the city manager or his designee and a certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
(b)  Every building or structure, except single-family residences, duplexes and residential condominiums, shall post and display in a conspicuous place a certificate of occupancy for the place of assembly. 
( Ord. No. 18-15, § 1, 12-11-2018 )  
Sec. 46-42. - Duty of owner and persons in possession or control. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every place of assembly to construct, equip, maintain and use such building or structure as to afford every reasonable and practical precaution and protection against injury from fire and overcrowding. 
(b)  No person who owns or controls the use or occupancy of a place of assembly shall permit the use or occupancy of the premises in excess of its posted maximum occupancy limits. 
(c)  No person who owns or controls the use or occupancy of a place of assembly shall permit any hazardous use or activity therein unless all reasonable and practical precautions against damage to property or injury to the person have been taken. 
( Ord. No. 18-15, § 1, 12-11-2018 )  
Sec. 46-43. - Inspections; right of entry. 
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or whenever the city manager or his designated representative has probable cause to believe that there exists in any building or structure or upon any premises within the city used or intended for use as a place of assembly, any use, activity, condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, or premises, unsafe, dangerous or specially hazardous to fire and overcrowding, the city manager or his designated representative, may enter such building, structure, or premises, at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed by this article; provided, if such building, structure, or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry from the building's owner or person in control or possession of the premises. If such building, structure or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or person having charge or control of the building, structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the city manager or his designated representative may apply to the Judge of the Municipal Court of the City of Griffin for an administrative search warrant. 
( Ord. No. 18-15, § 1, 12-11-2018 )  
Sec. 46-44. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate any provision of this article, or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements hereof, shall be cited to appear before the municipal court of this city. Upon trial, if convicted, such violation shall carry a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per day. Each and every day, or portion thereof, during which any violation of this article is committed or continued shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. Continuing violations of this article are hereby further declared to be public nuisances, harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare; and, in addition to all other remedies provided by law, are subject to abatement or injunction by a court of appropriate jurisdiction. 
( Ord. No. 18-15, § 1, 12-11-2018 )  
Secs. 46-45—46-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - EMERGENCY ACTIONS 
 
Sec. 46-50. - Cost of cleanup or abatement. 
(a)  Every responsible person shall have the duty to reimburse the city for and shall be liable for the payment of all costs incurred as a result of any cleanup or abatement resulting from any emergency action taken by the city fire department or any agency at the direction of the city, including, but not limited to: actual labor costs of the city personnel (including workmen's compensation benefits, fringe benefits, and administrative overhead), costs of equipment operation and materials obtained directly by the city, replacement of expended supplies, and other costs incurred. Costs under this section shall not include costs of actual fire suppression services which are normally or usually provided by the fire department. 
(b)  The city shall prepare and forward to the responsible person, a bill for the total costs and expenses incurred for which such person is responsible pursuant to this section; provided, however, any cost in connection with any independent cleanup contractor may be billed directly by such contractor. Payment of the total bill from the city shall be made within 30 days of receipt. Any bill or portion of a bill remaining unpaid after 30 days of receipt shall accrue interest on the unpaid balance at the rate of one and one-half percent per month, or fraction of a month. 
( Ord. No. 18-15, § 1, 12-11-2018 )  
Secs. 46-51—46-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CONSUMER FIREWORKS; SPECIAL USE PERMITS 
 
Sec. 46-60. - Use of consumer fireworks. 
The sale, possession, use, ignition and explosion of consumer fireworks within the City of Griffin shall be strictly governed by state law codified at O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq. 
( Ord. No. 18-15, § 1, 12-11-2018 )  
Sec. 46-61. - Special use permit for use and ignition of consumer fireworks. 
(a)  On any day, other than January 1, July 3, July 4, and December 31, outside the lawful hours established by general law for the use and ignition of consumer fireworks, the use and ignition of consumer fireworks within the city is prohibited, unless the person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership seeking to use, ignite, or cause to be ignited consumer fireworks holds a special use permit issued by the fire chief of the city. Application for such permit shall be made on forms provided by the city for such purpose and accompanied by payment of a fee of $100.00. No permit shall be issued for a time between 11:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on the following day. 
(b)  No person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership may use, ignite, or cause to be ignited consumer fireworks at a location within the city prohibited by general state law; provided, however, a special use permit may be issued by the fire chief of the city for a person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership to use, ignite, or cause to be ignited consumer fireworks within any public park, historic site, recreational area, or other property which is owned by the city, or under its custody and control; provided, further that no special use permit shall issue for any location within 100 yards of a hospital, nursing home, or other health care facility regulated under Chapter 7 of Title 31, O.C.G.A., unless the owner or administrator of the health care facility has given written permission for consumer fireworks to be used or ignited within 100 yards of its facility. Application for such permit shall be made on forms provided by the city for such purpose and accompanied by payment of a fee of $100.00. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this section for any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership, to use, ignite, or cause to be ignited within the city consumer fireworks at a time or location for which no special use permit has been issued. Citations for violations shall be returnable to the municipal court and, upon conviction, the violator shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
( Ord. No. 18-15, § 1, 12-11-2018 )  
Secs. 46-62—46-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - KEY LOCKBOX SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 46-70. - For commercial locations and residential locations with restricted access through locked gates. 
(a)  The following structures shall be equipped with a key lock box at or near the main entrance or such other location required by the fire marshal: 
(1)  Commercial or industrial structures that have fire alarm and/or sprinkler systems that are secured in a manner that restricts access during an emergency; 
(2)  Multifamily residential structures that have restricted access through locked gates; and 
(3)  Governmental structures and nursing care facilities with gated entrances. 
(b)  All newly constructed structures, communities, or complexes subject to this section shall have the key lock box installed and operational prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. All structures, communities, or complexes in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived and subject to this section shall have three years from the effective date of the ordinance to have a key lock box installed and operational. 
(c)  The fire marshal shall designate the type of key lock box system to be implemented within the city and shall have the authority to require all structures to use the designated system. 
(d)  The owner or operator of a structure, community, or complex required to have a key lock box shall, at all times, keep a key in the lock box, and maintain the operation of the box. 
(e)  The fire marshal shall be authorized to implement rules and regulations for the use of the lock box system. 
(f)  Any person who owns or operates a structure, community, or complex subject to this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 38-2 for any violation of this section; provided that the maximum fine for a conviction for a violation of this section shall be $1,000.00. 
(g)  All requests for the designated key lock box system shall be coordinated through the fire marshal and the location of the box on each site shall be approved by the fire marshal. 
( Ord. No. 18-15, § 1, 12-11-2018 )  
Chapter 50 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, adopted March 28, 2017, effective April 1, 2017 , repealed the former Ch. 50, §§ 50-1—50-6, 50-61—50-66, 50-91—50-94, and enacted a new Ch. 50 as set out herein. The former Ch. 50 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, adopted June 11, 2013. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; environment, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 54; planning, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Georgia Safe Dams Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-370 et seq. 
 
[ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL] 
 
Sec. 50-1. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to life, health, and safety due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development activities which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and, 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(b)  Applicability. This chapter shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the City of Griffin. 
( Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-1-2017 )  
Sec. 50-2. - Designation of chapter manager. 
The city manager is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. The city manager is authorized to designate, in writing, another officer or employee of the city to perform and carry out the duties under this chapter, provided, such designation is accepted, in writing, by the designee. 
( Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-1-2017 )  
Sec. 50-3. - Basis for area of special flood hazard; flood area maps and studies. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following are adopted by reference: 
(1)  The Flood Hazard Determinations (FHDs) by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, to become effective June 7, 2017, modifying the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), effective May 3, 2010, for the City of Griffin, Georgia (Community No. 130165), with accompanying FIRM maps and other supporting data, and any future revision thereto, is hereby adopted by reference. For those land areas acquired by the municipality through annexation after May 3, 2010, the current effective FIS and data for Spalding County, Georgia, with accompanying FIRM maps and other supporting data, and any future revision thereto, are hereby adopted by reference. 
(2)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
(a)  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the City of Griffin; or 
(b)  Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer licensed in the State of Georgia which has been prepared using FEMA-approved methodology acceptable to the City of Griffin. 
(3)  Studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevations or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
(a)  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to City of Griffin; or 
(b)  Any future-conditions flood study authored by a registered professional engineer licensed in the State of Georgia which has been prepared using FEMA-approved methodology acceptable to the City of Griffin. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying FIRM maps and other supporting data is located in the City of Griffin Storm Water Department, One Griffin Center, 3rd Floor, 100 S. Hill Street, Griffin, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-1-2017 )  
Sec. 50-4. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
Unless expressly repealed hereby, this chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other Code section, chapter, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other Code section, chapter, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other Code section, chapter, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
( Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-1-2017 )  
Sec. 50-5. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
This chapter is enacted in exercise of the police power in order to protect the general health, safety, and welfare of citizens and property within the City of Griffin, Georgia; and in furtherance of the mandate found in Art. I, Sec. I, Par. II of the 1983 Constitution of Georgia that protection of person and property is the paramount duty of government. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter, and the limitations imposed on owners of private property to use their property, is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on sound scientific and engineering considerations. In enactment of these restrictions, the governing body of the City of Griffin finds and concludes this chapter strikes a suitable balance between compelling governmental interests and private property rights, and that no undue burden is placed on private property owners. 
Conceptually, all land is subject to flooding. Larger floods can and will occur, above the level of flooding regulated by this chapter; the standards herein are deemed reasonable under common conditions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes beyond the legal control of the City of Griffin. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Griffin or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
( Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-1-2017 )  
Sec. 50-6. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the city manager, or his designee's, interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the base flood elevation (shown as an A Zone on the FHBM or the FIRM), and all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the future-conditions flood elevation. 
Base flood or 100-year flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation reasonably anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means a structure or other improvement that, because of its function, size, service area, or uniqueness, has the potential to cause serious bodily harm, extensive property damage, or disruption of vital socioeconomic activities if it is destroyed or damaged or if its functionality is impaired. Critical facilities include health and safety facilities, utilities, government facilities, and hazardous materials facilities. 
Development activity means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction [means] any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before November 20, 1974. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) commenced before November 20, 1974. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Fill material means any material which has the effect of changing the existing bottom elevation within the future-conditions floodplain. Examples include but are not limited to rock, sand, soil, clay, concrete, plastics, construction debris, wood and wood products, overburden from mining and excavation activities, and any impervious materials used to create structural foundations or infrastructure. Utilities, utility installations, and other public or government infrastructure are excluded from this definition. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(a)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(b)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map or FIRM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency ("FEMA"), delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community, and any future revisions thereof. 
Flood Insurance Study or FIS means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas of the floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than one foot. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
Future conditions flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood elevation. The future-conditions flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is; 
(a)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(b)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(c)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(d)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
2.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this chapter the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced after November 20, 1974. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after November 20, 1974. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the City of Griffin to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(a)  Built on a single chassis; 
(b)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(c)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and, 
(d)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Start of construction means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are not exempt from any chapter requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a 10-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
500-year flood means the area subject to inundation by the flood that has a 0.2 percent probability of being equaled or exceeded during any given year. The elevation of the 500-year flood is shown on FIRM maps as Zone X. 
( Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-1-2017 )  
Secs. 50-7—50-60. - Reserved.  
[ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION] 
 
Sec. 50-61. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  Permit application requirements. No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site located within or immediately adjacent to an area of special flood hazard without first meeting the requirements of this chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity. Unless specifically excluded by this chapter, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the City of Griffin a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. No permit shall be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this chapter. 
(b)  Floodplain management plan requirements. A permit application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard located on the site shall be required to include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, licensed in the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in section 50-91; 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in section 50-91(e). 
e.  Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  All applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development shall first be obtained and copies thereof filed with the city; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this chapter. 
The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or subsequently approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(c)  Construction stage submittal requirements. For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the city manager a certified as-built elevation certificate for the lowest floor elevation immediately after the lowest floor is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or registered professional engineer, licensed in the State of Georgia, and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The city manager, or his designee, shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
( Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-1-2017 )  
Sec. 50-62. - Duties and responsibilities of the manager. 
Duties of the city manager, or his designee, shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334, be provided and maintained on file; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the city manager shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of this chapter; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed; 
(6)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(7)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the city manager shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; and, 
(8)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the city manager and shall be open for public inspection. 
( Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-1-2017 )  
Sec. 50-63. - Boundary determinations. 
(a)  Determination of floodplain boundaries. 
(1)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(2)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the City of Griffin. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the City of Griffin, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the City of Griffin. 
(b)  Determination of floodway boundaries. 
(1)  The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the City of Griffin. If floodway data is not available from the City of Griffin, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the City of Griffin. 
( Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-1-2017 )  
Sec. 50-64. - General standards for development. 
(1)  Floodway encroachments. Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway, also known as regulatory floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. Development is prohibited within a regulatory floodway. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill materials, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in subsection (b) below. 
(b)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways, and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and, 
(c)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the City of Griffin until an affirmative Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the City of Griffin. 
(2)  Floodplain development limited. Outside of the regulatory floodway, but within the future-conditions floodplain, no development shall be allowed that could result in any of the following: 
(a)  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation; 
(b)  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
(c)  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or, 
(d)  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(3)  [Development conditions.] Any development within the future-conditions floodplain allowed under subparagraph (1) above shall meet the following conditions: 
(a)  No fill material shall be permitted within the future-conditions floodplain; 
(b)  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2.0 percent; 
(c)  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(d)  Verification of no-rise conditions, flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 50-66, signed and sealed by a professional engineer; 
(e)  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from flood waters; and 
(f)  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) to FEMA. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the City of Griffin using the Community Consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final Letter of Map Revision (LOMR). 
( Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-1-2017 )  
Sec. 50-65. - Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. 
An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of subsection 50-92(c) apply. This study shall be prepared by a currently registered Professional Engineer in the State of Georgia and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the City of Griffin prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the City of Griffin. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
( Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-1-2017 )  
Sec. 50-66. - Maintenance requirements. 
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The City of Griffin may direct the property owner to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain (at no cost to the city), if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the City of Griffin. In those cases where the property owner, after reasonable notice and opportunity to perform maintenance, fails or refuses to perform the maintenance, as required, the city shall treat the situation as a public nuisance and petition the municipal court for an order authorizing the city to enter upon the property to perform the needed maintenance and to lien the property for its costs. 
( Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-1-2017 )  
Secs. 50-67—50-90. - Reserved.  
[ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION] 
 
Sec. 50-91. - General standards for construction. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions apply: 
(a)  New construction of principal buildings (residential or non-residential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of areas of special flood hazard (outside the regulatory floodway), unless all requirements of this chapter have been met; 
(b)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(c)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(d)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(e)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
(1)  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(a)  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(b)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and, 
(c)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
(2)  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and, 
(3)  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(f)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(g)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(h)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(i)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(j)  On-site sewage disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding; and, 
(k)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the non- conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(l)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevations cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
( Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-1-2017 )  
Sec. 50-92. - Building standards within future-conditions floodplain. 
(a)  Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. The following provisions, in addition to those in section 50-91, shall apply: 
(1)  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of this chapter have been met. If all of the requirements of this chapter have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 50-91(e). 
(2)  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement to any principal structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 50-91(e). 
(3)  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with section 50-91(e) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed or stored on sites within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain must be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and not permanently attached to any structures. 
(5)  Standards for manufactured homes. 
a.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of this chapter have been met. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
(i)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
(ii)  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of section 50-91(g). 
(b)  Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. For purposes of this subsection, structures and buildings to be constructed or existing on a platted lot of record, including a single-family residential lot not part of a platted subdivision, which adjoins or contains, in part, land area within the elevation of the future-conditions floodplain shall be deemed "adjacent" to the future-conditions floodplain. For new construction or substantial improvement to any principal existing building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(c)  Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-Zones). For a residential single-lot development not part of a platted subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), the city manager shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this chapter. 
If data is not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements to existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement and access) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with section 50-91(e). 
(d)  Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-Zones). Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All substantial improvements to residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 50-91(e). 
(2)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(e)  Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; 
(2)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures shall not be required; 
(3)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 50-61(b). 
(4)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(5)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters, and discharges from the systems into flood waters; and, 
(6)  All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of City of Griffin to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
(f)  Standards for critical facilities. 
(1)  New critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(2)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
( Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-1-2017 )  
Sec. 50-93. - Appeal procedures. 
The following appeal procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity within or immediately adjacent to an area of special flood hazard, including a building permit. A notice of appeal shall be filed with the city manager, within 30 days of the written denial, by an applicant who has been denied a permit by the City of Griffin for the reasons stated herein. 
(1)  All notices of appeal shall be heard and decided by the board of commissioners, after notice to all affected parties and an opportunity to be heard in an administrative hearing. The chairperson of the board of commissioners shall set the date, time and location for the hearing, not less than 15 days following filing of the notice of appeal. The board shall affirm the denial of the permit, reverse the denial based upon the preponderance of the evidence that the permit should be issued, or grant a variance as provided in this section. The decision of the board of commissioners shall be final. 
(2)  Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the board of commissioners may petition the Superior Court of Spalding County for a Writ of Certiorari, within 30 days of the issuance of a written decision by the board of commissioners. 
(3)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of Historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this chapter are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(5)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(6)  In hearing appeals, the board of commissioners shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(7)  Conditions for variances: 
(a)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
(i)  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
(ii)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and, 
(iii)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(c)  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(d)  The city manager shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(8)  Any person appealing the denial of a permit shall submit such information and documentation as the board of commissioners shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. The burden shall rest upon the appellant to support the record by a preponderance of relevant evidence. 
(9)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the board of commissioners may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this chapter. 
(10)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
( Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-1-2017 )  
Sec. 50-94. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved floodplain management plan or permit issued by the city, shall be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(a)  Notice of violation. If the city manager or his designee determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved floodplain management plan or the provisions of this chapter, he shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site; if not the same, a copy shall also be served on the property owner. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the floodplain management plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; and 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
(b)  Enforcement measures. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city manager shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city manager may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following actions: 
(1)  Stop work order. The city manager may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city manager may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city manager may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city manager may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(c)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city manager shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the city manager has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city manager may file a complaint for nuisance against the applicant or other responsible person in municipal court; upon finding a nuisance to exist by reason of the condition, the court may order its abatement, including authorizing the city, if the nuisance remains unabated for such time as set by the court, to enter upon the property and perform remedial measures and lien the cost thereof against the property. 
(d)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the city manager may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment for six months, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, 3-28-2017, eff. 4-1-2017 )  
Chapter 54 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Aviation, ch. 18; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; environment, ch. 42; floods, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Regulations for septic tanks or individual sewerage management systems in unincorporated areas, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.1; power of county board of health to adopt and enforce rules and regulations, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-4(a)(4); power of county board of health to adopt rules and regulations of local application, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-6; promulgation of rules, regulations and standards by state department of human resources and county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-373; authority to provide public health facilities and services, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); health generally, O.C.G.A. § 31-1-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 54-1. - Adoption of certain rules and regulations. 
(a)  The following rules and regulations of the Spalding County Board of Health, as now existing and hereafter amended, are adopted by reference and incorporated into this Code, to-wit: 
(1)  Environmental health rules for individual water supplies; 
(2)  Environmental health rules for individual sewerage disposal systems; 
(3)  Rules and regulations for food service; 
(4)  Rules and regulations for tourist courts; 
(5)  Spalding County Board of Health Clean Indoor Air Ordinance; 
(6)  Spalding County Board of Health Rules and Regulations for Body Art Studios and Body Artists; and 
(7)  Spalding County Board of Health Rabies Control. 
Violations of such rules occurring within the corporate limits shall be punishable in the municipal court of the city as an offense against the city. Violators shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. Each and every day that any such violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense or violation. The punishment set out in this section for the purpose of enforcing these regulations as a violation of a city ordinance shall not be deemed exclusive, but shall be cumulative or all other remedies provided by the laws of the state; provided, however, that no person shall be convicted twice for the same violation. 
(b)  Employees of the Spalding County Board of Health whose duties expressly include enforcement of the board's rules and regulations are hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this article in the name of and on behalf of the city. 
(c)  This article is cumulative of the existing provisions of the city Code promulgated to protect and preserve the health, safety and welfare of its citizens. The provisions hereof are not intended to repeal by implication any existing provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1968, § 10-01; Ord. No. 07-04, § 1, 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 13-02, § 1, 3-26-2013; Ord. No. 18-13, § 1, 8-14-2018 )  
Sec. 54-2. - General cleanliness of premises. 
The owner and occupant of property within the city shall each be independently responsible for keeping the premises, including all buildings thereon and the full yard thereof, clean and free from all garbage, refuse, filth, dirt, ashes, trash, rubbish and other offensive materials. 
(Code 1968, § 10-2)  
Sec. 54-3. - Mosquito control. 
The control of mosquitoes and of mosquito breeding places shall be the responsibility of the owner and the occupant of property, and it shall be their duty to keep the property free from mosquito breeding grounds. The city may take reasonable steps to correct breeding places and charge the cost thereof to the owner and occupant of the premises. 
(Code 1968, § 10-3)  
Sec. 54-4. - Rat control. 
It shall be the responsibility of the owner and the occupant of property to prevent the entry into the premises of rats and the breeding of rats on the premises. The city may take reasonable steps to prevent or abate the presence or breeding of rats on private property and charge the cost thereof to the owner and occupant. 
(Code 1968, § 10-4)  
Sec. 54-5. - General cleanliness of street margins. 
The owner and occupant of each lot within the city shall each be independently responsible for keeping the property between the actual traveled portion of the public street upon which such lot faces and the front margin of such lot clean and free from all garbage, refuse, filth, dirt, ashes, trash, rubbish and other offensive materials, and shall also be responsible for keeping the lot clean and free of weeds or other unsightly undergrowth and, if grass is allowed to grow upon the lot, for keeping it neatly mowed. 
(Code 1968, § 10-5) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78.  
Secs. 54-6—54-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 54-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Food service establishment means establishments for the preparation and serving of meals, lunches, short orders, sandwiches, frozen desserts, or other edible products. The term includes restaurants; coffee shops; cafeterias; short order cafes; luncheonettes; taverns; lunchrooms; places which manufacture, wholesale, or retail sandwiches or salads; soda fountains; institutions, both public and private; food carts; itinerant restaurants; industrial cafeterias; catering establishments; food vending machines and vehicles and operations connected therewith; and similar facilities by whatever named called. The term shall not include food sales establishments licensed by the commissioner of agriculture, or nonprofit food sales and food service. 
Nonprofit food sales and service means the temporary sale or service of food items by an organization at an event sponsored by a county, municipality, or organization. 
Organization means an organization exempt from taxes under O.C.G.A. § 48-7-25(1)(a) and under Section 501(d) or paragraphs (1) through (8) or paragraph (1) of Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code, as that code is defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-1-2. 
(Ord. No. 98-13, § 1(10-40), 8-11-1998) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 54-32. - Permit required; sale or service without permit prohibited. 
(a)  No person or organization shall engage in the operation of a food service establishment nor conduct nonprofit food sales and service within the city without first obtaining a permit from the county board of health. 
(b)  As authorized by law, the county board of health shall act for and on behalf of the city, by regulating all food service establishments within the city, including permitting of nonprofit food sales and service by nonprofit organizations. The rules and regulations of the department of human resources regulating food sales and service are hereby adopted, and, by reference, incorporated in this section, as the minimum standards of food service regulation within the city. The county board of health is further delegated authority to adopt reasonable policies and procedures relating to permitting and inspection of food service establishments, any non-licensed food sales operations, and nonprofit food sales and service conducted within the city. 
(c)  Any person engaged in the operation of a food service establishment or nonprofit food sales and service, without holding a permit from the county board of health, shall be in violation of this article and subject to appear, upon citation, before the municipal court. Upon conviction of a violation of this article, such person shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(d)  In addition to the sanction imposed in this section, any violation of this article shall also constitute a nuisance within the city, contrary to the public health and safety, and subject to abatement before the municipal court or any other court of appropriate jurisdiction. Maintenance of a nuisance shall also entitle the city to seek injunctive relief in the superior court. 
(Ord. No. 98-13, § 1(10-41), 8-11-1998)  
Chapter 55 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-14, § 1, adopted August 27, 2002, added new provisions to the Code as ch. 52. In order to preserve the alphabetical sequencing of chapters within the Code, said provisions have been redesignated as ch. 55 at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; environment, ch. 42; fire prevention and protection, ch. 46; floods, ch. 50; planning, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 98. 
 
Sec. 55-1. - Purpose. 
The historical, cultural and esthetic heritage of the city is among its most valued and important assets. The preservation of that heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, safety and general welfare of its people. In order to stimulate revitalization of the central business district and historic residential neighborhoods, to protect and enhance its local historic and cultural attractions for tourists and visitors, to encourage the acquisition by the city or qualified preservation organizations of facade and conservation easements, to enhance the opportunities to tax relief as incentive for rehabilitation of certified historic structures, and to provide a uniform procedure in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq. the "Georgia Historic Preservation Act", the board of commissioners enacts this chapter to provide for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, and works of art having a special historical, cultural, or esthetic interest or value. 
(Ord. No. 02-14, § 1(1), 8-27-2002)  
Sec. 55-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the term: 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document approving a proposal to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a structure, site, or work of art located within a designated historic district, which document must be obtained from the historic preservation commission before such material change may be undertaken. 
Commission means the historic preservation commission created pursuant to this chapter in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 44-10-24. 
Designation means a decision by the board of commissioners by ordinance adopted subsequent to enactment of this chapter and designated on the official zoning map wherein a property or district proposed for preservation is located to designate such property or district as a "historic property" or as a "historic district" and thereafter to prohibit all material changes in appearance of such property or within such district prior to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness by the historic preservation commission. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design, and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including, but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material; the type and style of all windows, doors, and signs; and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details, or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area, urban or rural, which contains structures, sites, works of art, or a combination thereof which: 
(1)  Have special character or special historical or esthetic interest or value; 
(2)  Represent one or more periods or styles of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state, or region; and 
(3)  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. 
Historic preservation jurisdiction , in the case of the city means the area within the corporate limits of the municipality. 
Historic property means a structure, site, or work of art, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of its value to the municipality, county, state, or region for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
(2)  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
(3)  It is a place or structure associated with an event or person of historic or cultural significance to the municipality, county, state, or region; or 
(4)  It is a site of natural or esthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state, or region. 
Local governing body means the board of commissioners. 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect only the exterior architectural features of a historic property or of any structure, site, or work of art within a historic district and may include any one or more of the following: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape, or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details, or elements; 
(2)  Demolition of a historic property; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public way on any historic property; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration, or removal of any building or other structures within a designated historic district, including walls, fences, steps, and pavements, or other appurtenant features, except exterior paint alterations. 
Person includes any natural person, corporation, or unincorporated association. 
(Ord. No. 02-14, § 1(2), 8-27-2002)  
Sec. 55-3. - Creation of historic preservation commission. 
(a)  There is hereby created for the city a commission to be known as the historic preservation commission. The commission shall consist of five members appointed by the board of commissioners. All members shall be residents of the city, a majority of whom shall be persons having demonstrated special interest, experience, or education in history or architecture. For purposes of initial appointments, three members shall be appointed for a term of three years; one member shall be appointed for a term of two years; and one member shall be appointed for a term of one year. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for terms of three years; provided, however, members shall serve until their successors are duly appointed. All members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in performance of their duties, based upon submission of invoices to the city manager. 
(b)  The historic preservation commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Prepare an inventory of all property within its respective historic preservation jurisdiction having the potential for designation as historic property; 
(2)  Recommend to the municipal governing body specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, or works of art to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
(3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness and grant or deny the same in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 44-10-28 and this chapter; 
(4)  Recommend to the municipal governing body that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, or work of art as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
(5)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the municipality; 
(6)  Promote the acquisition by the municipal governing authority of conservation easements in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 44-10-1 through 44-10-8 and this chapter; 
(7)  Conduct an educational program on historic properties located within its historic preservation jurisdiction; 
(8)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation as the local governing body or the commission itself may from time to time deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of this chapter; 
(9)  Seek out state and federal funds for historic preservation and make recommendations to the local governing body concerning the most appropriate use of any funds acquired; 
(10)  Consult with historic preservation experts in the Historic Preservation Division of the Department of Natural Resources or its successor and the Georgia Trust for Historic Preservation, Inc.; and 
(11)  Submit to the Historic Preservation Division of the Department of Natural Resources or its successor a list of historic properties or historic districts designated as such pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-10-26 and this chapter. 
(c)  The historic preservation commission shall adopt by-laws for the transaction of its business and standards for consideration of applications for certificates of appropriateness. The commission shall designate in writing the time, place and location of its regular meetings and shall keep a current copy of such designation on file in the city manager's office. All meetings of the commission shall be held and conducted pursuant to the Georgia Open Meetings Law. At its organizational meeting the commission shall elect a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary. The secretary shall maintain minutes of all meetings which, together with other records of the commission, shall be maintained in the city manager's office for public inspection and copying. For purposes of conducting its business affairs a quorum shall consist of three members. 
(d)  Before consideration of any certificate of appropriateness, the members of the commission shall be governed by the conflicts of interest in zoning law, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq., and make all disclosures, in writing, required thereby. 
(Ord. No. 02-14, § 1(3), 8-27-2002)  
Sec. 55-4. - Designation of historic districts and properties. 
(a)  Ordinances recommended by the historic preservation commission to designate historic properties or historic districts shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Any ordinance designating any property as a historic property or any district as a historic district shall require the designated property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the municipality and kept by the municipality as a public record to provide notice of such designation in addition to other notice requirements specified by this section; 
(2)  Any ordinance designating any property as a historic property shall describe each property to be designated by applicable Spalding County tax map reference, shall set forth the names and addresses of the owner or owners as shown on the most recent tax digest of Spalding County, Georgia, and those persons known or believed to occupy or be in current possession of the property, and shall require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the historic preservation commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
(3)  Any ordinance designating any district as a historic district shall incorporate by reference a map, drawn to scale, showing the boundaries of the district, shall list each property located therein by Spalding County Tax Map reference, shall set forth the names and addresses of the owner or owners as shown on the most recent tax digest of Spalding County, Georgia, and those persons known or believed to occupy or be in current possession of the property, and shall require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the historic preservation commission prior to any material change in appearance of any structure, site, or work of art located within the designated historic district. 
(b)  No ordinance designating any property as a historic property and no ordinance designating any district as a historic district nor any amendments thereto may be adopted by the board of commissioners nor may any property be accepted or acquired as historic property by the city until the following procedural steps have been taken: 
(1)  The commission shall make or cause to be made an investigation and shall report on the historic, cultural, architectural, or esthetic significance of each place, district, site, building, structure, or work of art proposed for designation or acquisition. This report shall be submitted to the Historic Preservation Division of the Department of Natural Resources or its successor which will be allowed 30 days to prepare written comments concerning the report; 
(2)  The commission and the board of commissioners shall hold a public hearing on the proposed ordinance. Notice of the hearing shall be published three times in The Griffin Daily News and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners, interest parties and known occupants of such properties. All the notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing; and 
(3)  Following the public hearing, the board of commissioners may adopt the ordinance as prepared, adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the proposal. 
(c)  Within 30 days immediately following the adoption of the ordinance, the owners, interested parties, and known occupants of each designated historic property and the owners, interested parties, and known occupants of each structure, site, or work of art located within a designated historic district shall be given written notification of such designation by the city manager, which notice shall apprise said owners, interested parties, and occupants of the necessity for obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in the appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. Any person aggrieved by such designation may, within 30 days of receiving notice from the city manager, petition the Superior Court of Spalding County, Georgia, for declaratory judgment as to the appropriateness of such designation. 
(d)  Criteria for designation of a historic district. 
(1)  A historic district should be a geographically definable area which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, which: 
a.  Has a special character of special historic/esthetic value or interest; 
b.  Represents one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and 
c.  Causes such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality. 
(e)  Criteria for designation of historic property. A historic property is a building, structure, site or object, including the area adjacent necessary for proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of is value to the municipality, county, state or region, for one or more of the following reasons: 
(a)  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
(b)  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
(c)  It is a place or structure associated with a significant historic event or persons of significant historic or cultural importance to the municipality, county, state or region; or 
(d)  It is the site of natural or esthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historic development and heritage of the municipality, county, state or region. 
(Ord. No. 02-14, § 1(4), 8-27-2002; Ord. No. 04-02, § 1, 3-9-2004)  
Sec. 55-4A. - Designation of historic district and boundary map. 
Boundaries of the district, to be known as the "Historic Downtown Griffin Commercial District", are hereby designated as shown upon the map attached hereto as Exhibit "A", which, by reference, is incorporated herein and expressly made a part hereof. The zoning administrator is directed to cause the official zoning map of the City of Griffin, Georgia, to immediately be amended to reflect said boundaries of the district. Said map shall be kept in the office of the zoning administrator as a public record to provide notice of such designation to affected property owners. 
(Ord. No. 07-12, § 1, 10-23-2007)  
Sec. 55-4B. - List of properties in the historic district and current ownership thereof. 
The following is a list of each property, by owner and address, within the designated Historic Downtown Griffin Commercial District, as set forth above, as shown on the most recent Spalding County, Georgia, tax digest: 
Tax Parcel # 	Physical Address 	Property Owner's Name 	Property Owner's Mailing Address 
012 32002 	216 W. Broad St. 	The New Jerusalem Baptist 	216 W. Broad St., Griffin, GA 30223 
012 32003 	206 W. Broad St. 	Law, Sharon & Traylor, Karen 	1201 Oxford Rd., Griffin, GA 30224 
012 32004 	204 W. Broad St. 	Black, Ronnie H., Etal 	C/O Steve Statham, 231 Thrift Lake Dr., MTN REST, SC 29664 
012 32004A 	202 W. Broad St. 	Richardson, Norma J. 	707 Woodland Dr., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 23008 	213 N. Hill St. 	Michell, Richard T. & Martha 	3525 Broad St., Atlanta, GA 30005 
013 23008A 	217 N. Hill St. 	Joiner, John P., Etal 	317 B South Hill St., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 23009 	209 N. Hill St. 	Mcswain, Donald W. 	P.O. Box 431, Griffin, GA 30224 
013 23010 	101 W. Broadway St. 	Leyden, John C. Jr. & Kolzisek, D. J. 	450 Neely Rd., Fayetteville, GA 30214 
013 23011 	107 W. Broadway St. 	Leyden, John C. Jr. & Kolzisek, D. J. 	450 Neely Rd., Fayetteville, GA 30214 
013 24005 	206 N. Hill St. 	Akins Feed & Seed Inc. 	P.O. Box 289 Griffin, GA 30224 
013 25001 	W. Broad St. 	City of Griffin 	P.O. Box T. Griffin, GA 30224 
013 26001 	N. Hill St. 	City of Griffin 	P.O. Box T. Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33001 	134 W. Broad St. 	Bailey, Winfred L. 	5100 Magnolia Bluff Dr., Atlanta, GA 30350 
013 33002 	132 W. Broad St. 	Hutcherson, Jeanette D. 	577 N. 2nd St. Griffin, GA 30223 
013 33003 	130 W. Broad St. 	Flournoy, Tony R. 	301 S. Hill St. Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33003A 	W. Slaton Ave. 	The Downtown Development Authority 	P.O. Box T., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33004 	124 W. Broad St. 	The Downtown Development Authority 	P.O. Box T., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33005 	122 W. Broad St. 	Neel E. Camp 	711 Maple Dr., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33006 	120 W. Broad St. 	Touchstone A. C. 	C/O Frank Touchstone P.O. Box 664, Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33007 	State St. 	Deraney, Joe & Mike & I. Mansour 	147 Stafford Ave., Barnesville, GA 30204 
013 33007A 	118 W. Broad St. 	Deraney, Mike Jr. 	147 Stafford Ave., Barnesville, GA 30204 
013 33007B 	116 W. Broad St. 	United Christian Fellowship 	P.O. Box 191, Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33007C 	112 W. Broad St. 	United Christian Fellowship 	P.O. Box 191, Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33008 	110 W. Broad St. 	United Christian Fellowship 	P.O. Box 191, Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33034 	109 W. Slaton Ave. 	Hollberg, M. Douglas Jr. 	P.O. Box 255, Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33035 	State St. 	Hollberg, M. Douglas Jr. 	P.O. Box 255, Griffin, GA 30225 
013 33036 	111 W. Slaton Ave. 	City Of Griffin 	P.O. Box T., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33037 	113 W. Slaton Ave. 	Mierda, LLC 	1970 S. 6th St., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33038 	115 W. Slaton Ave. 	The Downtown Development Authority 	P.O. Box T., Griffin, Ga 30224 
013 33039 	117 W. Slaton Ave. 	The Downtown Development Authority 	P.O. Box T., Griffin, Ga 30224 
013 33040 	127 W. Slaton Ave. 	Fears, Bennie James & Claudette 	1216 East Mcintosh Rd., Griffin, Ga 30223 
013 33041 	Eighth St. 	Eighth Street Baptist Church 	408 Palace St., Griffin, GA 30223 
013 33009 	104 W. Broad St. 	Neel, E Camp 	711 Maple Dr., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33010 	137 N. Hill St. 	Chambers, W. T., Trustee 	3925 Fieldstone Dr., Gainesville, GA 30506 
013 33011 	135 N. Hill St. 	Callins, Rheuben E. & Jean M. 	3021 Deanna Way, Lawrenceville, GA 30044 
013 33012 	133 N. Hill St. 	Jinnah Downtown Cafe, Inc. 	133 N. Hill St., Griffin, GA 30223 
013 33013 	129 N. Hill St. 	Landrum Family Partnership Downtown Properties, LLC. 	749 Carver Rd., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33013A 	131 N. Hill St. 	Landrum Family Partnership Downtown Properties, LLC. 	749 Carver Rd., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33014 	127 N. Hill St. 	Landrum Family Partnership Downtown Properties, LLC. 	749 Carver Rd., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33015 	125 N. Hill St. 	Hollberg, M. Douglas Jr. 	P.O. Box 255, Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33016 	123 N. Hill St. 	Hulon, Donald A. Jr. 	123 N. Hill St., Griffin, GA 30223 
013 34001 	132 N. Hill St. 	Morris, Steve 	4295 Hwy. 19 & 41, Hampton, GA 30228 
013 34002 	Broad St. 	City of Griffin 	P.O. Box T., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 34003 	124 E Broad St. 	Spalding County 	P.O. Box 1087, Griffin, GA 30224 
013 34016 	120 N. Hill St. 	City of Griffin 	P.O. Box T., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 34017 	124 N. Hill St. 	Shepherd, Timothy N. & William G. Johnston 	P.O. Box 767, Griffin, GA 30224 
013 34018 	128 N. Hill St. 	Frye, Warren 	518 E. College St., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 34019 	130 N. Hill St. 	Kendall, M. Michael 	130 N. Hill St., Griffin, GA 30223 
014 35015 	120 N. Sixth St. 	City of Griffin 	P.O. Box T, Griffin, GA 30224 
013 34004 	E. Slaton Ave. 	Cogburn, John Jr., Etal 	P.O. Box 907, Griffin, GA 30224 
013 34005 	131 E. Solomon St. 	Freeman, Ralph W. 	P.O. Box 213, Griffin, GA 30224 
013 34006 	127 E. Solomon St. 	Newton, John T. Jr. 	P.O. Box 551, Griffin, GA 30224 
013 34006A 	E. Slaton Ave. 	Freeman Foods Inc. 	P.O. Box 213, Griffin, GA 30224 
013 34007 	115 E. Solomon St. 	Spalding County 	P.O. Box 1087, Griffin, GA 30224 
013 34007A 	119 E. Solomon St. 	Spalding County 	P.O. Box 1087, Griffin, GA 30225 
013 34008 	111 E. Solomon St. 	City of Griffin 	P.O. Box T., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 34008A 	113 E. Solomon St. 	Thacker, Louis C. 	113 East Solomon St., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 34009 	109 E. Solomon St. 	Griffin Spalding Co. Develop. Auth. 	109 E. Solomon St., Griffin, GA 30223 
013 34010 	102 N. Hill St. 200 	Griffin Opera House 	4295 Hwy. 1941, Hampton, Ga 30228 
013 34010A 	102 N. Hill St. 	Newsome, Christy & Burt 	237 Sapelo Road, Griffin, GA 30223 
013 34010B 	106 N. Hill St. 	Flournoy, Tony R. 	301 S. Hill St., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 34010C 	102 N. Hill St. 301 	Mims, Michael D. 	P.O. Box 2185, Griffin GA 30224 
013 34010D 	102 N. Hill St. 302 	Buice, Kenneth P. 	102 N. Hill St., Suite 302, Griffin, GA 30224 
013 34010E 	102 N. Hill St. 303 	Lewis Clower, Kim R. 	102 N Hill St., Suite 303, Griffin, GA 30224 
013 34010F 	102 N. Hill St. 304 	Newton, John T. Jr. 	P.O. Box 551, Griffin, GA 30224 
013 34010G 	102 N. Hill St. 305 	Newton, John T. Jr. 	P.O. Box 551, Griffin, GA 30224 
013 34010H 	102 N. Hill St. 200 	Flournoy, Tony R. 	301 S. Hill St., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 34010I 	104 N. Hill St. 	Morris, Steve 	4295 Hwy. 19 & 41, Hampton, GA 30228 
013 34011 	108 N. Hill St. 	Morris, Steve 	4295 Hwy. 19 & 41, Hampton, GA 30228 
013 34011A 	108 N. Hill St. 	Morris, Steve 	4295 Hwy. 19 & 41, Hampton, GA 30228 
013 34011B 	102 N. Hill St. 306 	Head, John D. 	102 N. Hill St., Suite 306, Griffin, GA 30223 
013 34011C 	102 N. Hill St. 307 	Helton, Michael S. Jr. 	P.O. Box 54, Griffin, GA 30224 
013 34011D 	102 N Hill St. 308 	Pietrefesa, Pasquale 	102 N. Hill St., Suite 308, Griffin, GA 30223 
013 34011E 	102 N. Hill St. 309 	Aderhold, Bonnie Lee 	102 N. Hill St., Suite 309, Griffin, GA 30223 
013 34012 	110 N. Hill St. 	Walters Income Properties, LP 	P.O. Box 2935, Chestnut Mountain, GA 30502 
013 34013 	114 N. Hill St. 	Pitts, Scott F. & Lynn Collier 	P.O. Box 653, Jackson, GA 30233 
013 34013C 	102 N. Hill St. 	Griffin Opera House 	4295 Hwy. 1941, Hampton, GA 30228 
013 34014 	118 N. Hill St. 	Blackshear Richard & Susie W. 	670 Brook Circle, Griffin, GA 30224 
014 35010 	205 E. Solomon St. 	City of Griffin 	P.O. Box T., Griffin, GA 30224 
014 35010A 	205 E. Solomon St. 	City of Griffin 	P.O. Box T., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33017 	117 N. Hill St. 	Morris, Steve 	4295 Hwy. 19 & 41, Hampton, GA 30228 
013 33018 	115 N. Hill St. 	Richardson, Norma 	707 Woodland Dr., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33019 	111 N. Hill St. 	Flanders, K. Mitchell & Lori 	1126 Placid Rd., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33020 	109 N. Hill St. 	Flanders K. Mitchell & Lori 	1126 Placid Rd., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33021 	107 N. Hill St. 	Lindsey H. Fielding Trustee 	1229 Buttermilk Ln., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33022 	103 N. Hill St. 	Lindsey H. Fielding Trustee 	1229 Buttermilk Ln., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33023 	101 N. Hill St. 	Lindsey H. Fielding Trustee 	1229 Buttermilk Ln., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33024 	111 W. Solomon St. 	Marshall, Doreen S. 	P.O. Box 1068, Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33025 	113 W. Solomon St. 	Marshall, Doreen S. 	P.O. Box 1068, Griffin, GA 30225 
013 33027 	121 W. Solomon St. 	Newton, John T. Jr. 	P O BOX 551 Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33028 	123 W. Solomon St. 	Pete's Pool Room, LLC 	123 W. Solomon St. Griffin, GA 30223 
013 33028A 	125 W. Solomon St. 	Jones, Tony L. 	1739 Honeybee Creek Dr., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33029 	133 W. Solomon St. 	Spalding County 	P.O. Box 1087, Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33030 	114 N. Eighth St. 	Head, Raymond & Touchstone A. C. 	P.O. Box 222, Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33031 	W. Slaton Ave. 	Pete's Pool Room, LLC 	123 W. Solomon St., Griffin, GA 30223 
013 33031A 	Slaton Ave. 	Jones, Tony L. 	1739 Honeybee Creek Dr., Griffin, GA 30224 
013 33032 	120 W. Slaton Ave. 	Marshall, Doreen S. 	P.O. Box 1068, Griffin, GA 30224 
017 45001 	204 E. Solomon St. 	Spalding County 	P.O. Box 1087, Griffin, GA 30224 
016 43001 	128 W. Solomon St. 	Morris, Steve 	4295 Hwy. 19 & 41, Hampton, GA 30228 
016 43002 	126 W. Solomon St. 	Natson Partners, LLC 	122 W. Solomon St., Griffin, GA 30223 
016 43003 	124 W. Solomon St. 	Newton, John Jr. 	P.O. Box 551, Griffin, GA 30224 
016 43004 	120 W. Solomon St. 	Natson Partners, LLC 	122 W. Solomon St., Griffin, GA 30223 
016 43004A 	122 W. Solomon St. 	Fletcher & Company Real Estate Appraisals 	P.O. Box 884, Griffin, GA 30224 
016 43005 	120 W. Solomon St. 	Raven Group, LLC 	P.O. Box 12445, Atlanta, GA 30355 
016 43006 	116 W. Solomon St. 	Heath, Virgil W. 	509 N. Pine Hill Rd., Griffin, GA 30223 
016 43007 	114 W Solomon St. 	Howle, Terriann W. 	157 Stolen Hours Lane, Fayetteville, GA 30214 
016 43008 	101 S. Hill St. 	Whalen, A. J. III & James R. Westbury Jr. 	101 S. Hill St., Griffin, GA 30224 
016 43009 	103 S. Hill St. 	Ogletree, James L. 	744 E. College St., Griffin, GA 30224 
016 43010 	105 S. Hill St. 	Clark, Theresa H 	105 S. Hill St., Griffin, GA 30223 
016 43011 	109 S. Hill St. 	Reams Hill Street, LLC 	2880 Athens Hwy., Madison, GA 30650 
016 43012 	111 S. Hill St. 	Drummond, Danny & Arlette 	186 Reynolds Bend Rd. SE., Rome, GA 30161 
016 43013 	115 S. Hill St. 	Oh, Hu Sik & Jee Youn 	104 Rebecca Circle, Griffin, GA 30224 
016 43015 	119 S. Hill St. 	Greg Pruitt Constr Co. Inc. 	914 W. Taylor St., Griffin, GA 30224 
016 43038 	W. Wall St. 	Blake Andrew E. & Alice L 	1009 E. College St., Griffin, GA 30224 
016 43039 	123 W. Bank St. 	Shockley T. Lyn & Mark E. Washington 	P.O. Box 197, Griffin, GA 30224 
016 43040 	125 W. Wall St. 	Norsworthy R. L. & Ruth F. 	1550 Mt. Zion Rd., Griffin, GA 30224 
016 43041 	S. Eighth St. 	Morris, Steve 	4295 Hwy. 19 & 41, Hampton, GA 30228 
016 43016 	123 S. Hill St. 	Another Road, LLC 	P.O. Box 1049, Lagrange, GA 30241 
016 43017 	125 S. Hill St. 	Smith, Cyndie P. 	125 S. Hill St., Griffin, GA 30223 
016 43018 	127 S. Hill St. 	Copeland, Peter D 	P.O. Box 448, Clarkston, GA 30021 
016 43018A 	127 S. Hill St. 	Jones, Bill 	127 South Hill Street—First Floor, Griffin, GA 30224 
016 43018B 	127 S. Hill St. 	Copeland, Peter D. 	P.O. Box 448, Clarkston, GA 30021 
016 43018C 	127 S. Hill St. 	Copeland, Peter D. 	P.O. Box 448, Clarkston, GA 30021 
016 43018D 	127 S. Hill St. 	Copeland, Peter D. 	P.O. Box 448, Clarkston, GA 30021 
013 43018E 	127 S. Hill St. 	Copeland, Peter D. 	P.O. Box 448, Clarkston, GA 30021 
016 43019 	129 S. Hill St. 	Danbridge Condos, LLC 	625 W. Taylor St., Griffin, GA 30223 
016 43020 	133 S. Hill St. 	Danbridge Condos, LLC 	625 W. Taylor St., Griffin, GA 30223 
016 43021 	135 S. Hill St. 	Danbridge Condos, LLC 	625 W. Taylor St., Griffin, GA 30223 
016 43022 	137 S. Hill St. 	Dunson, Dan L. & Nancy M. 	3 Terracedale Ct., Griffin, GA 30224 
016 43023 	111 W. Taylor St. 	Blake, Otis D. Jr. 	P.O. Box 52 
016 43024 	113 W. Taylor St. 	Evans, Larry H. & Larry Keith 	113 W. Taylor St., Griffin, GA 30223 
016 43025 	115 W. Taylor St. 	Evans, Larry H. & Larry Keith 	113 W. Taylor St., Griffin, GA 30223 
016 43025A 	119 W. Taylor St. 	Evans, Larry Keith & Dianna 	113 W. Taylor St. Griffin, GA 30223 
016 43026 	121 W. Taylor St. 	Blake, Otis D. Jr. 	P.O. Box 52, Griffin, GA 30224 
016 43027 	123 W. Taylor St. 	Baldwin, John W. 	1118 Hilltop Dr., Griffin, GA 30224 
016 43028 	125 W. Taylor St. 	Evans, Larry K. & Dianna 	113 W. Taylor St., Griffin, GA 30223 
016 43029 	127 W. Taylor St. 	Goodman, Gloria J. & B. Wayne 	127 W. Taylor St., Griffin, GA 30223 
016 43030 	129 W. Taylor St. 	Evans, Larry K. & Dianna J. 	255 Broadmoor Dr., Fayetteville, GA 30215 
016 43031 	131 W. Taylor St. 	Tretop Drug Company, LLC 	131 W. Taylor St., Griffin, GA 30223 
016 43033 	135 W. Taylor St. 	Tretop Drug Company, LLC 	131 W. Taylor St., Griffin, GA 30223 
016 43034 	126 S. Eighth St. 	Tretop Drug Company, LLC 	132 W. Taylor St., Griffin, GA 30223 
016 43035 	122 S. Eighth St. 	Mckenzie, Betty Sue 	122 S. 8th St., Griffin, GA 30223 
016 43036 	122 W. Bank St. 	Morris, Steve 	4295 Hwy. 19 & 41, Hampton, GA 30228 
016 43036A 	W. Bank St. 	City of Griffin 	P.O. Box T., Griffin, GA 30224 
016 43037 	116 W. Wall St. 	Dunson, Dan L. & Nancy M. 	3 Terracedale Ct., Griffin, GA 30224 
016 44008 	132 S. Hill St. 	Taliaferro, Don H. 	P.O. Box 829, Griffin, GA 30223 
016 44009 	130 S. Hill St. 	103 South Hill, LLC 	12608 Hwy 19, Griffin, GA 30224 
016 44010 	128 S. Hill St. 	Newton, John T. Jr. 	P.O. Box 551, Griffin, GA 30224 
016 44011 	126 S. Hill St. 	Willis, Arthur J. & Judy C. 	P.O. Box 1541, Griffin, GA 30224 
016 44012 	120 S. Hill St. 	Kendall, Wayne B. 	395 North Drive, Fairburn, GA 30213 
 
Within 30 days immediately following final adoption of this section, the city manager shall give written notification of such district designation to each owner at such address as last shown in the records of the Spalding County Tax Commissioner for the mailing of tax notices, apprising the owner of the necessity for obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the property listed within the historic district, and of the right of aggrieved property owners, within 30 days of receiving such notice, to file a petition in the Superior Court of Spalding County, Georgia, for declaratory judgment as to the appropriateness of such designation. 
(Ord. No. 07-12, § 1, 10-23-2007)  
Sec. 55-5. - Certificate of appropriateness required; building permits. 
(a)  After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of the historic property or of a structure, site, or work of art within the historic district shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof unless and until application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. Such application shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, or plans as may be required by the commission. 
(b)  In all cases where a certificate of appropriateness is required by this chapter, the city manager or his designated representative charged with issuance of building permits, shall not issue any building permit for work of any nature that may materially change the appearance of the historic property or structure, unless the certificate is granted. The rejection of a certificate of appropriateness shall be binding on the city manager or other officer charged with issuing building permits. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on a historic property, which maintenance or repair does not involve a material change in design, material, or outer appearance thereof, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other laws, ordinances, or regulations. 
(c)  The department of transportation and any contractors, including cities and counties, performing work funded by the department of transportation are exempt from this chapter. Local governments, including the city, are exempt from the requirement of obtaining certificates of appropriateness; provided, however, that local governments shall notify the commission not less than 45 days prior to beginning any undertaking within the historic district or affecting a historic property that would otherwise require a certificate of appropriateness and allow the commission an opportunity to comment. 
(Ord. No. 02-14, § 1(5), 8-27-2002)  
Sec. 55-6. - Certificate of appropriateness; applications; procedure; appeals. 
(a)  Prior to reviewing an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected materially by the application and shall give the applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. In cases where the commission deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the application. 
(b)  The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change in appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the esthetic, historical, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural value and significance; architectural style; general design, arrangement, texture, and material of the architectural features involved; and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style and pertinent features of other structures in the immediate neighborhood. 
(c)  In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or uses having no effect on exterior architectural features. Present and intended land use of a historic property shall not be a factor in the commission's determination. 
(d)  The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property or of a structure, site, or work of art located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Failure of the commission to act within the 45 day period shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(e)  In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so in writing and shall transmit a record of such action and the reasons therefor, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(f)  Where such action is authorized in writing by the board of commissioners and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, the commission may enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise of the property or any interest therein. 
(g)  Where, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon any owner of any specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to the provisions or to interpret the meaning of the provision so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided, however, that such variance, modification, or interpretation shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the provisions so that the architectural or historical integrity or character of the property shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will in its judgment best fulfill the purpose of this article. 
(h)  The commission shall keep a record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness and of all its proceedings. 
(i)  Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the board of commissioners and such governing body may, after conducting an administrative hearing, approve, modify and approve, or reject the determination made by the commission if the governing body finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. The decision of the board of commissioners shall be made in writing, stating its findings and reasons, with a copy served upon all interested parties. The decision of the board of commissioners shall be final. Aggrieved parties may, within 30 days of a final decision, petition the Superior Court of Spalding County, Georgia, for a writ of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 02-14, § 1(6), 8-27-2002)  
Sec. 55-7. - Building permits to conform to certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  Building permits issued based upon a certificate of appropriateness shall be conformed to the requirements of such certificate. A certificate of appropriateness shall expire six months after its date of issuance unless a building permit is issued and work is commenced and diligently pursued. In the event work is not performed in accordance with the certificate, the city manager or his designated representative charged with construction standards and enforcement shall issue a stop work order and all work shall cease. 
(b)  The city manager shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(Ord. No. 02-14, § 1(7), 8-27-2002)  
Sec. 55-8. - Enforcement; penalties and fines. 
Any person who owns or occupies a building or structure that has been designated a historic property or that is located within a historic district, who shall intentionally do anything prohibited by this chapter, or who shall willfully fail to do anything required by this chapter that results in a material change in appearance of the designated property shall be cited to appear before the municipal court for violation of this chapter and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. Each day a violation continues after initial citation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 02-14, § 1(8), 8-27-2002)  
Chapter 57 - MEDIA PRODUCTIONS 
 
Sec. 57-1. - Purpose. 
It is the public policy of the State of Georgia to market the state as a location for media productions, recognizing the economic impact this industry provides, as well as the tourism it generates for local jurisdictions, such as the City of Griffin. The city is further fortunate to have a diverse number of unique locations to attract movies and television productions to the city. 
Despite the many positive benefits a media production may offer, certain inconveniences may result if the production company and city cannot work in concert to assure minimum standards are met and to assure a thoroughly-planned production schedule is followed. These concerns are best addressed through a regulatory permit. 
(Ord. No. 12-10, § 1, 8-28-2012)  
Sec. 57-2. - Scope of coverage. 
The permit required by this chapter shall be required for all movies, television or video series, pilots, feature films and documentaries, commercials, music videos, photo shoots, infomercials and public service announcements, whether the final product is intended for commercial use or not, unless the activity shall wholly occur on private property within an otherwise licensed facility (such as a film or television studio). Any media production on public property, intended to be closed to participation by the public, or restricting access to public property or facilities normally accessible by the public, shall require a permit. For purposes of this chapter, media production activity shall include areas designated for parking of trucks and equipment on public or private property, base camps used during the production activity, and food service areas. No public highway, street or road shall have its public access restricted or limited except by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-10, § 1, 8-28-2012)  
Sec. 57-3. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  This permit is allowed with conditions in all zoning districts. Whenever a permit is sought for activities in primarily residential neighborhoods, extra consideration shall be given to the conditions imposed to ameliorate as much as possible inconvenience to the residents. 
(b)  Two classifications of media production permits are allowed: 
(1)  Low-impact activities are generally those activities having an intended duration of no more than 14 consecutive days, with little or no disruption to normal and customary use of the site and adjacent and nearby properties and uses; and 
(2)  High-impact activities are generally those activities having an intended duration of 15 or more consecutive days, which do not comply with the low-impact standards of this chapter, and/or will disrupt normal and customary use of the site and adjacent and nearby properties and uses. Any filming involving automobile crashes or chases, gunfire, pyrotechnics, explosives, the use of aircraft, stunts, and similar activities are examples of high-impact activities. 
(c)  General standards. Prior to making application for a permit, it shall be incumbent on the applicant to meet with the city manager and director of public safety, or their designees, to review locations and the general scope of activities planned during the production. A copy of the script shall be made available, upon request, to allow the city staff to better understand the applicant's needs. 
The following general standards shall apply to all permits: 
(1)  No tents, temporary sanitary facilities, trash collection, or food service facilities shall be located within 100 feet of the property line of any property used for residential use, unless the owner or tenant gives written consent; 
(2)  Tents, depending on their square footage, and other temporary structures may require a separate building permit from the city; any food preparation or food service provided at the location shall require a food service permit from the county health department, or evidence of exemption; 
(3)  Lighting for filming should be oriented away from adjacent or nearby properties as much as possible and shall not interfere with the safe movement of vehicular traffic; 
(4)  Temporary signage must be approved in writing, in advance, prior to erection, by the development director, or his designee; approval of temporary signage is conditioned restoration of permanent signage following completion of the media activity; 
(5)  No regulatory traffic control signage within a public right-of-way shall be removed without the prior written consent of the chief of police; 
(6)  No modification to any existing traffic signage, street light, traffic control device or other officially-installed facility or improvement shall be made without prior consent of the chief of police; 
(7)  No street, road, alley, or sidewalk shall be closed, barricaded or other obstruction erected within a public right-of-way, and no access shall be denied or restricted to public or private property or facilities unless the closure or restriction is approved as a condition of the permit; reasonable alternative access shall be arranged whenever possible; 
(8)  No trees, vegetation (including grasses), or ornamental shrubs shall be cut or removed from public property without prior written consent of the city in the permit, based upon an agreed landscape restoration plan. A land disturbance permit may be separately required depending upon the nature and extent of the activity. 
(9)  Traffic management plan. The applicant shall submit to the chief of police a traffic management plan to address traffic flow in the vicinity of the location where production activity is to occur, even if normal traffic flow is not to be obstructed or interrupted. Detours shall be determined and approved by the chief of police; temporary traffic control devices and signage as required by the manual on uniform traffic control devices shall be provided at the sole expense of the applicant; the city fire marshal shall also review and approve such plan. 
(10)  The City of Griffin shall be listed in the production credits for all permits required. 
(Ord. No. 12-10, § 1, 8-28-2012)  
Sec. 57-4. - Low-impact activity standards. 
In addition to the general standards, the following minimum standards shall be met in order to be permitted as a low-impact activity. Due to the varying requirements of media productions and nature of the industry, these standards are not intended to be all inclusive and additional conditions may be reasonably imposed, as warranted, to minimize anticipated adverse effects. 
(a)  No permit shall be effective for more than 14 consecutive dates from its date of issuance. Permits may be extended by the city manager, for reasonable cause, provided a daily filming fee shall apply. A single application shall include all locations for the same production within the city. Application shall be made no less than ten business days prior to the first scheduled event or day of filming. The permit shall be available, on location, at all times while production activity is occurring and shown to city inspectors upon request. 
(b)  Normal hours of activity shall be 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. daily; all preparation and wrap-up shall occur within one hour of this time frame. Noise shall be kept to a minimum. 
(c)  No street closure, obstruction or interference with normal traffic flow, including pedestrian use of sidewalks and public rights-of-way shall occur, including use of on-street parking spaces or parking in alleys or side streets. 
(d)  Facilities and locations to be used for base camp, food service, and parking shall be approved as a condition of the permit; any other required permit(s) shall be obtained prior to issuance of the permit under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-10, § 1, 8-28-2012)  
Sec. 57-5. - High-impact activity standards. 
In addition to the general standards, the following minimum standards shall be met in order to be permitted as a high-impact activity. Due to the varying requirements of media productions and nature of the industry, these standards are not intended to be all inclusive and additional conditions may be reasonably imposed, as warranted, to minimize anticipated adverse effects. 
(a)  No permit shall issue for a term of less than 15 consecutive days from its date of issuance; the duration of the permit shall be based upon an agreed production schedule submitted by the applicant. Permits may be extended by the city manager, for reasonable cause, provided a daily filming fee shall apply. A single application shall include all locations for the same production within the city. Application shall be made no less than ten business days prior to the first scheduled event or day of filming. The permit shall be available, on location, at all times while activity is occurring and shown to city inspectors upon request. 
(b)  Normal hours of activity shall be 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. daily; all preparation and wrap-up shall occur within one hour of this time frame. Noise shall be kept to a minimum; any activity occurring outside of the above hours involving planned noises in excess of 65 db at a distance of 100 feet from the point of origin shall be addressed in the application. If activity is planned within 500 feet of a residential area outside the hours specified, or will involve noises in excess of 65 db, notice shall be given by the best means available to residents as far in advance as reasonable. 
(c)  Street closure(s), obstruction or interference with normal traffic flow, including pedestrian use of sidewalks and public rights-of-way shall be detailed in the application, including any use of on-street parking spaces and/or parking in alleys or side streets. 
(d)  The city will not intervene on behalf of any permittee or negotiate access rights to private property with property owners; the permittee is expected to deal directly with private property owners for required permission and consent. 
(e)  Facilities and locations to be used for base camp, food service, and parking shall be approved as a condition of the permit; any other required permit(s) shall be obtained prior to issuance of the permit under this chapter. 
(f)  Based upon the proposed scope of production activity and in consideration of any potential danger to the safety, health and welfare of the community, particularly private property and residents near the location, the chief of police and/or city fire marshal may require on-site security (qualified private security or use of off-duty law enforcement officers) and/or may require personnel and equipment be placed on standby for portions of the high-impact activity at the expense of the applicant. The application shall detail the planned time, place, and manner of any of the following production activities: pyrotechnics, demolition, discharge of firearms or other weapons, motor vehicle chases, physical stunts, and similar actions. 
(Ord. No. 12-10, § 1, 8-28-2012)  
Sec. 57-6. - Application and permit procedure. 
(a)  Applications. All applications shall be made in writing on forms provided by the city. Applications shall be submitted in duplicate originals. No application shall be deemed accepted unless accompanied by payment of the requisite application fee in U.S. funds. 
(b)  Every application shall state the name and contact information of a responsible representative of the applicant, who shall be available at all times during actual production activity within the city and for a period of not less than one year thereafter; more than one point of contact may be specified. 
(c)  The application shall contain a detailed narrative of the scope of production activities, and include drawings, maps or plats to illustrate locations, property boundaries, existing material improvements, planned temporary improvements, curb cuts and driveways, adjoining streets, traffic patterns, and similar information helpful to assess the impact of the proposed activity. 
(d)  When activity is to occur in or near residential areas, personal notice of intent to secure a permit and the place, date and time of the proposed media activity shall be provided by the applicant, within five days of filing the application; to the extent feasible, written acknowledgment of the notice shall be obtained from the resident or resident's agent. For purposes of this section, all residential properties within 500 feet of the outside boundaries of the location(s) where production activity is to occur should be notified. 
(e)  A signed indemnification and hold harmless agreement, in a form acceptable to the city attorney, shall accompany the application, together with a certificate of insurance naming the city as an additional insured. The minimum limits of insurance coverage shall not be less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence. 
(f)  All applications shall be filed with the city manager, or his designee, who may require such additional information as needed to assess the proposed extent and intensity of the production within the city. 
(g)  Permits. All applications shall be approved with specific terms and conditions, or denied, by the city manager, or his designee, in writing. If approved, the city shall issue a permit to the applicant, in writing, with all terms and conditions clearly set forth therein. Low-impact activity applications shall be approved within ten business days of a complete application and high-impact activity applications shall be approved within ten business days of a complete application. If the application is denied, the city manager, or his designee, shall state, in writing, the reason(s) for denial. An aggrieved applicant may appeal to the board of commissioners at the next regular meeting occurring more than five days following receipt of a written denial. 
(h)  Permits may be denied, in whole or in part, due to prior scheduled events or activities sanctioned or permitted by the city under other provisions of this Code. 
(i)  Any material variation from the approved scope of work permitted shall be grounds for permit revocation, unless the permit is modified in advance by the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 12-10, § 1, 8-28-2012)  
Sec. 57-7. - Fees and waivers. 
(a)  Application fees for low-impact activity permits shall be $100.00 and the application fee for a high-impact activity permit shall be $250.00. Application fees are non-refundable and must be paid, in full, at time of application. 
(b)  Daily permit fees of $100.00 for each calendar day on which production activity physically occurs within the city shall be paid upon the last day of scheduled activity; if a production is scheduled for a duration in excess of a calendar month, the accrued daily fee shall be due and payable on the last day of each month in which production activity occurred. 
(c)  Additional fees and charges may be assessed based upon specific requirements, including fees for the monitoring of public safety or special services by a city department, based upon labor, time and equipment necessary to provide the service. When using city-owned buildings or property other than public road rights-of-way, for production activities, a separate rental fee or charge may be negotiated. 
(d)  Application fees and daily permit fees for use of city services or facilities may be reduced or waived for charitable or non-profit organizations holding § 501(c) status from the I.R.S., or for other governmental agencies. All waivers shall require approval of the city manager. 
(e)  Reduction or waiver of daily permit fees may be approved by the board of commissioners for commercial productions providing a greater than normal economic benefit to the community, as determined on a case-by-case basis. 
(Ord. No. 12-10, § 1, 8-28-2012)  
Chapter 58 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-17, § 1, adopted Oct. 25, 2016 , repealed the former Ch. 58, §§ 58-1—58-13, and enacted a new Ch. 58 as set out herein. The former Ch. 58 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1968, §§ 15-1, 15-8—15-10, 15-14—15-16, 15-29, 15-38; Ord. No. 02-13, § 1, adopted July 23, 2002; Ord. No. 07-06, § 1, adopted August 28, 2007; Ord. No. 12-07, § 1, adopted July 24, 2012; Ord. No. 15-16, § 1, adopted Nov. 10, 2015 . 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 38; traffic and vehicles, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 58-1. - Damaging, tampering with utility poles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to mutilate any of the electric light or telephone poles erected or other public property in the city, either by cutting or by pasting or by taking bills, posters, or cards on the electric light or telephone poles, or break any insulators, globes, or wires belonging on such poles. 
( Ord. No. 16-17, § 1, 10-25-2016 )  
Sec. 58-2. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  The term "disorderly conduct" shall mean the commission of such words, acts, and conduct upon public property, upon private property that is open to the general public, or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which under ordinary circumstances will naturally tend to disturb the public peace, tranquility, or decorum, scandalize the community, or shock the public sense of morality. Any person who engages in an act of disorderly conduct shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the following specific acts and conduct shall be deemed a violation of this section: 
(1)  Fighting by two or more persons to the disturbance of public tranquility; 
(2)  Use of obscene, vulgar, opprobrious, or abusive language, without provocation, which by its very utterance tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace; that is to say, words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to another person in the presence of the speaker, tend to provoke violent resentment; that is, words commonly called "fighting words"; 
(3)  Being and appearing in an intoxicated condition which is outwardly made manifest by boisterousness; by indecent condition or act such as to offend sentiments of delicacy and modesty universally recognized in civilized society; or by loud, vulgar, profane, opprobrious, abusive or unbecoming language, which by its very utterance tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace; 
(4)  Any act which may reasonably be expected to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, gathering, parade, or procession; 
(5)  Obstruction of any highway, road, street, sidewalk, passage, or parking area in such a way as to render it impassable without reasonable inconvenience or hazard and the failure or refusal to remove such obstruction upon being lawfully commanded to do so by a police officer; 
(6)  Engaging in boisterous, noisy, drunken, or carousing acts after receiving oral warning from a police officer that such activities have caused complaint or annoyance to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prevent the peaceful assembly of citizens in a lawful manner, the free exercise of protected speech, nor shall the mere possibility of disorder justify the exclusion of persons otherwise entitled to be present. 
(d)  Any person charged with a violation of this section shall have the right, upon written demand filed with the clerk of the municipal court and a copy thereof served upon the city attorney, to a jury trial, upon a finding by the municipal court that probable cause exists to bind the case over to the appropriate state court. 
( Ord. No. 16-17, § 1, 10-25-2016 )  
Sec. 58-3. - Discharging firearms, air rifles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to discharge firearms, air rifles, or pellet guns within the city except as provided for in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The chief of police may issue a special written permit to a citizen over the age of 21 years to firearms used under this section shall be limited to a .410 shotgun with 2 ½ inch shell with #8 shot or higher, or a .22 rifle using scatter or varmint shot only. The permit shall be for a limited time not to exceed 30 days and for use only upon the applicant's property. Not more than two permits in any one calendar year shall be issued for any one property location. The permit may be revoked for cause by the chief of police at any time without notice. No person holding such permit shall at any time discharge such firearm in the direction of any street, public way, house or property, or person of another. No person shall discharge such firearm at night or on Sunday or at other times so as to work a nuisance or cause annoyance of other citizens in the use and enjoyment of their property. The granting of this permit shall not relieve the permit holder from complying with all applicable state statutes. 
(c)  The application for such a permit shall be signed by the applicant and give his correct name, age, and address, the use intended, and the period and place desired for such proposed use. No person shall give false information in his written application. No such permit shall be issued by the chief of police to any person who has been convicted of a felony, assault of an aggravated nature, or crimes involving the person or property of another. The aforesaid application and a duplicate of the permit, if issued, shall be kept of record in the office of the chief of police. The permit shall be issued by the chief of police or his designee upon payment of a fee as set out in the schedule of fees and charges. Any person who is refused a permit may appeal in writing to the board of commissioners. 
( Ord. No. 16-17, § 1, 10-25-2016 )  
Sec. 58-4. - Loitering. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding citizens under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property within the vicinity. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in loitering within the city. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Immediate concern for the safety of persons or property may arise from observing a person or persons remaining idle in essentially one location, whether within or without a motor vehicle, having no obvious purpose or intent. 
(c)  Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a police officer shall, prior to arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel an alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence of conduct. 
(d)  This section shall not preclude a police officer from arresting any individual for criminal trespass where such individual knowingly and without authority remains on public or private property after being lawfully notified to depart. 
( Ord. No. 16-17, § 1, 10-25-2016 )  
Sec. 58-5. - School crossing guards. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to comply with any lawful signal or direction of a uniformed school crossing guard employed by the police department. 
( Ord. No. 16-17, § 1, 10-25-2016 )  
Sec. 58-6. - Abandoned iceboxes, airtight containers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to store, cast aside or junk in any place accessible to the public, any icebox, refrigerator, freezer box or locker box having an outside lock or catch, without first removing therefrom such outside lock or catch, or so fastening the door to such icebox, refrigerator, freezer box or locker box that such door cannot be opened without a key or without tools or mechanical devices. The provisions hereof are not intended to apply to any icebox, refrigerator, freezer box or locker box that is in constant use and is located in the premises or in the place of business of a person. 
( Ord. No. 16-17, § 1, 10-25-2016 )  
Sec. 58-7. - False alarms. 
It shall be an offense against the city for any person to cause or allow more than two false burglar or fire alarms to be reported to the city during any calendar month. Each such false alarm in excess of two during any month shall be punishable by a penalty of $40.00. A new alarm system shall be allowed a 30-day grace period from the date of its initial installation before the penalties of this section shall apply. 
( Ord. No. 16-17, § 1, 10-25-2016 )  
Sec. 58-9. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
Section 15-20 relating to selling on streets, section 15-21 relating to distribution of handbills, and section 15-35 relating to the use of sound amplifiers in the 1968 Code are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
( Ord. No. 16-17, § 1, 10-25-2016 )  
Sec. 58-10. - Littering. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare through the regulation and control of litter. The objectives of this section are: 
a.  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property; 
b.  Curb thereby the desecration of the beauty of the city and harm to the public health, safety and general welfare and degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(2)  Applicability. This section shall apply to all public and private property within the city. 
(3)  Compatibility with other regulations. This section is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. The requirements of this section should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this section imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(4)  Severability. If the provisions of any subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this section shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this section. 
(b)  Definitions. 
Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, cigarette butts, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal containers, glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51(6). 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; and body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forests. 
(c)  Prohibition against littering public or private property or waters. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the city or any waters in this jurisdiction unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; or 
(2)  The litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property. 
(d)  Vehicle loads causing litter. No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of such load onto the roadway. 
(e)  Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(1)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this section. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this section, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this subsection (e) or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(2)  Evidence. 
a.  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this section, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this section. 
b.  Whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this ordinance is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this ordinance. 
c.  Whenever the home delivery of newspapers, whether such newspapers are delivered based upon subscription or distributed in residential areas without subscription or charge, by placing or throwing the newspaper on the ground (public right of way or private property fronting the residence from the street) and not by placing it in a paper tube or other device intended for delivery, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that the publisher of the newspaper has committed the offense of littering in violation of this section if the resident has not picked up the newspaper within three calendar days of its delivery unless the newspaper is retrieved by the publisher within five calendar days of its delivery. 
d.  It shall be a rebuttable presumption that the owner or tenant in possession of private property has committed the offense of littering in violation of this section, if the owner or tenant has willfully failed or refused to remove litter dumped, deposited, thrown or left on the private property within five calendar days after notice by a law enforcement or code enforcement officer of the city. 
(3)  Penalties. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
a.  By a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,000.00; and 
b.  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (1) above, the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the city; and 
c.  1.  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
2.  In the sound discretion of the judge of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
d.  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this section. 
(4)  Enforcement. All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
( Ord. No. 16-17, § 1, 10-25-2016 )  
Sec. 58-11. - Public indecency. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Nude means the showing or display of the nipple and areola of the female breast, any portion of the human genitals, pubic hair, anus, vulva, or lower 2/3 of the cleft of the buttocks; and even if covered, the male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(2)  Operator means and includes the owner, tenant in possession, license holder, operating manager, or person in charge of any premises deemed a "public place" under this section. 
(3)  Public place includes all outdoor places owned by or open to the general public, and all buildings and enclosed places owned by or open to the general public, including places of entertainment, restaurants, clubs, theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party rooms, or facilities limited to specific members, restricted to adults or patrons invited to attend, whether or not an admission charge is levied. All business establishments licensed by the City of Griffin to sell, serve or distribute alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises shall be deemed public places for purposes of this section. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly and intentionally engage in or perform in any public place within this city an act of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law, or show, display, or exhibit in any public place any film, still picture, electronic or visual reproduction or image of any sexual act or conduct prohibited by law, including any simulation thereof. 
(c)  No person shall knowingly and intentionally appear nude in any public place within this city. To comply with this section, persons must, at a minimum, while appearing in public, wear a full and opaque covering which completely covers all of those specified anatomical areas of the human body defining the term "nude". Attire which is insufficient to comply with this requirement includes, but is not limited to, those items commonly known as "G-strings", "T-bottoms" or "T-back", dental floss, and thongs. Body paint, body dye, tattoos, latex, tape, or similar substance applied to the skin surface, any substance that can be washed off the skin, or any substance designed to simulate or which by its nature simulates the appearance of the anatomical area beneath it, is not a "full and opaque covering" as required by this section. 
(d)  No person shall knowingly and intentionally touch, caress or fondle any of the specified anatomical areas of the human body as defined in this section, either of themselves or of another person, in any public place within this city. 
(e)  No operator of any public premises shall knowingly permit, offer or allow any person to commit an act prohibited by this section. Where erotic dancing is offered in an establishment licensed for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises, dancers shall be confined to a stage, elevated at least 24 inches above surrounding floor height. All patrons shall remain seated at least 36 inches from the nearest edge of the stage. Patrons shall not "tip" dancers by giving tips directly to the dancers while performing or by inserting tips into the full and opaque coverings of those specified anatomical areas of the dancer's body defining the term "nude". Physical contact between patrons and dancers, such as "lap dancing", is prohibited. 
(f)  The prohibition set forth in subsection(c) shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any child under seven years of age; or 
(2)  Any female exposing a breast in the process of breastfeeding a child under two years of age; provided, however, the prohibitions set forth in subsections(b), (c) and (d) shall not apply in any adult business establishment licensed under article II of chapter 10 of this Code, or to any mainstream theatrical productions, films or videos having arguable artistic value, and not a guise or pretense to exploit nudity for commercial gain or profit. 
( Ord. No. 16-17, § 1, 10-25-2016 )  
Sec. 58-12. - Crowding, obstructing, or incommoding. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this section for a person, alone or in concert with others: 
(1)  To crowd, obstruct, or incommode: 
(A)  The use of any street, avenue, alley, road, highway, or sidewalk; 
(B)  The entrance of any public or private building or enclosure; 
(C)  The use of or passage through any public building or public conveyance; or 
(D)  The passage through or within any public park; and 
(b)  To continue or resume the crowding, obstructing, or incommoding after being verbally instructed by a law enforcement officer to cease the crowding, obstructing, or incommoding. 
(c)  As used in this section, the phrase "crowd, obstruct, or incommode" is intended to regulate conduct that physically impedes the public's shared use of common public spaces. This section is intended to give law enforcement officers the reasonable power to defuse situations that actually disturb the public, and should never be used for harassment or annoyance of persons in situations where an officer has not observed a physical blocking or hindering of another person's ability to pass through or use a common space. 
(d)  It shall not be a violation of this section for a person, alone or in concert with others, to engage in a demonstration in an area where it is otherwise lawful to demonstrate, regardless of whether a permit for such demonstration has been issued by the city under Article III of Chapter 74 of this Code. For purposes of this section, the term "demonstration" means marching, congregating, standing, sitting, lying down, parading, demonstrating, or patrolling by one or more persons, with or without signs, for the purpose of persuading one or more individuals to a particular point of view, or to protest some action, attitude, or belief. 
(e)  Any person who violates this section shall, upon conviction, be imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or fined an amount not to exceed $500.00; upon payment of said fine, the time for which sentenced shall be suspended. 
( Ord. No. 19-10, § 1, 6-11-2019 ) 
Editor's note— Prior to reenactment by Ord. No. 19-10, § 1, adopted June 11, 2019 , Ord. No. 17-14, § 1, adopted August 22, 2017 , repealed § 58-12, which pertained to aggressive panhandling and derived from Ord. No. 16-17, § 1, adopted Oct. 25, 2016 .  
Chapter 62 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 98. 
State Law reference— Power to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5); establishment of recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.; Georgia state games commission, O.C.G.A. § 50-12-40 et seq.; state parks, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-1 et seq.; recreation boards, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-5; authority of municipality to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation grounds and buildings used for sports, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 62-1—62-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL GOLF COURSE RULES AND REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 62-31. - Conduct on municipal golf course. 
In order to ensure that the municipal golf course pro shop and locker room are maintained for the maximum use and enjoyment of all citizens, the following rules and regulations are hereby established and ordained: 
(1)  All persons desiring to play golf on the municipal golf course must first register at the clubhouse with the course superintendent or his assistant and pay the regular green fee or membership dues. All golfers on the course must display a membership card or a paid ticket to the golf pro or his agent upon request. 
(2)  Conduct should always be beyond reproach. Misbehavior will not be tolerated. 
(3)  No person shall be allowed to play golf except when wearing proper golf shoes. 
(4)  No person shall be allowed to play golf with fewer than seven clubs. 
(5)  Reserved. 
(Code 1968, § 16-2; Ord. No. 12-01, § 1, 6-12-2012)  
Sec. 62-32. - Golf course trespassing. 
It shall be an offense against the city for any person to enter upon or remain upon the municipal golf course unless such person is engaged in the play of golf and has paid the requisite green fees, provided notice has been conspicuously posted upon the golf course forbidding such entry and that violators will be prosecuted. 
(Code 1968, § 16-3)  
Chapter 63 - PAWNSHOPS AND DEALERS 
 
Sec. 63-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the term: 
Pawnshop means any business wherein a substantial part thereof is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn, consignment, trade or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise, or any kind of personal property whatsoever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or other legal entity however organized. 
Scrap metal processor means any person engaged in the business of buying scrap vehicles, automotive parts, or other metallic waste, with the intent to process such material for resale as scrap or in bulk, by melting, reforming, or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 9-25-2007)  
Sec. 63-2. - Purpose; legislative intent. 
It is hereby declared to be within the public welfare for this city to impede the sale of stolen property by requiring pawnshop operators and scrap metal processors within the city to timely post electronically information obtained from pledges and sellers in a format available to and usable by law enforcement agencies. 
(Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 9-25-2007)  
Sec. 63-3. - Records and information to be recorded. 
Every person engaged as a pawnshop operator or scrap metal processor within the city shall secure from every person from whom he receives any used or previously owned tangible personal property, whether by purchase or through pledge, trade, pawn or exchange, the following: 
(a)  Government-issued photo identification card, such as a driver's license, military identification card, state identification card, or passport; 
(b)  The name, address, telephone number, race, sex, height, weight, date of birth, and a social security or driver's license number; 
(c)  A digital photograph clearly showing a frontal view of the subject's face (digital images shall be labeled with the date and time of the transaction and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption); 
(d)  The fingerprint of the right hand index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger available on the right hand shall be obtained with a notation of the exact finger printed; and 
(e)  Written description of property or item received, including serial number or other identifying marks, if available, and digital photograph of property or item, labeled with date and time of transaction. 
The operator or dealer shall maintain the above information, digital photographs, and fingerprint for a period of three years and make the same available to law enforcement personnel upon request. 
(ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 9-25-2007)  
Sec. 63-4. - Report to police; required format. 
Every operator or dealer located within the city shall make a computer-generated daily report, in such format as prescribed by the chief of police, of all transactions that occurred during the 24-hour period, ending at 9:00 p.m. on the date of the report. A report shall be made for each day the operator or dealer transacts business. Daily reports shall be filed electronically by posting to a law enforcement web site designated by the chief of police. Where technological problems prevent posting the daily report electronically, a printed, typed or legibly handwritten report shall be delivered to the police department in lieu thereof. 
(Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 9-25-2007)  
Sec. 63-5. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person who willfully and intentionally fails to obtain the information and maintain the records, digital photographs and fingerprints, or to file the daily reports required by this chapter shall, be guilty of an offense and punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, incarceration not to exceed six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 9-25-2007)  
Sec. 63-6. - Exemptions. 
Inasmuch as O.C.G.A. § 10-1-363 clearly expresses the intent of the general assembly to preempt any local regulation of secondary metal recyclers, as defined at O.C.G.A. § 10-1-350, except as expressly permitted thereby, secondary metal recyclers shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter. Secondary metal recyclers shall be subject to the land use and zoning regulations contained in the city's Land Development Code and subject to the imposition of an occupational tax in accordance with article II of chapter 26 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 10-03, § 1, 5-25-2010; Ord. No. 12-06, § 1, 7-24-2012)  
Chapter 64 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-07, § 1, adopted Dec. 9, 2008, deleted Arts. I—XX, which pertained to personnel and derived from Ord. No. 04-27, §§ 1.1-1.5, 2.1, 2.2, 3.1A-3.1I, 4.1, 4.2, 5.1-5.19, 6.1, 6.3, 6.4, 6.6, 6.7, 7.0-7.6, 8.1, 9.1, 9.2, 10.1-10.4, 11.1-11.3, 12.1-12.15, 12.7, 12.20-12.22, 13.1, 14.1-14.6, 15.1-15.5, 17.1-17.6, 18.1-18.4, 19.1-19.3, 20.1 adopted Dec. 14, 2004. 
Cross reference— Retirement benefits, app. B. 
 
ARTICLES I—XX. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 64-1—64-319. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXI. - GEORGIA MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES BENEFIT SYSTEM DEFINED BENEFIT PLAN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-16, § 1, adopted Nov. 28, 2017 , amended Art. XXI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. XXI, §§ 64-32—64-335, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 05-04, adopted April 12, 2005; Ord. No. 11-08, adopted Oct. 11, 2011. The Addendum referenced in this article, is not set out herein, but is available for inspection at the city offices. 
 
Sec. 64-320. - GMEBS defined benefit retirement plan—Adoption agreement. 
(a)  Administrator. 
Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System 
201 Pryor Street, SW 
Atlanta, Georgia 30303 
Telephone: 404-688-0472 
Facsimile: 404-577-6663 
(b)  Adopting employer. City of Griffin, Georgia. 
(c)  Governing authority. 
Name: Board of Commissioners of the City of Griffin 
Address: P.O. Box T, Griffin, GA 30224-0046 
Address: 100 South Hill Street, Griffin, GA 30223 
Phone: (770) 229-6408 
Facsimile: (678) 692-0403 
(d)  Plan representative. To represent governing authority in all communications with GMEBS and employees (See Section 2.49 of Master Plan). 
Name: Human Resources Director 
Address: P.O. Box T, Griffin Georgia 30224-0046 
Address: 100 South Hill Street, Griffin, GA 30223 
Phone: (770) 229-6408 
Facsimile: (678) 692-0403 
( Ord. No. 17-16, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Sec. 64-321. - Pension committee. 
Members should be designated by position. If not, members of pension committee shall be determined in accordance with Article XIV of Master Plan. 
Position: Chairperson of the Board of Commissioners or Commissioner designee 
Position: City Manager 
Position: City Attorney 
Pension Committee Secretary: 
Human Resources Director 
Address: P.O. Box T, Griffin, GA 30224-0046 
Address: 100 South Hill Street, Griffin, GA 30223 
Phone: (770) 229-6408 
Facsimile: (678) 692-0403 
( Ord. No. 17-16, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Sec. 64-322. - Type of adoption. 
This adoption agreement is for the following purpose. This is an amendment and restatement of the adoption agreement previously adopted by the employer, as follows: 
To update the Plan to comply with PPA, HEART, WRERA, and other applicable federal laws and guidance, and to make the following amendments to the adoption agreement: 1) To provide for participation in the Plan by elected or appointed members of the Governing Authority who hold such office on or after November 29, 2017 (see adoption agreement, pp. 5—6); 2) Establish the monthly Normal Retirement benefit formula for elected or appointed members of the Governing Authority in such office on or after November 29, 2017 as $25.00 a month per year of Service as an elected or appointed member of the Governing Authority (see adoption agreement, p. 23); 3) Increase the multiplier for the monthly Normal Retirement benefit formula for all Eligible Regular Employees in Service on or after July 1, 2018, from 1.5% to 2.0% (see adoption agreement, p. 21); 4) Eliminate the COLA for all Participants initially employed or who initially take office on or after July 1, 2018 (see adoption agreement, pp. 27—28); 5) Require Employee Contributions at the rate of 2.0% for all Participants who are in Service with the City on or after July 1, 2018 (see adoption agreement, pp. 32-33 and General Addendum, subsection 15(o)); and 6) with respect to Participants who Terminate employment on or after November 29, 2017, eliminate the age 22 cutoff for pre-retirement death benefit payments to a Participant's pre-retirement beneficiary who is a Child (see General Addendum subsection 15(f). 
( Ord. No. 17-16, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Sec. 64-323. - Effective date. 
NOTE: This adoption agreement and any addendum, with the accompanying Master Plan Document, is designed to comply with Internal Revenue Code Section 401(a), as applicable to a governmental qualified defined benefit plan, and is part of the GMEBS Defined Benefit Retirement Plan. Plan provisions designed to comply with certain provisions of the Pension Protection Act of 2006 ("PPA"); the Heroes Earnings Assistance and Relief Tax Act of 2008 ("HEART"); and the Worker, Retiree, and Employer Recovery Act of 2008 ("WRERA"); and Plan provisions designed to comply with certain provisions of additional changes in federal law and guidance from the Internal Revenue Service under Internal Revenue Service Notice 2012-76 (the 2012 Cumulative List) are effective as of the applicable effective dates set forth in the adoption agreement and Master Plan Document. By adopting this adoption agreement, with its accompanying Master Plan Document, the adopting employer is adopting a plan document intended to comply with Internal Revenue Code Section 401(a), as updated by PPA, HEART, WRERA, and the 2012 Cumulative List with the applicable effective dates. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in the Master Document or in this adoption agreement, the effective date of this restatement shall be November 29, 2017. 
This Plan is adopted as an amendment and restatement of the employer's preexisting GMEBS adoption agreement, which became effective on November 1, 2011 
The employer's first adoption agreement became effective April 16, 2005. The Employer's GMEBS Plan was originally effective April 16, 2005. Originally a non-GMEBS Plan, the Employer's non-GMEBS Plan was originally effective March 27, 1941. 
( Ord. No. 17-16, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Sec. 64-324. - Plan year. 
Plan Year means employer fiscal year commencing July 1—June 30. 
( Ord. No. 17-16, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Sec. 64-325. - Classes of eligible employees. 
Only employees of the adopting employer who meet the Master Plan's definition of "employee" may be covered under the adoption agreement. Eligible employees shall not include non-governmental employees, independent contractors, leased employees, nonresident aliens, or any other ineligible individuals, and this Section 9 must not be completed in a manner that violates the "exclusive benefit rule" of Internal Revenue Code Section 401(a)(2). 
(a)  Eligible regular employees. Regular Employees include Employees, other than elected or appointed members of the governing authority or Municipal Legal Officers, who are regularly employed in the services of the adopting employer. Subject to the other conditions of the Master Plan and the adoption agreement, the following Regular Employees are eligible to participate in the Plan: 
All regular employees except for the following: Any person who is or becomes classified as a part-time, seasonal, or temporary employee under the City of Griffin's Personnel Policy (in effect as of April 16, 2005 or as amended in the future), shall not be (or no longer be) eligible to participate in the Plan. (See General Addendum subsection 15(a) for additional provisions.) 
(b)  Elected or appointed members of the governing authority. An adopting employer may elect to permit participation in the Plan by elected or appointed members of the governing authority and/or municipal legal officers, provided they otherwise meet the Master Plan's definition of "Employee" and provided they satisfy any other requirements specified by the adopting employer. Municipal legal officers to be covered must be specifically identified by position. Subject to the above conditions, the employer hereby elects the following treatment for elected and appointed officials: 
Elected or appointed members of the governing authority who hold office on or after November 29, 2017, are eligible to participate in the Plan. 
(c)  Municipal legal officers. Municipal legal officers are not eligible to participate in the Plan. 
( Ord. No. 17-16, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Sec. 64-326. - Eligibility conditions. 
(a)  Hours per week (regular employees). The adopting employer may specify a minimum number of work hours per week which are required to be scheduled by regular employees in order for them to become and remain "eligible regular employees" under the Plan. It is the responsibility of the adopting employer to determine whether these requirements are and continue to be satisfied. The employer hereby elects the following minimum hour requirement for regular employees: 30 hours/week (regularly scheduled) and at least 1,500 hours per year (regularly scheduled) (must not exceed 40 hours/week regularly scheduled). 
(b)  Months per year (regular employees). The adopting employer may specify a minimum number of work months per year which are required to be scheduled by regular employees in order for them to become and remain "eligible employees" under the Plan. It is the responsibility of the adopting employer to determine whether these requirements are and continue to be satisfied. The employer hereby elects the following minimum requirement for regular employees: At least 1,500 hours per year (regularly scheduled). 
( Ord. No. 17-16, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Sec. 64-327. - Waiting period. 
Except as otherwise provided in Section 4.02(b) of the Master Plan, eligible regular employees shall not have a waiting period before participating in the Plan. Likewise, elected or appointed members of the governing authority and municipal legal officers, if eligible to participate in the Plan, shall not have a waiting period before participating in the Plan. 
( Ord. No. 17-16, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Sec. 64-328. - Establishing participation in the plan. 
Participation in the Plan is considered mandatory for all eligible employees who satisfy the eligibility conditions specified in the adoption agreement, except as provided in Section 4.03(e) of the Master Plan. However, the employer may specify below that participation is optional for certain classes of eligible employees, including regular employees, elected or appointed members of the governing authority, municipal legal officers, city managers, and/or department heads. If participation is optional for an eligible employee, then in order to become a participant, he must make a written election to participate within 120 days after employment, election or appointment to office, or if later, the date he first becomes eligible to participate in the Plan. The election is irrevocable, and the failure to make the election within the 120 day time limit shall be deemed an irrevocable election not to participate in the Plan. 
Classes for whom participation is optional include the following eligible employees: city managers, assistant city managers, and department managers initially employed after April 16, 2005, subject to the requirements described above concerning election to participate. If a former employee who terminated prior to April 16, 2005 is rehired as a city manager, assistant city manager, or department manager after April 16, 2005, and did not previously participate under the city's defined benefit retirement plan in effect prior to April 16, 2005 (hereinafter "Predecessor Plan"), he or she may not participate under this Plan. Participation is mandatory for the city manager, assistant city manager, and department managers employed as of April 16, 2005 (referred to below as "current managers"). If a current manager has not previously participated under the Predecessor Plan, he or she shall commence participation under this Plan as of April 16, 2005. Current managers shall receive credit under this Plan for full-time service (at least 30 hours per week) performed for the city prior to April 16, 2005. 
( Ord. No. 17-16, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Sec. 64-329. - Credited service. 
In addition to current credited service the adopting employer may include as credited service the following types of service: 
(a)  Credited past service with adopting employer . Credited past service means the number of years and complete months of service with the adopting employer prior to the date an eligible employee becomes a participant which are treated as credited service under the Plan. 
(i)  Eligible employees employed on original effective date of GMEBS Plan. With respect to eligible employees who are employed by the adopting employer on the original effective date of the employer's GMEBS Plan, service with the adopting employer prior to the date the eligible employee becomes a participant (including any service prior to the effective date of the plan) shall be treated as follows: All service prior to the date the eligible employee becomes a participant shall be credited (as credited past service). 
(ii)  Previously employed, returning to service after original effective date. If an eligible employee is not employed on the original effective date of the employer's GMEBS Plan, but he returns to service with the adopting employer sometime after the effective date, his service prior to the date he becomes a participant (including any service prior the effective date) shall be treated as follows: All service prior to the date the eligible employee becomes a participant shall be credited (as credited past service), provided that after his return to employment, the eligible employee performs service equal to the period of the break in service or one (1) year, whichever is less. Any limitations imposed above with respect to eligible employees employed on the effective date shall also apply. 
Credited past service shall not include service as an elected or appointed member of the governing authority unless the participant was serving as an elected or appointed member of the governing authority or eligible regular employee on November 29, 2017. 
(iii)  Eligible employees initially employed after effective date . If an eligible employee's initial employment date is after the original effective date of the employer's GMEBS Plan, his credited past service shall include only the number of years and complete months of service from his initial employment date to the date he becomes a participant in the Plan. 
(iv)  Newly eligible classes of employees. If a previously ineligible class of employees becomes eligible to participate in the plan, the employer must specify in an addendum to this adoption agreement whether and to what extent said employees' prior service with the employer shall be treated as credited past service under the Plan. 
(b)  Prior military service. 
Note: This Section does not concern military service required to be credited under USERRA — See Section 3.02 of the Master Plan for rules on the crediting of USERRA Military Service. 
(i)  Credit for prior military service. The adopting employer may elect to treat military service rendered prior to a participant's initial employment date or reemployment date as credited service under the Plan. Unless otherwise specified by the employer under "Other Conditions" below, the term "Military Service" shall be as defined in the Master Plan. Except as otherwise required by federal or state law or under "Other Conditions" below, Military Service shall not include service which is credited under any other local, state, or federal retirement or pension plan. Military Service credited under this Section shall not include any service which is otherwise required to be credited under the Plan by federal or state law. Prior Military Service shall be treated as follows: Prior Military Service is not creditable under the Plan. 
(c)  Prior governmental service. 
Note: A Participant's prior service with other GMEBS employers shall be credited for purposes of satisfying the minimum service requirements for Vesting and eligibility for Retirement and pre-retirement death benefits as provided under Section 9.05 of the Master Plan, relating to portability service. This Section 13(C) does not need to be completed in order for Participants to receive this portability service credit pursuant to Section 9.05 of the Master Plan. 
(i)  Credit for prior governmental service . The adopting employer may elect to treat governmental service rendered prior to a participant's initial employment date or reemployment date as creditable service under the Plan. Subject to any limitations imposed by law, the term "prior governmental service" shall be as defined by the adopting employer below. The employer elects to treat prior governmental service as follows: Prior governmental service is not creditable under the Plan. 
(d)  Leave conversion for unused paid time off (e.g., Sick, Vacation, or Personal Leave). 
(i)  Credit for unused paid time off. Subject to the limitations in Section 3.01 of the Master Plan, an adopting employer may elect to treat accumulated days of unused paid time off for a terminated participant, for which the participant is not paid, as credited service. The only type of leave permitted to be credited under this provision is leave from a paid time off plan which qualifies as a bona fide sick and vacation leave plan (which may include sick, vacation or personal leave) and which the Participant may take as paid leave without regard to whether the leave is due to illness or incapacity. The credited service resulting from the conversion of unused paid time off must not be the only credited service applied toward the accrual of a normal retirement benefit under the Plan. The pension committee shall be responsible to certify to GMEBS the total amount of unused paid time off that is creditable hereunder. 
Important Note: Leave cannot be converted to credited service in lieu of receiving a cash payment. If the employer elects treating unused paid time off as credited service, the conversion to credited service will be automatic, and the participant cannot request a cash payment for the unused paid time off. 
The employer elects the following treatment of unused paid time off: unused paid time off shall not be treated as credited service. 
( Ord. No. 17-16, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Sec. 64-330. - Retirement eligibility. 
(a)  Early retirement qualifications. Early retirement qualifications are: 
(i)  Attainment of age 55. 
(ii)  Completion of 10 years of Total Credited Service. 
(b)  Normal retirement qualifications. 
Note: Please complete this Section and also list "Alternative" Normal Retirement Qualifications, if any, in Section 14.C. 
Regular Employees. Normal retirement qualifications for Regular Employees are: 
(i)  Attainment of age 65. 
(ii)  Completion of 5 years of Total Credited Service. 
(c)  Elected or appointed members of governing authority. Normal retirement qualifications for this class are: 
(i)  Attainment of age 65. 
(ii)  Completion of 5 years of Total Credited Service 
(d)  Alternative normal retirement qualifications. The employer may elect to permit participants to retire with unreduced benefits after they satisfy service and/or age requirements other than the regular normal retirement qualifications specified above. The employer hereby adopts the following alternative normal retirement qualifications: 
(1)  Alternative normal retirement qualifications: 
(i)  Attainment of age 55. 
(ii)  Completion of 25 years. 
This alternative normal retirement benefit is available to: All participants who qualify. 
A participant is not required to be in the service of the employer at the time he satisfies the above qualifications in order to qualify for this alternative normal retirement benefit. 
(2)  Other alternative normal retirement benefit for public safety employees only. 
Must specify qualifications: Rule of 75 with a minimum age of 50 . 
This alternative normal retirement benefit is available to: 
(i)  Only the following public safety employee Participants: Participants who are Police Officers or Firefighters, as defined in the Master Plan Sections 2.51 and 2.34 respectively. 
A public safety employee participant is required to be in the service of the employer at the time he satisfies the qualifications for this alternative normal retirement benefit. 
Note: "Public safety employees" are defined under the Internal Revenue Code for this purpose as employees of a state or political subdivision of a state who provide police protection, firefighting services, or emergency medical services for any area within the jurisdiction of such state or political subdivision. 
(e)  Disability benefit qualifications. Subject to the other terms and conditions of the Master Plan and except as otherwise provided in an addendum to this adoption agreement, disability retirement qualifications are based upon Social Security Administration award criteria or as otherwise provided under Section 2.23 of the Master Plan. The Disability Retirement benefit shall commence as of the participant's Disability Retirement Date under Section 2.24 of the Master Plan. 
To qualify for a disability benefit, a participant must have the following minimum number of years of Total Credited Service: The participant must have at least 5 years of Credited Service and must have become an employee of the city before July 1, 1995 (See General Addendum Section 15(b) for additional requirements). 
( Ord. No. 17-16, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Sec. 64-331. - Retirement benefit computation. 
(a)  Maximum total credited service. The number of years of Total Credited Service which may be used to calculate a benefit is not limited. 
(b)  Monthly normal retirement benefit amount. 
(1)  Regular employee formula. The monthly normal retirement benefit for Eligible Regular Employees shall be 1/12 of: 
(i)  Flat Percentage Formula. 2.0% (insert percentage) of Final Average Earnings multiplied by years of Total Credited Service as an Eligible Regular Employee. 
This formula applies to only the following Participants: All Participants who are Regular Employees who are in Service with the City on or after July 1, 2018; provided, however, that for any Participant who was vested under the Plan as of April 15, 2005 under the formula in effect under Section 19A-2.2(a) of the predecessor defined benefit retirement plan immediately prior to April 16, 2005 (the Predecessor Plan), the monthly benefit shall not be less than the benefit to which said Participant would be entitled under the terms of the Predecessor Plan (See General Addendum subsection 15(c) for additional provisions concerning calculation of a comparative benefit under Predecessor Plan). 
(ii)  Alternative Flat Percentage Formula. 1.5% of Final Average Earnings multiplied by years of Total Credited Service as an eligible regular employee. This formula applies to the following Participants: All participants who are regular employees who are in Service with the city on or after November 29, 2017, and who Terminate prior to July 1, 2018; provided, however, that for any participant who was vested under the Plan as of April 15, 2005 under the formula in effect under Section 19A-2.2(a) of the predecessor defined benefit retirement plan immediately prior to April 16, 2005 (the Predecessor Plan), the monthly benefit shall not be less than the benefit to which said participant would be entitled under the terms of the Predecessor Plan (See General Addendum subsection 15(c) for additional provisions concerning calculation of a comparative benefit under Predecessor Plan). 
(2)  Formula for elected or appointed members of the governing authority. The monthly normal retirement benefit for members of this class shall be as follows: 
$25.00 per month for each year of Total Credited Service as an elected or appointed member of the governing authority or municipal legal officer or major fraction thereof (6 months and 1 day). 
This formula applies to: 
All elected or appointed members of the governing authority or municipal legal officers eligible to participate. 
(c)  Monthly early retirement benefit amount. 
(1)  Standard early retirement reduction table . The monthly early retirement benefit shall be computed in the same manner as the monthly normal retirement benefit, but the benefit shall be reduced on an actuarially equivalent basis in accordance with Section 12.01 of the Master Plan to account for early commencement of benefits. This provision shall apply to: All participants. 
(d)  Monthly late retirement benefit amount. 
(1)  The monthly late retirement benefit shall be computed in the same manner as the normal retirement benefit, based upon the participant's accrued benefit as of his late retirement date. 
(e)  Monthly disability benefit amount. 
(1)  Computation. The amount of the monthly disability benefit shall be computed in the same manner as the normal retirement benefit, based upon the participant's accrued benefit as of his disability retirement date. 
(2)  Minimum disability benefit . The adopting employer may set a minimum disability benefit. The employer elects the following minimum disability benefit: No minimum is established. 
(f)  Minimum/maximum benefit for elected officials. In addition to any other limitations imposed by federal or state law, the employer may impose a cap on the monthly benefit amount that may be received by elected or appointed members of the governing authority. The employer elects that no minimum or maximum applies. 
( Ord. No. 17-16, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Sec. 64-332. - Suspension of benefits following bona fide separation of service; COLA. 
(a)  Re-employment as eligible employee after normal, alternative normal, or early retirement and following bona fide separation of service (see master plan section 6.06(c) regarding re-employment as an ineligible employee and master plan section 6.06(e) and (f) regarding re-employment after disability retirement). 
(1)  Reemployment after normal or alternative normal retirement . In the event that a retired participant 1) is reemployed with the employer as an eligible employee (as defined in the Plan) after his normal or alternative normal retirement date and after a bona fide separation from service, or 2) is reemployed with the employer in an ineligible employee class, and subsequently again becomes an eligible employee (as defined in the Plan) due to the addition of such class to the Plan after his normal or alternative normal retirement date, the following rule shall apply: The participant's benefit shall be suspended in accordance with Section 6.06(a)(1) of the Master Plan for as long as the Participant remains employed. 
(2)  Reemployment after early retirement. In the event a Participant Retires with an early retirement benefit after a bona fide separation from service 1) is reemployed with the employer as an eligible employee before his normal retirement date; or 2) is reemployed with the employer in an ineligible employee class, and subsequently again becomes an eligible employee (as defined in the Plan) before his normal retirement date due to the addition of such class to the Plan, the following rule shall apply: The participant's early retirement benefit shall be suspended in accordance with Section 6.06(a)(1) of the Master Plan for as long as the Participant remains employed. This rule shall apply to all retired participants. 
(b)  Cost of living adjustment. The employer may elect to provide for an annual cost-of-living adjustment (COLA) in the amount of benefits being received by retired participants and beneficiaries, which shall be calculated and paid in accordance with the terms of the Master Plan. The Employer hereby elects the following: Fixed annual cost-of-living adjustment equal to 3.0%. 
The above cost-of-living adjustment shall apply with respect to the following participants (and their beneficiaries): All participants (and their beneficiaries) who were initially employed before July 1, 2018. All participants (and their beneficiaries) initially employed on or after July 1, 2018, will have no cost-of-living adjustment. 
The adjustment date for the above cost-of-living adjustment shall be (if not specified, the adjustment date shall be January 1). 
( Ord. No. 17-16, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Sec. 64-333. - Termination of employment before retirement; vesting. 
(a)  Eligible regular employees. Subject to the terms and conditions of the Master Plan, a participant who is an eligible regular employee and whose employment is terminated for any reason other than death or retirement shall earn a vested right in his accrued retirement benefit in accordance with the following schedule: Cliff Vesting Schedule. Benefits shall be 100% vested after the Participant has a minimum of 10 years of total credited service. Benefits remain 0% vested until the Participant satisfies this minimum. 
(b)  Elected or appointed members of the governing authority. Subject to the terms and conditions of the Master Plan, a participant who is an elected or appointed member of the governing authority or a municipal legal officer shall earn a vested right in his accrued retirement benefit for credited service in such capacity in accordance with the following schedule: Benefits shall be 100% vested after the participant has a minimum of 8 years of Total Credited Service. Benefits remain 0% vested until the participant satisfies the minimum. 
( Ord. No. 17-16, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Sec. 64-334. - Pre-retirement death benefits. 
(a)  In-service death benefit . Subject to the terms and conditions of the Master Plan, the employer hereby elects the following in-service death benefit, to be payable in the event that an eligible participant's employment with the employer is terminated by reason of the participant's death prior to retirement: Auto A Death Benefit. A monthly benefit payable to the participant's pre-retirement beneficiary, equal to the decreased monthly retirement benefit that would have otherwise been payable to the Participant, had he elected a 100% joint and survivor benefit under Section 7.03 of the Master Plan. In order to be eligible for this benefit, a Participant must meet the following requirements: The participant must be vested in a normal retirement benefit. 
(b)  Terminated vested death benefit. The employer may elect to provide a terminated vested death benefit, to be payable in the event that a participant who is vested dies after termination of employment but before retirement benefits commence. Subject to the terms and conditions of the Master Plan, the Employer hereby elects the following terminated vested death benefit: Auto A Death Benefit. A monthly benefit payable to the participant's pre-retirement beneficiary, equal to the decreased monthly retirement benefit that would have otherwise been payable to the participant had he elected a 100% joint and survivor benefit under Section 7.03 of the Master Plan. 
( Ord. No. 17-16, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Sec. 64-335. - Employee contributions 
(a)  Employee contributions. Employee contributions are required in the amount of 2.0% of earnings for participants in the following classes: Employee contributions are required for all eligible regular employees who are in service with the city on or after July 1, 2018. Contributions are not required for elected or appointed members of the governing authority. See General Addendum subsection 15(o) concerning withdrawal and repayment of employee contributions by eligible regular employees initially employed prior to July 1, 2018. 
(b)  Pre-tax treatment of employee contributions. If Employee Contributions are required in Subsection (1) above, an adopting employer may elect to "pick up" employee contributions to the Plan in accordance with IRC Section 414(h). In such case, employee contributions shall be made on a pre-tax rather than a post-tax basis, provided the requirements of IRC Section 414(h) are met. If the employer elects to pick up employee contributions, it is the employer's responsibility to ensure that employee contributions are paid and reported in accordance with IRC Section 414(h). The adopting employer must not report picked up contributions as wages subject to federal income tax withholding. 
The employer hereby elects: To pick up employee contributions. By electing to pick up employee contributions, the adopting employer specifies that the contributions, although designated as employee contributions, are being paid by the employer in lieu of employee contributions. The adopting employer confirms that the executor of this adoption agreement is duly authorized to take this action as required to pick up contributions. This pick-up of contributions applies prospectively, and it is evidenced by this contemporaneous written document. On and after the date of the pick-up of contributions, a participant does not have a cash or deferred election right (within the meaning of Treasury Regulation Section 1.401(k)-1(a)(3)) with respect to the designated employee contributions, which includes not having the option of receiving the amounts directly instead of having them paid to the Plan. 
(c)  Interest on employee contributions. The adopting employer may elect to pay interest on any refund of employee contributions. Interest shall be paid on a refund of employee contributions at a rate established by GMEBS from time to time. 
( Ord. No. 17-16, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Sec. 64-336. - Modification of the terms of the adoption agreement. 
If an adopting employer desires to amend any of its elections contained in this adoption agreement (or any addendum), the governing authority by official action must adopt an amendment of the adoption agreement (or any addendum) or a new adoption agreement (or addendum) must be adopted and forwarded to the board for approval. The amendment of the new adoption agreement (or addendum) is not effective until approved by the board and other procedures required by the Plan have been implemented. 
The administrator will timely inform the adopting employer of any amendments made by the board to the Plan. 
( Ord. No. 17-16, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Sec. 64-337. - Termination of the adoption agreement. 
This adoption agreement (and any addendum) may be terminated only in accordance with the Plan. The administrator will inform the adopting employer in the event the board should decide to discontinue this volume submitter program. 
( Ord. No. 17-16, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Sec. 64-338. - Employer adoption and authorization for amendments. 
Adoption. The adopting employer hereby adopts the terms of the adoption agreement and any addendum, which is attached hereto and made a part of this ordinance. The adoption agreement (and, if applicable, the addendum) sets forth the employees to be covered by the Plan, the benefits to be provided by the adopting employer under the Plan, and any conditions imposed by the adopting employer with respect to, but not inconsistent with, the Plan. The adopting employer reserves the right to amend its elections under the adoption agreement and any addendum, so long as the amendment is not inconsistent with the Plan or the Internal Revenue Code or other applicable law and is approved by the board of trustees of GMEBS. The adopting employer acknowledges that it may not be able to rely on the volume submitter advisory letter if it makes certain elections under the adoption agreement or the addendum. 
The adopting employer hereby agrees to abide by the Master Plan, Trust Agreement, and rules and regulations adopted by the board of trustees of GMEBS, as each may be amended from time to time, in all matters pertaining to the operation and administration of the Plan. It is intended that the Act creating the board of trustees of GMEBS, this Plan, and the rules and regulations of the board are to be construed in harmony with each other. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of any of the foregoing, they shall govern in the following order: 
(1)  The Act creating the Board of Trustees of The Georgia Municipal Employees' Benefit System, O.C.G.A. Section 47-5-1 et seq. (a copy of which is included in the Appendix to the Master Defined Benefit Plan Document) and any other applicable provisions of O.C.G.A. Title 47; 
(2)  The Master Defined Benefit Plan Document and Trust Agreement; 
(3)  This ordinance and adoption agreement (and any addendum); and 
(4)  The rules and regulations of the board. 
In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Plan shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the previously existing provisions or the other section or sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this Plan, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudicated invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part hereof. The governing authority hereby declares that it would have passed the remaining parts of this Plan or retained the previously existing provisions if it had known that such part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudicated invalid or unconstitutional. 
This adoption agreement (and any addendum) may only be used in conjunction with Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System Master Defined Benefit Retirement Plan Document approved by the Internal Revenue Service under advisory letter _______ dated _______, 20___. The adopting employer understands that failure to properly complete this adoption agreement (or any addendum), or to operate and maintain the Plan and Trust in accordance with the terms of the completed adoption agreement (and any addendum), Master Plan Document and Trust, may result in disqualification of the adopting employer's Plan under the Internal Revenue Code. Inquiries regarding the adoption of the Plan, the meaning of Plan provisions, or the effect of the IRS advisory letter should be directed to the Administrator. The Administrator is Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System, with its primary business offices located at: 201 Pryor Street, SW, Atlanta, Georgia, 30303. The business telephone number is: (404) 688-0472. The primary person to contact is: GMEBS Legal Counsel. 
Authorization for Amendments. Effective on and after February 17, 2005, the adopting employer hereby authorizes the volume submitter practitioner who sponsors the Plan on behalf of GMEBS to prepare amendments to the Plan, for approval by the board, on its behalf as provided under Revenue Procedure 2005-16, as superseded by Revenue Procedure 201536, Revenue Procedure 2011-49, and Announcement 2005-37. Effective January 1, 2013, Georgia Municipal Association, Inc. serves as the volume submitter practitioner for the Plan. Employer notice and signature requirements were met for the adopting employer before the effective date of February 17, 2005. The adopting employer understands that the implementing amendment reads as follows: 
On and after February 17, 2005, the board delegates to the practitioner the authority to advise and prepare amendments to the Plan, for approval by the board, on behalf of all adopting employers, including those adopting employers who have adopted the Plan prior to the January 1, 2013, restatement of the Plan, for changes in the Code, the regulations thereunder, revenue rulings, other statements published by Internal Revenue Service, including model, sample, or other required good faith amendments (but only if their adoption will not cause such Plan to be individually designed), and for corrections of prior approved plans. These amendments shall be applied to all adopting employers. Employer notice and signature requirements have been met for all adopting employers before the effective date of February 17, 2005. In any event, any amendment prepared by the practitioner and approved by the board will be provided by the administrator to adopting employers. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing paragraph, no amendment to the Plan shall be prepared on behalf of any adopting employer as of either: 
• the date the Internal Revenue Service requires the adopting employer to file Form 5300 as an individually designed plan as a result of an amendment by the adopting employer to incorporate a type of Plan not allowable in a volume submitter plan as described in Revenue Procedure 2015-36; or 
• as of the date the Plan is otherwise considered an individually designed plan due to the nature and extent of the amendments. 
If the adopting employer is required to obtain a determination letter for any reason in order to maintain reliance on the advisory letter, the practitioner's authority to amend the Plan on behalf of the adopting employer is conditioned on the Plan receiving a favorable determination letter. 
The adopting employer further understands that, if it does not give its authorization hereunder or, in the alternative, adopt another pre-approved plan, its Plan will become an individually designed plan and will not be able to rely on the volume submitter advisory letter. 
( Ord. No. 17-16, § 1, 11-28-2017 )  
Chapter 66 - PLANNING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— On November 11, 2000, the city adopted Ordinance Number 00-22 which provided for the City of Griffin, Georgia Development Manual to govern all future development of land in the city. Such manual is compiled and published separately by the city. An official copy of the manual is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat saved from repeal, § 1-7(11); administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; environment, ch. 42; floods, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 94; vegetation, ch. 98; retirement benefits, app. B. 
State Law reference— Regional development centers, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-30 et seq.; coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.; Redevelopment Powers Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-44-1 et seq.; City Business Improvement District Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-43-1 et seq.; authority to adopt plans and exercise zoning powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV; The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67-A-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 66-1. - Comprehensive plan. 
The City of Griffin Comprehensive Plan is adopted. 
(Ord. of 7-18-1991)  
Chapter 74 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, adopted August 22, 2017 , amended Ch. 74 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 74, §§ 74-31—74-41, 74-75—74-77, 74-100, 74-120—74-131, 74-160, 74-161, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 06-06, § 1, adopted Sept. 26, 2006; Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, adopted June 9, 2009; Ord. No. 09-10, §§ 1—3, adopted July 28, 2009. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; environment, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 54; littering, § 58-10; utilities, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Solid waste management education program, establishment of Georgia Clean and Beautiful Advisory Committee and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3; yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; transportation of biomedical waste, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253.1; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdiction and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249; scrap tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 74-1—74-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HANDLING, STORAGE AND COLLECTION 
 
Sec. 74-31. - Intent; policies. 
(a)  It is declared to be the intent of the board of commissioners, in furtherance of the city's responsibility to protect the public health, safety and well-being of its citizens and to protect and enhance the quality of its environment by enacting policies governing the collection, storage and handling of solid waste, as that term is hereinafter defined in this article, in accordance with the comprehensive statewide program for solid waste management now in effect in the state. It is the purpose of this article to establish procedures to regulate solid waste handling, storage and collection by the city solid waste department and by those private collectors licensed to collect, store and handle solid waste generated from commercial and industrial sources within this city and to secure reliable data for solid waste management planning as part of the city's goal for wasteload reduction. 
(b)  It is further declared to be the policy of the city to educate and encourage generators and handlers of solid waste to reduce and minimize to the greatest extent possible the amount of solid waste which requires collection, treatment, or disposal through source reduction, reuse, composting, recycling, and other methods and to promote markets for and engage in the purchase of goods made from recovered materials and goods which are recyclable. 
(c)  It is further declared to be the policy of the city that every effort be undertaken to ensure the proper management of scrap tires from the point of generation to the ultimate point of reuse, recycling, or disposal and that every effort be made to ensure that, where possible, they be reused or recycled rather than being disposed. 
(d)  It is further declared to be the policy of the city that nature's way of recycling vegetative matter be respected and followed and that essential landfill space no longer be wasted by such materials being collected and buried in landfills, but allowed to decompose and returned to the soil. The city therefore recommends natural, low-maintenance landscaping requiring little or no cutting, using drought-tolerant trees, plants and shrubs, and encourages its citizens follow these steps for handling yard waste: 
(1)  Grass should be recycled by mowing it and letting the clippings lie; 
(2)  Leaves should be left where they fall, or mowed and composted; 
(3)  Woody material should be chipped on the site where such material was generated, or cut for use as fiber fuel; and 
(4)  Composting on the site where the material was grown, followed by incorporation of the finished compost into the soil at that site. 
(e)  The owner and/or occupant of every premises within the city shall be ultimately responsible for the proper handling, storage and disposal of all solid waste generated upon the property. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 74-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Biomedical waste means pathological waste, biological waste cultures and stocks of infectious agents and associated biologicals, contaminated animal carcasses (body parts, their bedding, and other wastes from such animals), sharps, chemotherapy waste, discarded medical equipment and parts, not including expendable supplies and materials which have not been decontaminated, as further defined in rule 391-3-4-15 of the board of natural resources of the state, and other such waste materials. 
Board of commissioners means the Board of Commissioners of the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
Bulk waste means such items as large household appliances (i.e., washing machines, clothes dryers, water heaters, stoves, refrigerators and dishwashers), furniture, tree stumps, large timber, car bodies, carpet waste, large packing containers, tanks, and other items whose volumes are not significantly reduced through normal compaction methods. 
Business day means a calendar day other than a Saturday, Sunday, or public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1. 
Closure means a procedure approved by the state environmental protection division which provides for the cessation of waste receipt at a solid waste disposal site and for securing the site in preparation for post-closure. 
Collector means a person who, under agreements, verbal or written, with or without compensation, does the work of collecting and/or transporting solid wastes from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, and/or similar locations, or from residential dwellings; provided, however, this definition shall not include an individual who collects and/or transports waste from a single-family dwelling unit owned or occupied by such individual or his or her immediate family member(s). 
Collector permit means a permit required to engage in the business of solid waste collecting in the City of Griffin, Georgia, and issued by the city in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses, and other manufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Construction and demolition waste means solid waste composed of building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations of houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such waste includes, but is not limited to roofing shingles, wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wall board, paper, cardboard, inert waste, and other wastes not likely to cause leachate of environmental concern. 
Contaminant means any physical, biological, or radiological substance or matter. 
Day means a calendar day, unless otherwise specified. 
Disposal or dispose means the discharge, deposit, discard, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, throwing, or placing of any solid waste or hazardous waste into or on any land or water. 
Drop-off center means any facility or location at which recyclable or compostable materials are taken by individuals and deposited into designated containers. 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, burn, or dispose of a substance. 
Environmental protection division means the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, including but not limited to its director, and any successor entity or entities. 
Generator means any person in this state or in any other state who creates solid waste. 
Hazardous constituent means any substance listed as a hazardous constituent in regulations promulgated pursuant to the federal act by the administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency which are in force and effect on February 1, 1992, codified as appendix VIII to 40 CFR 261, Identification and Listing of Hazardous Waste. 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste which contains hazardous constituents or has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations of the state environmental protection division, chapter 391-3-11. 
Hazardous Waste Management Act shall mean the Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, codified at O.C.G.A. §§ 12-8-60 through 12-8-83, as the same has been heretofore or may be hereafter amended. 
Household hazardous waste means hazardous waste used or generated in the household or similar source or any item, product or material containing or contaminated by any household hazardous waste. 
Industrial solid waste means solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes or operations that is not a hazardous waste regulated under O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq., the "Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act." Such waste includes, but is not limited to, waste resulting from the following manufacturing processes: Electric power generation; fertilizer and agricultural chemicals; iron and steel products; leather and leather products; nonferrous metal and foundry products; organic chemicals; plastics and resins; pulp and paper; rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; stone, glass, clay, and concrete products; textiles; transportation equipment; and water treatment. This term does not include mining waste or oil and gas waste. 
Inert landfill means a landfill used for the disposal of inert waste. 
Inert waste means solid wastes that will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate. Such waste is limited to earth and earth-like products, rocks, concrete, bricks, land clearing debris, tree and shrub wastes, yard wastes, cured asphalt, and construction and demolition wastes. 
Landfill means an area of land on which or an excavation in which solid waste is placed for permanent disposal and which is not a land application unit, surface impoundment, injection well, or compost pile. 
Leachate means liquid that has percolated through solid waste and the soils surrounding a landfill and has extracted, dissolved or suspended materials from it, which may be potentially harmful to groundwater. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate that prevents its percolation into surrounding soils and groundwater. 
Light commercial entity means a business entity within the service area which uses an approved residential cart(s) provided by the city to dispose of its waste. 
Manifest means a form or document used for identifying the quantity, composition, origin, routing, and designation of substances in the waste stream from point of generation, through intermediate points, to an end user, processor or disposer approved by the state environmental protection division. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks and means solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard waste and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final disposition of municipal solid waste occurs and includes but is not limited to municipal solid waste landfills and thermal treatment technology facilities. 
Municipal solid waste landfill means a discrete area of land or excavation that receives household waste, and that is not a land application unit, surface impoundment, injection well, or waste pile, as those terms are defined under 40 CFR part 257.2. A municipal solid waste landfill may also receive other types of solid waste, such as commercial solid waste, nonhazardous sludge, small-quantity generator waste and industrial solid waste. Such a landfill may be publicly or privately owned and/or operated. 
Operator means the person or entity responsible for and having direct supervision of daily field operations at a disposal facility. 
Person means an individual, trust, firm, joint-stock company, corporation (including a government corporation), consortium, joint venture, commercial entity, partnership, association, state, municipality, authority, commission, political subdivision of a state, or any interstate body and shall include each department, agency, and instrumentality of the United States. 
Post-closure means a procedure approved by the state environmental protection division to provide for longterm financial assurance, monitoring, and maintenance of a closed disposal site to protect human health and the environment. 
Processing or processing operation means any method, system or other treatment designed to change the physical form or chemical content of solid waste and includes all aspects of its management (administration, personnel, land, equipment, buildings and other elements). 
Putrescible waste means wastes that are capable of being quickly decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of putrescible wastes include, but are not necessarily limited to, kitchen wastes, animal manure, offal, hatchery and poultry processing plant wastes, and garbage. 
Recovered materials means those materials which have known use, reuse, or recycling potential; can be feasibly used, reused, or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse or recycling, whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing. 
Recycling means any process by which materials which would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Restricted waste, excluding municipal solid waste, means any solid, liquid, or sludge: 
(1)  Contained in a drum, barrel, box, pail, transportable tank, or any other container; 
(2)  Transported in a bulk tank; 
(3)  Residue or waste from a pollution control process; 
(4)  Residue or waste from an industrial process; and 
(5)  Residue, debris, and waste from the cleanup of a spill or a release of a chemical substance or commercial product or waste associated with items (1) through (4) as above-mentioned. Restricted waste shall include hazardous waste but shall not include household hazardous waste, provided that such household hazardous waste is disposed of at a solid waste handling facility designated by the city to accept such household hazardous waste and in accordance with the policies and procedures of the city. Other restricted wastes may include, but are not limited to, animal wastes and carcasses, asbestos, ash, biomedical wastes, chemicals, containers, clothing, debris, equipment and instruments, grease and oil, latex, plant (vegetal) materials, sludges, washwaters, or other wastes. Sources of such material include but are not limited to research, veterinary and medical laboratories, mortuaries, taxidermists, automobile washes and laundries (both commercial and industrial), publicly owned treatment works, and industrial treatment facilities, food processing and restaurant-related facilities. The city manager has the full authority to determine whether a waste is a restricted waste. 
Retreadable casing means a scrap tire suitable for retreading. 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect. 
Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end user, or disposal facility. 
Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires as defined in section 391-3-4-19(2.1) of the Georgia Rules of Solid Waste Management. 
Scrap tire handling means the storage, collection, transportation, utilization, processing, or disposal of scrap tires by any person other than end users on whose motor vehicles the tires have been affixed. 
Sludge means any solid, semisolid, or liquid waste generated from a municipal, commercial, or industrial wastewater treatment plant or facility (including any pretreatment process), water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility, exclusive of the treated effluent of a wastewater treatment plant. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 USC 1342; or source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the Federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended. 
Solid waste director means the administrative head or manager of the city's solid waste department, or his designee. 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal of solid waste or any combination of such activities. 
Solid waste handling facility means any location where any storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing or disposal of solid waste, or any combination thereof, occurs. 
Solid Waste Management Act shall mean the Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act codified at O.C.G.A. §§ 12-8-20 through 12-8-59.2, as the same has been heretofore or may be hereafter amended. 
Special waste means municipal solid waste which is comprised, in whole or in part, of: waste requiring special handling; waste containing free liquids; sludge; waste generated by industrial processes; bio-medical wastes; off-specification, outdated or discarded chemical or petroleum products; waste containing asbestos; or contaminated soils or debris resulting from an environmental spill or cleanup. 
Tire means a continuous solid or pneumatic rubber covering designed for encircling the wheel of a motor vehicle and which is neither attached to the vehicle or a part of the vehicle as original equipment. 
Tire retailer means any person engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires. 
Tire retreader means any person actively engaged in the business of retreading scrap tires by scarifying the surface to remove the old surface tread and attaching a new tread to make a usable tire. 
Yard waste means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural, and silvicultural operations. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 74-33. - Collection of residential solid waste. 
(a)  Receipt of service required. In order to protect the public health and sanitation, to prevent the spread of contagious or infectious diseases, and to prevent the breeding of rodents, insects and other vermin, all improved residential properties (single-family and multifamily residences) within the city shall receive regular municipal solid waste collection services from the city solid waste department. All residential customers will be provided once-per-week collection of their solid waste debris. No owner of a residential property shall be exempt or relieved from payment of the monthly sanitation collection and handling fee by reason of failure or refusal to receive services as provided by the solid waste department. Such fee shall be imposed against the property itself and payment of the fee shall be enforceable and collected as provided by law for levy and sale of in rem liens. 
(b)  Outside storage of residential solid waste; curbside containers. All residential solid waste, except newspapers, stored outside the residence pending collection shall be placed inside approved containers with lids tightly affixed. Approved containers shall be those issued by the city to residential customers pursuant to this article, designed to be rolled to curbside for periodic collection. All waste must be bagged and placed inside the container. Under no circumstances will garbage outside of city-issued containers be collected. If necessary, extra containers may be obtained for an additional monthly fee, as determined by the current fee schedule in affect at the time such additional cart is provided. Each container shall bear a serial number and shall be registered to the assigned customer. All containers shall remain the property of the city. Additionally, in the event a container is lost, stolen or intentionally damaged, the city reserves the right to charge the customer the replacement cost of the container. Except when taken to the curbside for scheduled collection, containers shall be consistently located behind the residence and outside of fenced enclosures in which animals are kept. Containers shall be used exclusively for the storage and transport of solid waste to the curbside. 
(c)  Time and placement of containers. By 6:30 a.m. on the scheduled day for collection, customers should place their containers at curbside in front of the customer's residence. Both the solid waste and recycling containers should be placed approximately four feet from the edge of the roadway, but not so as to pose a physical or visual obstruction to motorists. Both containers may be placed at curbside the night before the scheduled day for collection; for example, if the scheduled day for collection is Monday, containers may be placed at curbside on Sunday evening. All carts shall be placed with the front of the cart squarely facing the roadway, so as to be capable of being picked up by automated collection equipment. Where there is insufficient right-of-way adjacent to the roadway, or other topographical difficulties exist which make it unreasonable to conform to the general requirements, customers should place their container at a location mutually agreeable to the customer and solid waste department, after consultation with the solid waste director or his designee. All containers shall be removed from the curbside and returned to a location behind the customer's residence no later than 6:30 a.m. following the scheduled day of service. Due to holidays or other unforeseen circumstances, special collection dates will be announced or published through the local news media. Customers are encouraged to make suitable arrangements with neighbors or friends to set out and remove their containers from the curbside if absent during the hours specified herein; customers routinely allowing containers to remain at curbside outside of the hours specified shall be deemed to create a nuisance, punishable as a violation of this Code. 
(d)  Assisted service for households with mobility-impaired residents. Households in which all regular residents are mobility-impaired may apply for assisted collection service at the same fee as levied for curbside collection. The containers must be placed at the street building line, visible from the street. Applications shall be made on forms provided by the solid waste department director or his designee, accompanied by the certificate of a physician licensed in the state stating that, based upon a physical examination conducted within the past 30 days, the applicant is mobility-impaired or has sufficient medical reasons not to place the container at curbside. Any denial of an application shall be in writing, stating the reason therefore. Aggrieved applicants may, within 20 days of the receipt of denial, request a hearing before the city manager, whose decision shall become final. The solid waste department may request recertification of a mobility-impaired customer annually. It shall be the duty of a mobility-impaired customer to report promptly to the solid waste department any change in medical condition or change in occupancy of the residence. 
(e)  Service for multifamily residential developments. 
(1)  Multifamily residential developments with three or less units. Residential developments of three or less dwelling units (detached, attached, duplex or triplex) located on the same tract or parcel shall be served with each unit being assigned a container for curbside collection. 
(2)  Multifamily residential developments with more than three units. All other multifamily developments (more than three units) shall be deemed as residential customers, but shall be serviced by a centrally located commercial container or compactor. It shall be the responsibility of each multifamily residential development to provide adequate containers for storage of its own waste. Before a building permit shall be issued for construction of a new multifamily development or before a certificate of occupancy is issued for a previously vacant multifamily development, arrangements for the storage and collection of solid waste shall be approved pursuant to city development regulations. Commercial containers at existing multifamily developments serviced by the city solid waste department shall be placed at locations approved by the solid waste director. 
(f)  Restrictions on residential solid waste other than household garbage. Municipal solid waste, other than household garbage, shall not be placed in containers nor mixed with residential solid waste. Cardboard boxes and related shipping materials should be broken down and securely bundled and left next to the container at curbside. Objects such as broken glass or hypodermic needles that may cause injury to sanitation workers shall be enclosed in nonpermeable containers with lids tightly affixed, before mixing with residential solid waste. 
(g)  Maintenance of surrounding area. The occupant of a single family residential dwelling shall be responsible for maintaining the area surrounding the container clean and free of litter. The owner of a multifamily residential unit shall be responsible for maintaining the area surrounding the container clean and free of litter. Upon failure of the occupant of a single family residential dwelling, and on premises which are not currently occupied, the owner shall have the duty to maintain the premises accordingly. 
(h)  Cleanliness of containers. All refuse and recycling containers, except single use containers, shall be kept clean and free of accumulated waste and shall be treated with an effective insecticide, if necessary, to prevent nuisance. 
(i)  Dangerous or corrosive materials. It shall be a violation of this article to place or cause to be placed in any refuse or recyclables container for collection any acid, explosive material, flammable liquids or dangerous or corrosive material of any kind. No person shall place a used lead-acid vehicle battery in mixed municipal solid waste or discard or otherwise dispose of a lead-acid vehicle battery except by delivery to a battery retailer or wholesaler, to a secondary lead smelter, or to a collection or recovered materials processing facility that accepts lead-acid vehicle batteries. 
(j)  Pet litter, disposable diapers, other similar waste. Pet litter, disposable diapers and other similar waste must be contained in a securely tied plastic bag before placing in a refuse container. 
(k)  Preparation of municipal solid waste. All municipal solid waste shall be free of liquid and placed in watertight plastic bags with the tops secured prior to being placed in a refuse container. 
(l)  Paint cans. Paint cans shall be collected if empty or if the paint therein is dry or solidified with sand or pet litter and the cans are placed at the curb with lids off. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 74-34. - Collection of yard waste from residential customers and light commercial entities. 
(a)  Yard waste not to be mixed with municipal solid waste. It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard waste, as defined by this article, with municipal solid waste within a container intended for storage and collection of residential solid waste. All residential customers will be entitled to one biweekly collection of yard waste at curbside. For purposes of this article one biweekly load shall consist of a pile approximately eight feet by four feet by four feet in height. Bagged leaves and grass clippings will be excluded from the measurement of loads. Unbagged leaves will be included in the measurement of loads. Yard waste shall be placed on the right-of-way, in front of the residence, within approximately four feet of the roadway, provided no yard waste shall be placed so as to physically protrude into the roadway or visually obstruct any motorist. No yard waste shall be placed at a location where it is likely to wash or blow into the roadway, into a storm drain, or on or near fire hydrants, water meter boxes, mail boxes, utility poles or guy wires, in such manner as to obstruct access to the waste to be collected or to obstruct the function of the object. 
(b)  Regulations on yard waste. Limbs and branches shall be separated from grass clippings and leaves. No other debris, such as rocks, glass bottles, wood, pieces of wire, steel or concrete, shall be mixed with or concealed under grass clippings or leaves. Limbs should be cut into lengths of no more than eight feet in length and shall be smaller than six inches in diameter and placed with the cut end toward the street. Stumps will require an additional fee for special handling. All grass clippings shall be placed in biodegradable bags. Leaves may be placed in biodegradable bags. Plastic bags, trash bags, and/or other non-biodegradable bags are not acceptable and will not be collected. No wire or fencing of any type will be handled by the city solid waste department. 
(c)  Additional fees for excess loads. Customers anticipating having more than one biweekly load are encouraged to transport their yard waste to the city's Shoal Creek compost site or construction and demolition landfill. The dumping of yard waste is free of charge at these two locations with proof of residency within the city. Yard waste will not be accepted at the city transfer station. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 74-35. - Unacceptable curbside materials; residential and commercial. 
(a)  Commercial contractors, vendors, and residents are required to properly dispose of appliances, construction materials, carpets, mattresses, box springs, furniture, trees, stumps, fencing, wire, scrap tires, lead-acid vehicle batteries, large automobile parts, and other similar items. It is the responsibility of the prime contractor, and upon his failure to act, of the property owner, to keep private property free of waste, debris, and litter during new construction or during remodeling, repair and landscaping. It shall be unlawful for any person to place these items at curbside, except for special handing under prior agreement with the solid waste director. 
(b)  Liquid wastes, such as oils, paints, gasoline, and chemicals, shall not be mixed with municipal solid wastes and shall not be collected and handled by solid waste department employees. It is the responsibility of every owner of property within the city to dispose of such waste in a proper manner, by lawful means. It shall be unlawful for any person to pour or introduce liquid wastes into a sanitary or storm sewer or drain. 
(c)  Appliances, including commercial refrigeration and air conditioning units will not be handled or collected by the solid waste department unless special handling arrangements have been made, in advance, and required fees paid. Arrangements can be made by contacting the solid waste department director or his designee. It shall be unlawful to place these items at curbside, unless instructed to do so by the solid waste department. 
(d)  The solid waste department shall not be responsible for collecting or hauling discarded building material, dirt, rock, or discarded furniture and appliances from private property, nor shall it be responsible for collecting or hauling trees, bushes, or other vegetation from or generated by commercial tree trimmers, landscapers or building contractors. 
(e)  The solid waste department reserves the right not to collect or handle solid waste and other matter except in accordance with this article. Whenever waste is placed or left at curbside in violation of this article, the solid waste department director or his designee shall give written notice to the property owner, as shown on the most recent tax digest, or occupant of the premises, if known, to cause the removal and proper disposal of the material. If the conditions are not corrected by the person disposing of the material within two calendar days after he date of notice, the solid waste department may remove the material and assess a special handling fee against the person responsible, which fee shall be in addition to any fine imposed under this article upon conviction for its violation. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 74-36. - Residential solid waste collection and handling fees. 
(a)  Monthly fees are imposed for residential solid waste collection and handling services for the following service categories: 
(1)  Curbside and mobility-impaired, (once per week). 
(2)  Residential multifamily with central location. 
(3)  Each additional container. 
(4)  Biweekly collection of yard waste. 
(5)  Curbside and mobility impaired recycling, (once per week). 
(b)  Special handling fees shall be assessed based upon the size of the collection vehicle and manpower required. A minimum rate as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges per load for 20-cubic-yard vehicle and crew of two persons will be charged. If required, rental of specialized equipment, use of additional manpower, etc., shall be assessed at actual cost to the city. Special handling for other solid waste, bulk waste, and construction and demolition waste shall be based on the size and weight of the load, and will include handling, hauling, and disposal fees. 
(c)  Rates, fees and charges shall be established by resolution of the board of commissioners, provided all rates shall be uniform for the same class of service; and revised by resolution as from time to time required. All rates, fees and charges shall be set forth in a schedule on file in the office of the city manager and available for public inspection and copying. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 74-37. - Collection of commercial and industrial solid waste. 
(a)  Generally. All commercial and industrial generators of solid waste within the city are responsible for assuring the safe handling, storage and collection of waste from their premises. For purposes of this article, all mixed-use developments shall be considered as commercial customers, unless a majority of the usable square footage, exclusive of parking and service areas, is devoted to residential use. The city solid waste department can provide regularly scheduled collection and handling services for all commercial and industrial customers, except for the handling of hazardous constituents. Such services are available in accordance with the classification and fee schedule. Commercial and industrial customers are expected to enter into written service contracts with the city and abide by the regulations for such service as from time to time promulgated by the solid waste department manager. 
(b)  Special waste handling. Before collecting or handling of any special waste, the generator must complete a manifest, approved by the solid waste director or his designee. The solid waste director shall inspect the waste and may cause testing thereof, as in his sole discretion is reasonably necessary to assure safe and proper handling and disposal of its constituents. The cost of testing shall be included in the special handling fees and charges imposed upon the generator. Prior to collection, the generator shall follow all special handling procedures set forth in writing by the solid waste director, including provisions for segregation of special wastes from the municipal solid waste stream, special containerization, etc. The generator shall cooperate with the solid waste director, as reasonably requested, concerning general waste information, physical waste characteristics, and available laboratory analysis. All laboratory analyses provided to the solid waste director shall be certified by the generator, under oath, as accurate and truthful. 
(c)  Reporting of suspicious loads. In the handling of special wastes, should inspection reveal suspicious contents, the solid waste department shall have the right to refuse collection until testing proves the waste acceptable for collection and handling. Should evaluation reveal that prohibited wastes are present in the load, the state environmental protection division will be contacted and a record of the incident recorded in the solid waste department's operations log. No load containing known prohibited wastes will be collected or transported by the solid waste department. 
(d)  Prohibited wastes. The solid waste department shall not empty a commercial refuse container that contains any of the following items: 
(1)  Large household or industrial appliances; 
(2)  Furniture and wooden crates; 
(3)  Scrap tires and heavy motor vehicle parts such as engines and transmissions; 
(4)  Liquids, including paint, cooking oil and motor vehicle fluids and lubricants; 
(5)  Logs or limbs over eight feet in length or six inches in diameter; 
(6)  Bed springs and mattresses; 
(7)  Rocks, dirt, bricks, concrete, stone, plaster, sheetrock, roofing or other similar materials; 
(8)  Uncontainerized refuse, such as lumber that protrudes from the container or refuse placed on top or in front of the container; 
(9)  Any acid, explosive material, inflammable liquids, dangerous or corrosive material of any kind, including lead-acid vehicle batteries. 
(10)  Yard waste. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 74-38. - Classifications of commercial/industrial customers. 
(a)  Industrial customers. Industrial customers shall be classed as provided in the customer's contract. Unless otherwise provided in the contract, industrial customers shall receive one regularly scheduled collection each week. Customers requesting extra service may do so at agreed rates based upon the size of the container and collection vehicle required: 
(b)  Commercial customers . Commercial customers shall be classed accordingly: 
(1)  Class A: Heavy commercial. A single entity utilizing a solid waste container with a volume of at least 20 cubic yards, or utilizing a compactor unit. 
(2)  Class B: Medium commercial. A single entity utilizing a solid waste container with a volume of at least two cubic yards, but no more than 20 cubic yards. 
(3)  Class C: Light commercial. A single entity generating not more than 192 gallons of solid waste per week. 
Unless otherwise provided in the customer's contract, all commercial customers shall receive one regularly scheduled collection each week. Customers requesting extra service may do so at agreed rates based upon the size of the container and collection vehicle required. 
(c)  Commercial customers within the Central Business District . Commercial customers within the Central Business District (CBD), as defined by the boundaries indicated on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Griffin, shall be classed accordingly: 
(1)  Tier 1: Office . Those business with occupation tax classifications of transportation and warehousing; finance and insurance; real estate and rental and leasing; professional, scientific, and technical services; educational services; arts, entertainment, and recreation; and public administration. 
(2)  Tier 2: Retail . Those businesses with occupation tax classifications of wholesale trade; retail trade; health care and social assistance; and other services, such as barber shop, car wash, dog grooming, laundromat, personal service business, shoe repair, and place of worship. 
(3)  Tier 3: Manufacturing and food service. Those businesses with occupation tax classifications of manufacturing; and accommodation and food services. 
Residential customers within the Central Business District will be charged the residential apartment rate. 
(d)  Containers and equipment. Standardized commercial containers, including roll-off boxes, may be furnished by the city as part of the services covered by this section. The city reserves the right to determine the location of each container, including the right to require joint usage by more than one customer where feasible. Customer-owned compactors are encouraged and the solid waste department manager and building official can furnish specifications for installation of compactors with city containers. All new customers shall consult with the solid waste director in the design and development of commercial and industrial sites to assure access and compatibility of city-owned equipment. 
(e)  Arrangements for storage of refuse and location of containers; approval required. It shall be the responsibility of each commercial or industrial customer to provide adequate containers for storage of its own waste. Before a building permit shall be issued for construction of a commercial or industrial establishment, arrangements for the storage of refuse shall be approved by the solid waste director. 
(f)  Location. Commercial or industrial refuse containers at existing establishments serviced by city collection vehicles shall be placed at locations approved by the solid waste director for collection by the solid waste department. The city shall not collect refuse from commercial or industrial customers unless it is placed in commercial containers, properly located, except where space or other limitations dictate other arrangements which shall be specifically approved by the solid waste director. 
(g)  Determination of fees. Fees for commercial and industrial customers shall be uniform as to class. The solid waste director is hereby authorized to publish and assess fees for each customer class and tier, subject to approval by resolution of the board of commissioners. Fee schedules, as from time to time amended, shall be maintained in the city manager's office and available for public inspection. 
(h)  Authorization of department manager to promulgate rules. The solid waste director is hereby delegated the authority to promulgate regulations governing commercial and industrial customers, subject to approval by resolution of the board of commissioners. Such regulations, as from time to time amended, shall be regularly published and available for public inspection. 
(i)  Responsibility of owner to remove waste, removal by city. Whenever the owner or occupant of any commercial or industrial property within the city permits solid waste to accumulate upon its premises, and the removal thereof is not part of the regular services offered by the city hereunder, it shall be the duty of the owner and occupant, if known, to cause the removal and proper disposal of such waste within two business days of the date of written notice from the solid waste director. Notice shall be given the owner or occupant, by personal service or certified mail, at the address shown on the latest city tax digest. If such waste is not removed within the two-day period, the city may cite the owner or occupant for a violation of this article. If the waste constitutes a nuisance or public health hazard, the city shall cause the collection thereof in accordance with section 42-31, et seq. of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 ; Ord. No. 19-01, § 1, 1-8-2019 )  
Sec. 74-39. - Landfill dumping fees; use of landfill. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and imposed a cost reimbursement fee on all users of the city construction and demolition disposal facility (landfill) at a rate per ton as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, or portion thereof, plus a surcharge per ton, or portion thereof, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges approved by the board of commissioners. Charges shall be prorated based upon actual weight; provided, however, the minimum charge (regardless of weight) shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges per vehicle load. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  All vehicles transporting construction and demolition waste or yard waste into the landfill must stop at the designated checkpoint for inspection and weighing. The landfill manager, or his designee, shall be authorized to reject any material not permitted for disposal under the city's solid waste handling permit, as from time to time amended by the state environmental protection division. The determination of the landfill superintendent as to acceptability of wastes handled shall be final. Tires will not be accepted at the landfill. Yard waste shall not be placed in or mixed with other construction and demolition waste, and, in the discretion of the landfill manager, may be banned altogether. The city reserves the right to reject any and all parts of any load mixed with nonacceptable wastes or materials. 
(2)  The disposal superintendent or his designee shall specify the area for dumping of wastes. Vehicles shall proceed to that point directly, and after depositing their load shall return promptly to the checkpoint. 
(3)  All vehicles shall be weighted before leaving the landfill, after dumping their loads and the charge calculated. Payment shall be made before the vehicle departs, unless credit arrangements have been made in advance with the city. 
(4)  The solid waste director is hereby authorized to promulgate regulations governing landfill usage, in accordance with applicable law and this article. 
(5)  It shall be an offense against the city, punishable before the municipal court, for any person to enter the landfill or deposit wastes therein in willful violation of this section. Persons convicted of violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(6)  All vehicle loads entering the landfill shall be completely secured, tarped, and covered to prevent scattering and littering of contents, pursuant to state law. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 74-40. - Use of transfer station; fees and charges. 
(a)  Residential customers within the city, not including commercial businesses and industries located within the city, may dispose of municipal solid waste at the city transfer station free of charge. Proof of residency may be shown by providing a current city utility bill and picture identification with address indicated. 
(b)  Commercial businesses and industries located within the city and all other nonresidents may dispose of materials at the city transfer station at a rate per ton, with a minimum charge per load, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges approved by resolution of the board of commissioners. Commercial waste haulers may receive negotiated rates upon executing a contract with the city. 
(c)  Hazardous, medical, and toxic wastes shall not be accepted at the city transfer station. 
(d)  The solid waste director is hereby authorized to promulgate regulations governing transfer station usage, in accordance with applicable law and this article. 
(e)  It shall be an offense against the city, punishable before the municipal court, for any person to enter the landfill or deposit wastes therein in willful violation of this section. Persons convicted of violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(f)  All vehicle loads entering the transfer station shall be completely secured, tarped, and covered to prevent scattering and littering of contents, pursuant to state law. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 74-41. - Tire disposal regulations. 
(a)  This section is enacted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city by providing for the orderly and safe disposal of scrap tires. The improper handling of scrap tires by any person within the city is hereby deemed to constitute a public nuisance. 
(b)  The city will not collect or dispose of any scrap tires found on public or private property, except in strict accordance with this section. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to store any scrap tires on residential property, to leave tires exposed in residential areas, or to willfully discard or place tires on private property and public rights-of-way. 
(c)  No person may dispose of scrap tires in a municipal solid waste landfill or inert landfill unless the tires have been shredded, chopped or chipped in accordance with regulations established by the state environmental protection division. 
(d)  All tire retailers and retreaders shall accept scrap tires from any person for disposal and be responsible for the proper handling, storage and disposal of scrap tires in accordance with state law. Purchasers of new or used tires should leave used scrap tires with the tire retailer or retreader for handling and disposal. 
(e)  All persons engaged in scrap tire handling, within the city, shall do so in strict compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20, et seq., and chapter 391-3-4-19, Rules of Solid Waste Management, as applicable to scrap tires. 
(f)  Scrap tire generators, carriers, and sorters must maintain disposal records and shall make such records available to the solid waste director, upon request. 
(g)  The city shall provide information to its citizens and educate customers on the proper manner for disposing of scrap tires, and shall identify carriers that have been permitted to transport scrap tires. 
(h)  In addition to and supplementary of the provisions of section 74-76, abatement of any nuisance created by improper handling of scrap tires or scrap tire materials shall be as follows: 
(1)  The city may abate as a nuisance any threat or potential threat to public health or the environment created or which could be created by scrap tires or other scrap tire materials by removing or processing the scrap tires or other scrap tire materials. Before taking any action to abate the threat or potential threat, the city shall give any person having possession or control of the scrap tires or materials, or owning the property upon which scrap tires or materials are located, reasonable written notice of the city's intentions and ordering the responsible party to abate the threat or potential threat in a manner approved by the city. For purposes of this section, reasonable notice shall be three business days if personally served, and five business days if served by U.S. mail, in a properly addressed envelope with adequate postage thereon. 
(2)  Whenever the solid waste director has reason to believe that a violation of any provision of this section has occurred, he shall attempt to obtain a remedy with the violator or violators (including any scrap tire generator known to have contributed to the violation) by conference, conciliation, or persuasion. In the case of failure of such conference, conciliation, or persuasion to affect a remedy to such violation, the solid waste director may issue an administrative order directed to such violator or violators. The order shall specify the provisions of this section or rule or regulation alleged to have been violated and shall order that necessary corrective action be taken within a reasonable time to be prescribed in such order. Any order issued under this section shall be signed by the solid waste director and served upon the violator(s) by the means most likely to afford notice. Any such order shall become final unless the person or persons named therein requests in writing a hearing before the city manager no later than ten days after such order is served on such person or persons. The decision of the city manager shall be final, subject to review by the superior court on application for writ of certiorari. 
(3)  If the responsible party refuses or is unwilling to comply with such order or if no person who has contributed or is contributing to the scrap tires or scrap tire materials which are to be abated can be found, the solid waste director may undertake the cleanup of the site. 
(4)  The solid waste department or its contractors may enter upon private property at any reasonable time and in such manner as deemed necessary to investigate and effectuate the necessary corrective action to protect human health and the environment. 
(5)  The city shall not be responsible for any loss of business, damages, or taking of property associated with the corrective action. 
(6)  The city may bring an action or proceeding against the property owner or any person having possession or control of the scrap tires or other scrap tire materials to enforce the administrative order issued and to recover any reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by the solid waste department, including administrative and legal expenses. The solid waste department's certification of expenses shall be prima facie evidence that the expenses are reasonable and necessary. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any generator of scrap tires who is identified as being a contributor to the materials which are the object of the abatement and who can document that he has fully complied with this part and all rules promulgated pursuant to this part in disposing of such scrap tires shall not be liable for any of the cost of recovery actions of the abatement. 
(i)  This section is enacted pursuant to the general assembly's express provision contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1(i)(6), granting municipalities authority to abate or clean up scrap tires which are a threat or potential threat to human health. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Secs. 74-42—74-74. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS 
 
Sec. 74-75. - Intent; policy declared. 
The City of Griffin Board of Commissioners hereby finds that it in order to meet the state's goal of solid waste reduction it is in the best interest of all the citizens of the City of Griffin, in order to promote the health, safety, welfare and of all the citizens in the city, to recycle, reduce and reuse as many waste materials as possible in order to eliminate the accumulation of litter and garbage and solid waste material within the city and reduce the overall amount of solid waste which must be properly disposed of upon pickup by city employees. Therefore, it is the policy of the City of Griffin Board of Commissioners to require all generators of solid waste to recycle according to this article. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 74-76. - Residential recycling program. 
(1)  Recycling. It shall be the responsibility of all residential solid waste customers of the city to dispose of recyclable materials in an approved recycling container. No item that that has been classified as recyclable material shall be disposed in a customer's solid waste container. All recyclable materials may be commingled (mixed) in the same recycling container. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of any individual, organization or other entity to donate any recyclable material for proper disposal, if such disposal does not violate any laws or this article. 
(2)  Containers. Each resident shall be issued an approved recycling container by the solid waste division. All containers shall remain the property of the city. Recycling containers shall be used exclusively for the storage and transport of recyclable materials only. Each recycling container shall be placed at the curb along with the container for solid waste disposal. Any customer that fails to place their assigned recyclable container with recyclables at the curb on their scheduled day of pickup shall be in violation of this article, will be subject to not having their household solid waste removed by city employees, and shall not be entitled to a refund of any portion of their monthly service during the time that such customer fails to comply with this article. 
(3)  Time and placement of containers. By 6:30 a.m. on the day of collection customers shall place their recycling container at curbside in front of the customer's residence. Containers shall be placed with the same restrictions as solid waste containers as stated in subsection 74-33(c). All recycling containers shall be removed from the curbside no later than 6:30 a.m. on the day following collection. 
(4)  Assisted services for households with mobility impaired residents. Those households with residents already classified as mobility impaired shall be issued a recycling container and collected in accordance with subsection 74-33(e). 
(5)  Recyclable materials . Those materials which have a known use, reuse or recyclable potential shall be diverted from the waste stream by recycling. Currently those items are: newspapers, glass bottles and jars, metal cans, plastic sacks, bottles and jugs, aluminum cans, corrugated cardboard, office paper, magazines, telephone books and junk mail. The solid waste director may, from time to time, modify the list of recyclable materials and provide notice of any modifications to customers. 
(6)  Collection of recyclable materials. All recyclable materials used in the storage and transportation of food shall be clean and free of any food items. All glass, plastic and metal containers shall be rinsed out and no liquids present. Boxes, sacks and bags shall be free of any food or trash. Paper and newspaper shall be clean and dry with no waste or food present. 
(7)  Unacceptable recycling items . Those materials which are unacceptable due to contamination from food or liquids, hazardous materials, or have no value to be recycled are: fast food containers, pizza boxes, paper or foam plates, plastic forks, spoons and knives, aluminum foil, motor oil bottles, pesticide containers, aerosol cans, styrofoam of any type, glass windows or mirrors, clothing, toys, wood, food and liquids. 
(8)  Scavenging. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge or remove recyclable materials from the designated recycling container which has been properly placed at the curb for collection. 
(9)  Multifamily residential recycling and collection. All residential customers living in multifamily developments shall be required to recycle. Those materials that have been classified as recyclable shall be separated from the regular household garbage. Owners of multifamily developments shall be required to provide storage and collection facilities to accommodate recycling for their residents. Owners of multifamily developments shall be required to use compatible equipment to city owned collection vehicles. 
(10)  Lost/missing recycling carts/bins. It shall be the responsibility of all customers who establish service with the city for solid waste removal to secure the recycling cart or bin assigned to them during the time that the customer has service with the city. In the event that such cart or bin should be lost and unaccounted for when service is either transferred or discontinued, the customer shall be responsible for reimbursing the city for the cost to replace the cart or recycling bin. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 74-77. - Commercial recycling, policies and reporting requirements. 
(1)  Commercial recycling of old corrugated cardboard containers. All commercial waste generators within the city shall be required to recycle old corrugated cardboard containers (OCC). OCC shall not be disposed of in the generator's solid waste container. OCC shall be separated and properly recycled. Commercial generators may provide their own bailers or containers to store and collect OCC. Arrangements for storage, collection and recycling of OCC shall be made with the city's solid waste department and must be approved by the director. 
(2)  Private haulers. Commercial waste generators within the city that use a private hauler for storage, collection and disposal of their waste shall be required to recycle OCC. Private haulers are required to report the amount of OCC recycled to the city's solid waste department at the end [of] every quarter and yearly total at the end of each calendar year. It shall be a violation of this section for any private hauler not to report the amount of OCC recycled and disposed of OCC by a commercial generator within the city. 
(3)  Reporting of recycled OCC. Commercial generators who choose to use a private hauler or bail their own OCC shall report the amount OCC recycled to the city's solid waste department at the end of every quarter and total at the end of each calendar year. It shall be a violation of this section for any commercial generator to not report the amount of OCC recycled and dispose of OCC in commercial container with other solid waste within the city. 
(4)  Handling of OCC. Commercial generators recycling OCC must dispose of said product in proper containers or bails. All boxes shall be broken down flat and placed in recycling containers or crushed and bailed. No boxes shall be placed on the ground or on the floor of container pads. All OCC shall be dry and free of other waste materials. All OCC that is contaminated by food waste or other means shall be properly disposed in generators solid waste container. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Secs. 74-78—74-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OTHER COLLECTION SERVICES 
 
Sec. 74-100. - Collection of solid waste from county residents. 
(1)  Where logically feasible, the city can provide solid waste services to Spalding County residents. However, it shall be at the discretion of the solid waste director or his designee to determine where services can be provided. 
(2)  County residents that are within the established service routes of the city's collection areas will receive once-per-week service along with once per week recycling services. 
(3)  Current city rates will apply and billing for solid waste service will appear on the customer's monthly utility bill. 
(4)  Containers for solid waste and recyclables must be furnished by the city and all applicable fees and replacement costs shall apply. County residents who utilize the services of the city solid waste division shall execute a contract for service agreeing to comply with all current regulations set forth in this article. 
(5)  Commercial generators who are serviced by rollout carts shall be issued a recyclables container and shall place the container alongside the solid waste container for collection on their assigned day. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Secs. 74-101—74-119. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PRIVATE COLLECTORS; PERMITTING; TRANSPORTATION AND DISPOSAL OF WASTE 
 
Sec. 74-120. - Permit required. 
(a)  All solid waste generated or otherwise found within the City of Griffin, Georgia, shall either be collected: 
(1)  By the city or its designees, or 
(2)  By persons holding valid collector permits for such activity, granted in accordance with this article. Each such collector permit shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year in which the initial permit issued pursuant to this article. Any collector permit holder desiring to renew an existing permit shall complete and submit to the city the application described in section 74-121 not more than 90 days nor less than 60 days before the expiration date thereof. A collector permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on the business during the term of such permit and subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this article and related laws and other ordinances and resolutions of board of commissioners of the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
(b)  This article shall not be construed to require a permit for the transportation of waste through the city, so long as such waste was not generated within the borders of the City of Griffin. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 74-121. - Collector permit application, issuance, and appeal procedures; fees. 
(a)  Within 90 days after the effective date of this article, each collector then operating within the city must submit an application for a collector permit to the city on a form approved by the city manager. The applicant shall, under penalty of perjury, certify that all information contained in the permit application and all information submitted in connection with the permit application is true and correct. At a minimum, the application for a collector permit shall require a collector to provide the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  A list of all vehicles proposed to be used in the City of Griffin, Georgia, for the purpose of collecting solid waste, including the following information for each vehicle: 
a.  The state motor vehicle registration number; 
b.  Description of chassis by year and manufacturer; 
c.  Description of the body by year and manufacturer; 
d.  The legal weight limit; 
e.  The volume of the body of the vehicle in cubic yards; and 
f.  A certification by the collector that it maintains motor vehicle liability insurance coverage for each vehicle in an amount not less than the minimum coverage required under Georgia law. 
(3)  A list of the area or areas served by the vehicles listed in the permit application. The applicant is obligated to notify the city of changes to the list within ten days. 
(4)  A list of all contracts and agreements covering the collection of solid waste generated within the city. This list shall include the name(s) of the parties to the contract or agreement, the term of the contract and the termination date of the contract, and the name(s) of any disposal location(s) specified in the contract or agreement. 
(5)  A copy of the notification required by O.C.G.A. § 391-3-4.06(2) solid waste management (permit by rule for collection, transportation, processing, and disposal). 
(6)  Any additional data and information deemed necessary by the city, the city manager, or any of his or her designees in order to verify the accuracy of information contained in the permit application forms and attendant documents. 
(b)  The collector permit fee shall be $100.00 per collector payable to the city at the time the initial permit application is filed and at the time each renewal application is filed thereafter; provided, however, that the permit fee required hereunder shall be waived for the City of Griffin, Georgia. The fee imposed by this section is intended to cover the administrative cost of registration and permitting and it is not the intent of this article to regulate private collection services within the city. Should the board of commissioners deem a future increase in the collector permit fee necessary, it shall first conduct a public hearing, with not less than 30 days' written notice to all collector permit holders. 
(c)  An application for an initial or renewed collector permit submitted pursuant to this division may be granted or denied by the city manager or his or her designee. Application may be denied only for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  The applicant has failed to provide some or all of the information required by subsection (a) of this section. 
(2)  The applicant has supplied false information to the city or any other employee, officer, or official of any agency, department, or authority of the City of Griffin, Georgia, Spalding County, the State of Georgia, or the United States. 
(3)  The applicant has failed to pay any permit fee, rates, fees, penalty, or interest required or imposed under this article or has otherwise failed to comply with any of the provisions contained in this article. 
(4)  The applicant has failed to comply with any applicable legal or procedural requirements imposed by state law. 
(d)  The city manager or his or her designee shall grant or deny a collector permit application within 60 days of the applicant's submission of a completed application. If the collector permit application is denied, written notice, stating the reason(s) for denial, shall be served on the applicant by certified mail; the applicant may appeal such denial by filing a written appeal with the city manager within ten days of the denial. A hearing shall then be set before the board of commissioners and written notice of such hearing shall be sent to the appellant by certified mail. Ten business days' written notice shall be deemed reasonable, but a longer period of notice may be authorized as the board of commissioners may deem justified by the circumstances. Unless the circumstances justify otherwise, the hearing shall be held within 30 days of the appeal being filed with the city manager. The board of commissioners may affirm, reverse, or modify the permitting decision. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 74-122. - Collector vehicle requirements. 
(a)  A collector may only use a qualifying vehicle to collect or transport solid waste within the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
(1)  To qualify, a vehicle must be owned or leased by the applicant and must be listed in the permit application described in section 74-121. If a collector obtains a vehicle that the collector intends to use for purposes of collecting solid waste after the permit application is filed, the collector shall provide the information required by subsection (a)(2) to the city on forms approved by the city manager within ten days of the acquisition, purchase or lease of the qualifying vehicle. 
(2)  A qualifying vehicle shall have the business name, business address, and/or telephone number, tare weight and vehicle identification number painted or permanently affixed to each side of the vehicle in letters and numbers at least three inches in height. A regularly used business logo may also be displayed. No other names or numbers, not required by law, shall be displayed. 
(b)  Vehicle construction and maintenance. Solid waste disposal vehicles utilized by collectors of solid waste must meet the following minimum requirements both prior to and after the issuance of a permit: 
(1)  The collection vehicle body shall be capable of being readily emptied. 
(2)  The collection vehicle shall be kept in a sanitary condition. 
(3)  The collection vehicle must be so equipped that all loading openings on the bodies have tightly fitting doors or covers which latch, clamp or fasten to keep them closed and rubber or other suitable gasket to render them leakproof, spillproof, dustproof and odorproof to the maximum extent practicable. 
(4)  Roll-off boxes must be of welded construction and doors must be tightly fitted so as to render them leakproof and spillproof. Provisions shall be made to facilitate application of a tightly fitting tarpaulin cover or diaper. 
(5)  All unloading doors must be equipped with chains to keep them securely fastened in an open position when unloading. 
(6)  The collection vehicle shall be equipped with heavy-duty front hooks, loops or shackles, good and serviceable tires and other accessories as necessary for operation and/or navigation in or about any solid waste handling facility operated by the city. 
(7)  Each collection vehicle used or proposed for use by a collector together with the contents of any collection vehicle shall be subject at all times to inspection by law enforcement personnel and the city prior to discharge of the contents. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 74-123. - Transporting waste. 
Each collector shall comply with the following requirements of transporting solid waste generated in the city: 
(a)  Solid waste shall be suitably enclosed or covered to prevent littering, spillage of solid waste or fluids, and infiltration of rainwater. Tarpaulins must be used to cover compactor box openings, roll-off tops, or other openings. Tarpaulins must be kept in good repair at all times. 
(b)  Any spillage of solid waste on the roads leading to or on any solid waste handling facility is the sole responsibility of the person transporting such waste and shall be immediately cleaned and removed by the person transporting such waste. Any and all costs incurred by the city related to any such spillage shall be immediately remitted to the city by the person transporting such waste. This provision is in addition to any penalties authorized elsewhere by any other provision of law. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 74-124. - Disposal of waste. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, any person who collects solid waste generated in the City of Griffin, Georgia, (other than restricted waste rejected by the city) shall dispose of such waste at a solid waste handling facility operated by the city. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the source separation of materials from solid waste prior to collection of such solid waste for disposal. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 74-125. - Collector records. 
(a)  Each collector permitted to collect solid waste in the City of Griffin shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the city manager or any of his designees may require and for a period no less than three years. Such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers shall include, but not be limited to, documents evidencing the tonnage of waste each collector has collected within the city, the solid waste handling facility or disposal site where such waste is deposited, and the date(s) of disposal. 
(b)  The city manager or any of his designees may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and other facilities of any collector permitted to collect solid waste in the city in order to verify compliance with this article. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 74-126. - Solid waste facility procedures, rules, and waste acceptance policy. 
(a)  Establishment of policies and procedures. In order for the city to safely and cost effectively manage solid waste generated within the city, the city manager or his designee shall establish policies and procedures for the acceptance of restricted waste at any solid waste handling facility operated by the city. 
(b)  Acceptance of solid waste. Municipal solid waste and commercial solid waste generated in the City of Griffin shall be accepted at the appropriate solid waste handling facility operated by the city, subject to any fees and rates established pursuant to section 74-40 of this Code and any other policies and procedures established by the city. Only industrial solid waste that has been evaluated by the city pursuant to policies and procedures established by the city manager or his designee may be accepted for disposal, provided that the acceptance of such waste is consistent with the Solid Waste Management Act, the Hazardous Waste Management Act, or the rules and regulations promulgated by the environmental protection division under the authority of those statutes. 
(c)  Hazardous waste. No hazardous waste will be accepted for disposal at a solid waste handling facility operated by the city other than household hazardous waste that has been approved for acceptance by the city. No person shall deposit or attempt to deposit hazardous waste at any solid waste handling facility operated by the city or on the city's property, other than household hazardous waste that has been approved for acceptance by the city. 
(d)  Yard waste. Yard waste will only be accepted at a solid waste handling facility operated by the city and in compliance with any policies and procedures of the city, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2, any successor statute, and the rules and regulations promulgated by the environmental protection division under the authority of that statute. 
(e)  Other solid waste. All other solid waste generated in the City of Griffin, including but not limited to asbestos, bulky waste, construction or demolition waste, and scrap tires shall only be accepted at a solid waste handling facility operated by the city or at such other solid waste handling facility as designated by the city, in compliance with the policies and procedures established by the city manager and any applicable rules and regulations promulgated by the environmental protection division. 
(f)  Authority. The board of commissioners shall have the authority to establish any other policies and procedures it deems necessary to address the solid waste management needs of the City of Griffin, including, but not limited to, limitations of liability, reservation of rights, and general rules for the operation of city facilities. In addition, the board of commissioners shall have the authority to establish penalties for violations of its rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, the temporary suspension of a collector's permit (not to exceed 30 days) and permit revocation subject to the provisions of section 74-130 of this article. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 74-127. - Disposal fees. 
(a)  The board of commissioners, upon recommendation by the city manager or his designee, shall establish all rates and fees collected or assessed in accordance with this chapter, including but not limited to tipping fees for any waste deposited at a solid waste handling facility operated by the city. 
(b)  The city manager shall annually review all rates and fees collected or assessed in accordance with the article and may recommend adjust or eliminate any such rates and fees. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the city from changing such rates and fees, provided, however, that no adjustment to such rates and fees may occur without 30 days' public notice. 
(c)  All fees imposed or collected by the city shall comply with O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39 and any successor statute. 
(d)  The city is specifically authorized to require a letter of credit or a bond from any collector to ensure payment of rates and fees, including tipping fees. The city manager shall establish the minimum letter of credit or bond amount that may be required, but in no event shall the amount of any letter of credit or bond be less than the previous month's tipping fees from the collector who is required to post the bond or provide the letter of credit. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 74-128. - Emergency powers; right to assume collection. 
(a)  The board of commissioners of the City of Griffin, Georgia reserves the right to assume responsibility for all or part of the collection of solid waste in the city should it be determined that this is in the best interest of the health and welfare of the residents of the City of Griffin, Georgia. Such action shall be on a temporary basis, not to exceed 30 days, until a hearing before the board taking such action is held. 
(b)  Prior to the hearing described in subsection (a) above being held, notice to all affected holders of collector's permits of the time, place, and purpose of such hearing shall be given by prior certified written notice. Three business days' written notice shall be deemed reasonable, but a shorter or longer period of notice shall be authorized as the board may deem justified by the circumstances. 
(c)  The proceeding shall be as informal as is compatible with due process. All interested parties, including the city or its designee, shall be allowed to present any evidence, documents, or statements to support their position. The board will then determine whether the action described in subsection (a) above should be made permanent or whether any other action by the board is justified under the circumstances, including, but not limited to, entering into an exclusive franchise agreement for the collection of solid waste within the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
(d)  Any person adversely affected by any decision made by the board pursuant to this division and desiring to appeal further must do so by writ of certiorari directly to the Superior Court of Spalding County within 30 days of such adverse decision. There shall be no intermediate appeal to any other body. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 74-129. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided by resolution of the board of commissioners of the City of Griffin, Georgia, the enforcement of this article shall be within the jurisdiction of the city's enforcement personnel, including law enforcement personnel, employees of the city empowered to enforce codes and ordinances, and the city manager and his designees. 
(b)  Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  To facilitate the enforcement of this article, the city manager or his designees shall have the authority to request documents and information from any person generating solid waste within the City of Griffin that demonstrate or otherwise evidence the solid waste such person generates or has generated in the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
(d)  Subject to the limitations provided by O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6, a violation of any section of this division shall result in the following: 
(1)  A fine of not less than $500.00 for the first violation; 
(2)  A fine of not less than $750.00 for the second violation; 
(3)  A fine of not less than $1,000.00 for a third violation and each subsequent violation; and 
(4)  The city manager may, at his option, indefinitely revoke a collector's permit(s) for the fourth and all subsequent violations. Any revocation will be subject to the provisions of section 74-130 of this article. 
(e)  Any violator of this article shall be cited to appear before the municipal court of the city. 
(f)  Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to limit or constrain any federal or state agency or authority from enforcing federal or state laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, those laws and regulations regarding the generation, collection, transportation, and/or disposal of solid waste or hazardous waste in the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 74-130. - Permit revocation. 
(a)  To revoke a collector's permit, the city manager shall bring before the board of commissioners, at the next regularly scheduled meeting, a request to revoke indefinitely a collector's permit. Notice to the holder of such permit of the time, place, and purpose of such hearing shall be given by certified mail. Ten business days' written notice shall be deemed reasonable, but a longer period of notice may be authorized as the board of commissioners may deem justified by the circumstances. 
(b)  In all hearings before the board of commissioners conducted pursuant to this article, the following procedures shall apply; and the proceeding shall be as informal as is compatible with due process: 
(1)  The chairperson of the board of commissioners shall read or cause to be read the charges against the permit holder. The chairperson shall then read or cause to be read any response filed by the permit holder. 
(2)  The board of commissioners shall hear the evidence upon which the charges have been filed against the permit holder and shall not consider any additional evidence beyond the scope of these charges. The board may exclude evidence which is purely cumulative in nature. 
(3)  The order of proof shall be as follows: 
a.  The city attorney shall present evidence in support of the charges. 
b.  The permit holder or its attorney shall then present its evidence. 
c.  The board of commissioners shall allow each party to present rebuttal evidence. 
d.  The evidence of each party may be supported by the submission of pertinent documents and/or testimony. 
(4)  The permit holder and the city may each be represented by counsel, and may present, examine, and cross-examine witnesses. Additionally, the board of commissioners may question both parties and all witnesses to obtain any information deemed necessary to evaluate the charges. 
(c)  Upon the conclusion of the presentation of the evidence, the board of commissioners may indefinitely revoke the collector's permit, suspend the collector's permit for a period of time it deems justified, or allow the collector to retain the permit with or without additional conditions that the board of commissioners deems justified by the circumstances. A written decision shall be entered, setting forth the reasons found, and served upon the collector, either personally or by certified mail. 
(d)  Any person adversely affected by any revocation made by the board of commissioners and desiring to appeal further must do so by writ of certiorari directly to the Superior Court of Spalding County within 30 days of such adverse decision. There shall be no intermediate appeal to the City of Griffin, Georgia, or to any other body. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 74-131. - Prospective application; severability of provisions. 
This article shall not have retroactive effect or application, nor shall it be construed to have such an effect or application. This article shall have prospective application only. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Secs. 74-132—74-159. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - BILLING AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 74-160. - Billing and collection of fees and charges. 
The fees and charges imposed by this article may be billed upon the customer's city utility bill. The failure to pay all or any portion of such utility bill, including any special handling fees, shall subject the customer to penalties and interest as set forth on such bill. Any amount remaining outstanding after 30 days of its due date may be collected by the city manager in the manner provided for collection of delinquent taxes. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Sec. 74-161. - Offenses; penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  Authority to inspect and institute proceedings. The solid waste director and his duly authorized representatives shall have the power to enter at all reasonable times upon any private or public property within the city for the purpose of inspection and investigation of conditions of solid waste handling. Whenever the solid waste director has reason to believe any provision of this article is being violated, he shall attempt to obtain a remedy with the violator or violators by conference, conciliation and agreement. If such efforts should be unsuccessful, it shall be the duty of the solid waste director to institute proceedings against any person found to be in violation of this article. 
(b)  Vandalism, etc., of garbage containers prohibited. It shall be an offense against the city for any person to set fire to the contents of, scavenge in, indiscriminately scatter the contents of, or otherwise vandalize or cause damage to a container provided by the city for the collection and storage of garbage. 
(c)  Placement of residential waste in commercial and industrial containers prohibited. It shall be an offense against the city for any person to discard or place for collection any garbage, trash or other waste generated within a residential household in a commercial or industrial container. 
(d)  Dumping or depositing of solid waste. No person shall willfully place, dump, discard, or deposit solid waste, including scrap tires and lead-acid batteries, on public or private property, except in strict accordance with this article. 
(e)  Penalty for violations. Any person violating any restriction, prohibition or provision of this article shall be cited for an offense and tried before the municipal court. Upon a finding of conviction, the court shall impose a sentence as provided in section 1-12. 
( Ord. No. 17-13, § 1, 8-22-2017 )  
Chapter 78 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(6); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-7(9); any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(15); aviation, ch. 18; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; display of street numbers required, § 22-111; cemeteries, ch. 30; environment, ch. 42; floods, ch. 50; general cleanliness of street margins, § 54-5; parks and recreation, ch. 62; planning, ch. 66; telecommunication, ch. 86; traffic and vehicles, ch. 90; utilities, ch. 94; vegetation, ch. 98; vehicles for hire, ch. 102. 
State Law reference— Power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; Georgia Code of Public Transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 et seq.; governmental authorization for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; state, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; power of city to open, close or extend public streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; grant by municipal corporation of right to obstruct public street prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; municipal street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; executions for collection of municipal assessments for paving streets and laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358; municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 78-1. - Displaying goods, signs, advertisements. 
It shall be unlawful to display any goods, wares, merchandise or junk, or erect or place any sign, bill, poster or advertisement of any nature on any portion of any street, sidewalk, parkway or other public property in any manner, unless approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1968, § 20-7)  
Sec. 78-2. - Sidewalk cafes; permits. 
(a)  The city manager may issue permits under which a restaurant or cafe, located within the downtown commercial historic district (as defined in chapter 6 of the Code of Griffin, Georgia), may provide seating for its customers, with tables for their use, on the sidewalk and within portions of the street right-of-way farthest from the street or roadway; provided, however, the placement of tables and chairs shall not interfere with the safe and convenient passage by pedestrians along the sidewalk. Permits issued under this section shall apply only for that portion of right-of-way immediately adjacent to the restaurant or cafe, as defined by projecting imaginary lines from the property boundaries toward the street or roadway. Not less than five feet of sidewalk shall remain open and unobstructed at all times for pedestrian usage. 
(b)  The city manager shall specify in the permit the boundaries of the area where tables and chairs may be located, and whether temporary (removable) barriers or fencing is required to separate the seating area(s) from pedestrian traffic. No permanent obstruction, including canopies, are allowed. The city manager shall, in the permit, specify standards and practices for litter control and sanitation, requirements for the removal of the tables, chairs and barriers during hours when the restaurant or cafe is closed or circumstances make sidewalk seating undesirable to the public, security, minimum insurance or bond requirements, and other matters consistent with the permit. 
(c)  Permits under this section shall be approved and issued by the city manager only after the directors of public safety and public works find and recommend that public safety and the convenience of the pedestrian public will not be harmed or prejudiced by this activity, in whose findings the city manager concurs. Permits issued under this section shall constitute a mere "privilege" and afford no right or interest in the permit holder, and are revocable, without cause, by the city manager at any time. No fee shall be charged by the city for a permit issued under this section. Permits are not transferable upon change in ownership of the restaurant or cafe. 
(d)  Where the restaurant or cafe holding a permit under this section has also been licensed by the city to serve alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, possession of an open container of alcoholic beverage, purchased from the restaurant or cafe and being consumed within the area designated by permit under this section, shall not be a violation of the "open container" prohibition of chapter 6 of this Code; provided, however, no person, including employees of the establishment permitted under this section, shall possess or transport open containers of alcoholic beverages beyond the area(s) designated for sidewalk seating. No establishment permitted under this section shall serve a patron more than one drink or container of an alcoholic beverage within the designated area at one time. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 1, 8-14-2006)  
Secs. 78-3—78-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OBSTRUCTIONS OF INTERSECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43. 
 
Sec. 78-31. - Report of interference or obstruction. 
Whenever it is reported or discovered that weeds, bushes, shrubs or trees are growing on private property abutting an intersection so as to interfere with or obstruct the clear view of motorists entering or approaching the intersection, the facts surrounding the report or discovery shall be reported to the chief of the police department. 
(Code 1968, § 13-121(a))  
Sec. 78-32. - Issuance of citation to remove obstruction. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of the police department to issue a citation to the property owner or occupant, if occupied by a party other than the owner, notifying such party to remove the obstruction within five days of service of the citation. 
(Code 1968, § 13-121(b))  
Sec. 78-33. - Filing of complaint upon failure to comply with citation. 
If the owner or occupant fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the citation, the chief of the police department shall cause a complaint to be filed in the municipal court of the city citing the owner or occupant to appear to determine the question of whether the condition found to exist on the property obstructs the intersection and constitutes a nuisance in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 42, article II of this Code. 
(Code 1968, § 13-121(c))  
Sec. 78-34. - Abatement by city; costs as lien. 
If the municipal court determines the existence of a nuisance, it shall order its abatement on such terms as the court deems reasonable and just. If the property owner or occupant fails to comply with the order to abate the nuisance in the time allowed, the city manager shall act to remove or cutback the obstruction so as to provide a clear view for motorists at the intersection. The amount of the cost of work performed by the city shall be assessed as a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Such lien shall attach to the real property upon the payment of all costs of removal by the city and the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of such costs by the city manager in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners of the city on a lien docket maintained by the clerk for such purposes. 
(Code 1968, § 13-121(d))  
Sec. 78-35. - Collection of lien. 
The city manager shall enforce collection of the lien in the following manner: 
(1)  The owner or parties in interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the city, within 30 days after the perfection of such lien, a sum of money equal to 25 percent of the total amount due and by further paying the remaining balance due on such lien, together with interest at the rate of seven percent per annum, in three equal annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment; 
(2)  Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred or conveyed by the owner or parties in interest at any time prior to the termination of the three-year period, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the city; and 
(3)  Should the amount due on such lien, or any portion thereof, be unpaid after the passage of such three-year period, or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided for in subsection (2) of this section, the city may enforce collection of the amount due on such lien in the same manner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-368 and other state statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person having any right, title or interest in or lien upon such property, all as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-4-40. 
(Code 1968, § 13-121(e))  
Secs. 78-36—78-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PARADES, ASSEMBLIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-04, § 1, adopted April 24, 2018 , repealed the former Art. III, §§ 78-61—78-70, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to parades and demonstrations and derived from Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, adopted Feb. 25, 2014. 
State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; operation of motorcycles and motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7; funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76; authority to regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on the highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3). 
 
Sec. 78-61. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose of this article to regulate parades, gatherings, assemblies, and demonstrations, and similar events that occupy or obstruct the safe and orderly passage of motor vehicles and pedestrians on, over and across the streets and public ways of the city, without regard to the content or any message conveyed by such activity. The City of Griffin recognizes that the First Amendment, made applicable to the states through the Fourteenth Amendment, prohibits a municipal government from restricting expression because of its message, its ideas, its subject matter, or its content; content-based regulations are presumptively unconstitutional and unenforceable. Therefore, it is the intent of the board of commissioners, in enacting this article, to be content-neutral and impose reasonable regulations, by date, time, place, manner, and location only. 
Further, this article involves a balancing of the right of the public to the free passage of citizens, either in motor vehicles, on foot, or by other means of conveyance, along, over and across the public streets and ways of the city against the First Amendment rights of citizens to exercise certain protected speech and activities on or within the city's streets, which the U.S. Supreme Court regards as quintessential public forums. It is the finding and conclusion of the board of commissioners that public safety and the protection and preservation of life and property, both public and private, are legitimate, significant, and compelling governmental interests which this article is intended to protect and regulate. It is further believed that the regulations imposed hereunder are narrowly tailored to achieve such purposes and reasonably protect such government interests, and that these regulations are the least restrictive measures that achieve such results. Finally, it is the intent of this board of commissioners to leave open adequate alternative avenues for communication. 
( Ord. No. 18-04, § 1, 4-24-2018 )  
Sec. 78-62. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parade is any form of assembly, march, ceremony, demonstration, show, exhibit, pageant, road race (walk/run/bicycle or other form of conveyance), or procession of any kind, in, on, or upon any public street, sidewalk, park or other public place within the city, which impedes, obstructs, impairs or interferes with, free flow of traffic, by motor vehicles, pedestrians, or other conveyances within a public street or way. Any assembly on or within a public street that does not conform to the normal or usual traffic control devices shall be presumed to impede, obstruct, impair or interfere with the free flow of traffic on such street, highway, alley, sidewalk or other public way. 
Person is any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other form of recognized business entity, association, or organization, whether organized for profit or not-for-profit. 
( Ord. No. 18-04, § 1, 4-24-2018 )  
Sec. 78-63. - Permit required. 
Permitting is a reasonable way for a local government to receive notice of an upcoming event, such as a parade, protest march, or assembly. By receiving advance notice of such event, the city has the opportunity to meet with event organizers, determine the location(s) where the event will take place, and to properly assess security and other needs for the event. The purpose for a permit under this section is not to restrict or suppress a person's right to engage in speech or expressive conduct protected by the First Amendment; rather it is to provide the city with reasonable advance notice of intended or planned assemblies that may interfere with or impede normal traffic flow and operation of vehicles and pedestrians upon a public street or way. In requiring a permit for planned assemblies, it is not the city's intent to suppress the spontaneous exercise of First Amendment rights, when such are occasioned by news or current affairs becoming public knowledge, or caused by reaction to some topical event, such as demonstrations for which a permit has been issued. No person shall engage in, participate in, organize, form, promote or aid in the start of any planned or organized parade, assembly, or demonstration that occupies or obstructs a public street or way of the city, unless a permit shall have been obtained from the city manager or his designee, or the event or activity is excepted from a permit by this article. 
( Ord. No. 18-04, § 1, 4-24-2018 )  
Sec. 78-64. - Exceptions. 
This permit requirement of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions formed and conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76(a); 
(2)  A government entity or agency acting within the scope of its legal authority, duties and functions; 
(4)  Picketing involving less than 30 persons and no vehicles or floats, whose route is confined solely to public sidewalks and which does not obstruct or impair normal traffic movement (vehicles or pedestrians) in, along, or on any public street, or encroach on private property adjacent to the sidewalk unless written permission is first obtained from the property owner, and which does not involve sound amplification or noises regulated by the city's noise pollution regulations; or 
(5)  On not less than 24 hours notice from the event organizer, the city manager shall have the discretion to waive the requirement for a permit for a spontaneous exercise of First Amendment rights, provided such exercise is wholly located on city-owned property in the block bounded by Slaton Street on the north, N. Fifth Street on the east; E. Solomon Street on the south, and N. Sixth Street on the west. This exception is provided to afford an alternative adequate avenue for communications protected by the First Amendment. In order to exercise the discretion afforded by this section, the city manager, or his designee, shall meet, in person, in advance, with the event organizer in order to determine the level of security required for citizens and property during the event. 
( Ord. No. 18-04, § 1, 4-24-2018 )  
Sec. 78-65. - Permit—Application. 
An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the city tax and license clerk, who shall promptly convey the application to the chief of police or his designee, time being of the essence. Such application shall be on form(s) provided by the city and shall be filed not less than five calendar days prior to the proposed parade, assembly or demonstration. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name(s), address(es), telephone number(s) and email address of the person or persons sponsoring, organizing, or conducting the event; the name and a cellular telephone number of the sponsor's contact person who will be continuously available by phone during the event and for 24 hours prior thereto; 
(2)  The date and time of the parade or event; 
(3)  The proposed route of the parade, including its assembly and disassembly points, if permission is sought to shorten the route or follow a different route from that set forth in section 78-68 of this article; the proposed location(s) for a protest or demonstration, and the written consent of any private property owner on whose property the event is to occur; 
(4)  Approximate number of participants, and type of vehicles, animals, marching units, bands, and floats to be involved, including any sound amplification to be used; 
(5)  Estimate of the number of persons or spectators who may observe the event; 
(6)  Estimate of the maximum length of the parade and/or time during which street intersections along the parade route may be obstructed; 
(7)  Estimate whether any opposition or contra-demonstration is anticipated and what security measures, if any, the sponsor or organizer has taken to provide security for participants; 
(8)  A description of any unusual problems anticipated concerning traffic or public safety, or a statement that no unusual problems are anticipated; 
(9)  Where a separate permit is required by the Georgia Department of Transportation to occupy or obstruct a state route or highway, such permit shall be issued by GDOT as a condition precedent to applying for a city permit. 
(10)  All applications shall be signed by the event sponsor or organizer, who shall swear before a notary that the information contained therein is true and correct. Any false statement in an application shall be grounds for denial or revocation of a permit and/or denial of future permits. 
No fee or charge shall be imposed upon an applicant for a permit under this article. 
( Ord. No. 18-04, § 1, 4-24-2018 )  
Sec. 78-66. - Permit—Investigation and report on application. 
The police chief, or his designee, shall promptly investigate the application and make a written report to the city manager, including recommendation for additional police officers and/or fire and rescue personnel, the provision of first responder/medical assistance during the event, portable sanitation facilities, and additional personnel for street cleaning and trash pick-up following the event. Whenever possible, the police chief shall have a meeting, in person, with the event sponsor or organizer, who signed the application, to better understand the purpose and intent of the event and potential for hostile counter activity. The report shall contain findings as to whether all requirements of section 78-65 have been met. Further, the report shall assess the requirements for traffic and pedestrian safety in the vicinity of the event, including that of parade participants and observers, during and following the event. This investigation shall be completed within four calendar days of receipt of a complete application for permit; should the police chief fail to complete a report to the city manager within that time the application shall be deemed granted. 
( Ord. No. 18-04, § 1, 4-24-2018 )  
Sec. 78-67. - Permit—Issuance or denial. 
By the fifth calendar day after filing of a complete application, the city manager shall review the application and the investigative report and recommendations of the police chief. The city manager, in recognition of his limited discretion to deny the permit, shall issue the permit unless he or she finds: 
(1)  The parade or event will be of such a size or nature that diverts public safety resources to such a degree that the rest of the city will be without reasonable police, fire, or life safety protection; 
(2)  The parade or event will encroach upon or interfere with another parade or event for which a permit has been previously approved; 
(3)  Information contained in the application is found to be false in any material aspect; or 
(4)  The sponsor refuses to agree to abide by and comply with the reasonable conditions of this article. 
No decision to deny a permit shall be based upon the message or expression of speech conveyed by such event, its ideas, or subject matter. All decisions to deny a permit shall be in writing, shall state, with specificity, the reason or reasons for permit denial, and shall be served upon the applicant, either in person or by statutory overnight delivery to the address given in the application. The decision of the city manager shall be final. An applicant aggrieved by a permit denial may file a petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Spalding County, Georgia asserting any alleged errors of law. 
( Ord. No. 18-04, § 1, 4-24-2018 )  
Sec. 78-68. - Regulations pertaining to all parades and events. 
(a)  All parades, except road races, shall assemble and start on the North Expressway (U.S. 19 and 41, Ga. 92 Business), south of its intersection with W. Ellis Road; thence, proceed south on the North Expressway to its intersection with Flynt Street, thence west on Flynt Street to its intersection with Spalding Street, then north on Spalding Street to its intersection with Varsity Drive, then east on Varsity Drive to its intersection with the North Expressway, thence north on the North Expressway to the point of origin, where the parade shall disband. To keep traffic congestion to a minimum, the sponsor or event organizer should seek written consent of commercial parking lot owners near the point(s) of assembly to allow gathering of participants, parking, and formation of units off-street, if possible. Buses and other vehicles used to transport participants to the assembly point shall be parked prior to the parade start. Uniformed policemen shall be posted at all intersections where the normal use of traffic-control devices will be interrupted during the parade or event. 
(b)  Road races shall be routed so as to minimize traffic congestion, particularly in the commercial business district and/or impacting federal or state highways; crossing of federal or state highways shall be kept to a minimum for safety purposes. Uniformed policemen shall be posted at all intersections where the normal use of traffic-control devices will be interrupted during the race event. At all other non-signalized intersections, it shall be the responsibility of the race organizer to post its own personnel, wearing an orange safety vest, to warn approaching motorists during the race event. 
(c)  In coordination with the Georgia Department of Transportation, since the North Expressway is a federal and state highway, parades using the route specified in subparagraph (a) above, shall only be conducted on Tuesdays and Thursdays between the hours of 9:30 a.m. and 11:00 a.m., the hours of 1:30 p.m. and 3:30 p.m., and the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m.; and on Saturdays, and legal holidays between the hours of 9:30 a.m. and 12:00 p.m., the hours of 1:30 p.m. and 4:30 p.m., and the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(d)  No parade participant shall carry or have in his or her possession any firearms, knives, pepper spray, tasers, bats, or weapons of any description while participating in a parade, or at the points of assembly or disbanding. Participants parking or entering on private property without permission shall be subject to having their vehicles towed and impounded. 
(e)  All materials used in the construction of floats shall be fire-resistant and shall be subject to inspection with fire and life safety requirements by the city fire marshal. 
(f)  Drivers of all motorized vehicles, regardless of whether such vehicle is required to display a tag or proof of title, shall operate the vehicle in accordance with the Uniform Rules of the Road, as adopted by city ordinance, while participating in a parade or other permitted event. Any driver who operates a motor vehicle in an unsafe manner, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-251, may be cited accordingly. Drivers of vehicles in parades shall obey the lawful commands and instruction of police officers posted along the parade route. 
(g)  To prevent risk of injury to spectators and other parade participants, no objects shall be thrown from floats or vehicles in the parade. Handbills, leaflets, individually wrapped candy, or objects of a similar nature not likely to cause physical injury may be handed to spectators by participants walking outside of vehicles or floats. 
(h)  Where barricades, ropes, tape or similar devices are used to demarcate the limits of the parade route, spectators shall remain within or behind defined areas. Spectators shall not cross the parade route while the parade is in progress or in such a manner as to interfere with its progress. No objects may be thrown by spectators into the parade route or at parade participants. 
(i)  When animals are participating in a parade, it is the responsibility of the animal's handler to immediately remove any droppings from the public street or sidewalk. 
(j)  Parade participants are encouraged not to engage in speeches or debates during the parade or march, but may make speeches, debate and distribute literature at rallies or similar gatherings conducted at the conclusion of the parade, if suitable arrangements have been made off the public streets and sidewalks of the city. 
(k)  As a condition of every permit, permittee, its officers, agents and employees acknowledge that issuance of a permit by the city forms no special relationship between the city and event sponsor or organizer, any participant, observer or spectator in or at the permitted event or activity. All participants do so at their own risk. Permittees are encouraged, but not required to obtain and maintain adequate liability insurance for such permitted activity or event. 
( Ord. No. 18-04, § 1, 4-24-2018 )  
Sec. 78-69. - Public conduct during parades. 
(a)  Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any parade or permitted event, or with any person, vehicle, or animal participating in a parade. 
(b)  Driving through parades or funeral processions. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between vehicles or persons comprising a parade when the parade is in progress or in motion, unless directed by authorized traffic control personnel. 
(c)  Parking on parade route. When in the sole judgment of the chief of police it is reasonably necessary to prohibit or restrict parking of vehicles along a street or highway constituting a part of the route of a parade, road race, or other permitted event, the police department shall post signs to that effect. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave an unattended vehicle in violation thereof. Offending vehicles may be towed and/or impounded. 
( Ord. No. 18-04, § 1, 4-24-2018 )  
Sec. 78-70. - Revocation of parade permit. 
Any permit issued pursuant to this article may be summarily revoked, without prior notice to the permit holder, by the city manager, if by reason of disaster, public calamity, riot, or other emergency, he or she determines that the safety of the public or property, public or private, is in peril. Whenever a permit is revoked under this section, a new permit for a rescheduled parade or event, if requested, shall be issued to the sponsor at no cost or charge. 
( Ord. No. 18-04, § 1, 4-24-2018 )  
Sec. 78-71. - Legal and financial responsibility. 
Nothing in this article shall relieve the sponsor or organizer of an event, as herein defined, from legal liability for any injuries or damages to persons or property, public or private, occasioned by any act or omission arising from the event for which a permit under this article was issued. The City of Griffin, merely by requiring and approving an event permit under this article, accepts no responsibility for the safety of persons participating in parades and events governed by this article, including spectators at such events. 
( Ord. No. 18-04, § 1, 4-24-2018 )  
Secs. 78-72—78-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - UTILITY ACCOMMODATION POLICY AND ISSUANCE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-03, § 1, adopted Jan. 22, 2019 , repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 78-80—78-88, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 16-04, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 2016 . 
 
Sec. 78-80. - Declaration of findings, purpose, scope, definitions. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. The City of Griffin (the "city") is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized primarily for a viable transportation network of streets, roads and highways, sidewalks, and alternative modes of travel; secondarily to promote the public health, safety, welfare, and economic development of the city; and third to protect its public works infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the Laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, including but not limited to Article IX, Section I, paragraphs II and III of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3 and O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92, has adopted this article for the purpose of regulating public and private utilities which use or occupy the city rights-of-way. 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the city's rights-of-way, other than rights-of-way on the State Highway System, as provided herein. Telecommunication facilities located outside the public rights-of-way are governed by Article III of Chapter 86, Telecommunication Antennas and Tower Standards. Aerial installation of telecom facilities on city-owned utility poles and structures within the rights-of-way requires a separate pole attachment agreement with the city to occupy the communications space on city-owned utility poles, which must be executed prior to seeking a permit under this article. 
(c)  Definitions. For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this article. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
(1)  City means the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
(2)  Codified ordinances means the Code of Griffin, Georgia. 
(3)  Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way. 
(4)  Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way. 
(5)  Director means the Public Works Director of the City of Griffin, Georgia, or his or her designee. 
(6)  Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety of a person, or of significant damage or loss of real or personal property. 
(7)  Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including but not limited to pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, signs, towers, traffic control devices and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the rights-of-way within the city. 
(8)  Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations. 
(9)  FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto. 
(10)  Permit means a written authorization which grants permission to conduct specific activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in the written authorization issued pursuant to this article, in a separate written agreement with the city (such as a pole attachment agreement), in a right-of-way design and specifications manual, or in a related provision of this Code. 
(11)  Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing streets, roads, highways and related facilities. 
(12)  Service(s) means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public. 
(13)  Service agreement means a valid license agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city as specified therein. 
(14)  Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and transportation corridors within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof. 
(15)  Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. 
(16)  Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities. 
(17)  Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, stormwater, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof, or serve a governmental purpose. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to systems of communications, data, information, telecommunications, cable television and video services. 
( Ord. No. 19-03, § 1, 1-22-2019 )  
Sec. 78-81. - Utility registration. 
(a)  Registration required. Each utility who owns, occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of this article, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the city within 45 days of the effective date of this article. 
(b)  Registration procedure. The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation, etc.), mailing address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, mailing address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
(2)  The name, mailing address, email address and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times; 
(3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of legal authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements. 
(4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(c)  Incomplete registration. If a registration is incomplete, the director shall promptly notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. When a registration is complete, the director shall accept it and so notify the utility in writing. 
(d)  Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, revocable license to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by Federal or state law, codes or regulations, nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
(e)  Facilities in place without registration. Beginning three months after the effective date of this article, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, shall be deemed a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city codes or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
( Ord. No. 19-03, § 1, 1-22-2019 )  
Sec. 78-82. - Construction permits. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, locate, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the rights-of-way of the city without a construction permit from the department of public works in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(b)  Permit procedure. Construction permits shall be obtained from the director (or such other person as the city manager may designate) upon application made on forms prescribed by the department of public works. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and mailing address of the utility; 
(2)  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)  The name and mailing address, email address and telephone number of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The name, mailing address, email address and telephone, cellphone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s); 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(6)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in the amount of $1,000,000.00, payable to the city to pay any damages to any part of the city street system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(7)  A copy, if requested, of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(8)  A copy, if requested, of the pole attachment agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the application. 
(c)  Permit fees. Fees shall be paid at the time of filing the application, subject to the most recent fee schedule approved by the commission, as from time to time amended. The fee schedule shall be available at the offices of the director and the city manager and open for public inspection, without charge. 
(d)  Issuance of permit. All permit applications shall be reviewed and processed in a reasonably timely manner. Where any law or regulation imposes a time limitation for permit review and issuance, else the permit is "deemed granted" (such limitation often referred to by the FCC as a "shotclock"), every reasonable effort shall be made by the city to process the application and issue written approval, with or without reasonable conditions, or denial of the permit within such time limitations. 
If the director determines the applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the director shall issue a permit. 
(1)  Whether issuing of the approval will be consistent with this article; 
(2)  Whether applicant has submitted a complete application, including payment of the requisite fee, and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, as applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and 
(3)  The impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, aesthetic standards, traffic flow, and other users of the right-of-way and the difficulty and length of time of the project, construction or maintenance. 
Written notification of application approval/permit issuance shall be given to the applicant, either by email at the email address given in the application, or by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested. If a decision is made to deny the permit, facts supporting the reason(s) for denial shall be stated in the notice. 
(e)  Emergency situations. 
(1)  Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the director of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. 
(2)  In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities other than by notification to the director, the city shall use its best efforts to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility, for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(f)  Effective period of permit. 
(1)  Each permit shall have a set date on or after which work may commence and shall expire six months from date of commencement, unless based on information provided in the applicant's permit application, a longer construction period is anticipated. 
(2)  The permit shall remain in place until construction is completed or until its stated expiration date, unless the utility is in default. The director may give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
a.  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a permit application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; 
b.  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this chapter; 
c.  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city; or 
d.  Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application. 
(g)  Cancellation for cause . If a utility fails to cure a default within ten working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the permit. If the director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  City shall serve the utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)  If utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the permit terminated. 
(h)  Expiration of permit. If work is not begun within six months of the date of issuance, the permit will automatically expire. 
( Ord. No. 19-03, § 1, 1-22-2019 )  
Sec. 78-83. - Required minimum standards. 
(a)  Utility accommodation manual adopted. The 2016 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards Manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, and appendix items, except Appendix B (Permit Forms and supporting Documents), promulgated by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in this article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained herein. A copy of the manual shall be maintained in the offices of the director or his designee and open for public inspection and copying. Copies of the manual are also available on the Georgia Department of Transportation's website. Any conflicts between the provisions of this article and the manual shall be resolved in favor of this article. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the City of Griffin municipal equivalents. 
(b)  Protection of traffic and roadway. Unless specifically in the permit, no utility may occupy city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic, pedestrian use, and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the city from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way or the right-of-way itself. 
(c)  Grading. If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time by the city or by federal or state highway authorities during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(d)  Installation of new poles and other wireholding structures. A provider of wireline or wireless communication services seeing to install aerial facilities shall collocate its facilities on existing poles and structures whenever feasible. Unless otherwise provided in a valid pole attachment agreement, no placement of communications facilities is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way. No new poles may be set by an applicant in the right-of-way if adequate capacity exists on an existing pole or structure owned by another utility or entity, and any poles or structures permitted are to be removed, relocated, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. No new pole or structure shall exceed a height of 55 feet, unless the city consents thereto in writing. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of all right-of-way users and adjacent property owners. All installations shall conform to the National Electric Safety Code (NESC), and other applicable federal and state laws, codes and regulations. No aerial facility may sag lower than 18 feet at mid-span under fully loaded conditions. 
(e)  Aesthetic considerations. Where feasible, all aerial installations, poles and other support structures, shall match the character of the area within a 500-foot radius in order to blend into the surrounding environment and be visually unobtrusive. Each antenna must fit within an imaginary enclosure of not more than six cubic feet, may not exceed a height of three feet above the top of the pole or structure, and may not protrude from the outer circumference of the pole or structure by more than two feet. The cumulative size of all communications installations on a single pole or structure shall not be more than 30 cubic feet in volume, or protrude from the outer circumference of the pole or structure by more than two feet. Ground-based enclosures, separate from a pole, may not be higher than three feet above grade, not wider than three feet and not deeper than three feet. Pole-mounted enclosures may not be taller than five feet. To the extent possible, all installations shall be of a style and color to match the color of the pole. No signage shall be affixed to a wireless installation other than a small tag identifying its owner, with emergency contact information. 
(f)  Historic District. Within the Commercial Historic District of the city, the boundaries of which are shown on the official zoning map, no wireless communications installation shall be attached to any decorative lamppost, traffic control signal mast arm, or structure other than a utility pole, unless the applicant demonstrates to the city's satisfaction that its proposed installation cannot provide reasonably comparable service using an existing utility pole. To the extent feasible, the wireless service provider shall conform to design and aesthetic standards for the Commercial Historic District and consider camouflaging its installation in order to minimize the impact on the aesthetics of the Historic District. 
(g)  Utilities protection. As provided in O.C.G.A § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next working day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than working days. 
( Ord. No. 19-03, § 1, 1-22-2019 )  
Sec. 78-84. - Restoration of property. 
(a)  Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities damage. 
(b)  A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
( Ord. No. 19-03, § 1, 1-22-2019 )  
Sec. 78-85. - Inspection. 
(a)  The utility shall make the construction site available to the director and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
(b)  At any time, including the time of inspection, the director may order, in writing, the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this article, or may issue an order, in writing, to correct work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
(c)  When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility shall notify the department. 
( Ord. No. 19-03, § 1, 1-22-2019 )  
Sec. 78-86. - Other approvals, permits and agreements. 
Additional permits required. The utility shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to city codes, state or federal law. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of laws, shall complete work in a way as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and is responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way regardless of who performs the work. No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency. 
( Ord. No. 19-03, § 1, 1-22-2019 )  
Sec. 78-87. - Penalties. 
(a)  Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisance, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
(b)  Citations returnable to the Municipal Court of Griffin, Georgia shall be deemed valid when served personally upon the utility's designated facilities representative, or by certified mail, return receipt requested, or statutory overnight delivery at the address provided. 
( Ord. No. 19-03, § 1, 1-22-2019 )  
Sec. 78-88. - Other provisions. 
(a)  Reservation of regulatory and police powers. The city by issuing a written approval of registration or permit under this article, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and Laws of the United States, State of Georgia and the City Charter, and under the provisions of the City Code to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. A utility by applying for and being issued a written permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(b)  Compliance. No person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of city to enforce compliance. 
(c)  Appeal of administrative decisions. An aggrieved applicant for a construction permit under this article shall have the right, within 30 days of receipt of written notice of denial of the permit, to appeal the decision to the city manager, whose decision shall be final. Any appeal provided for by this article and any notification to the city required by this article shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the city manager at P.O. Box T, Griffin, GA 30224. 
( Ord. No. 19-03, § 1, 1-22-2019 )  
Secs. 78-89—78-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - REGULATION OF TIMBER HARVESTING ACTIVITY 
 
Sec. 78-100. - Title. 
This article is known as the "Regulation of Timber Harvesting Activity." 
( Ord. No. 16-12, § 1, 8-23-2016 )  
Sec. 78-101. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, timber harvesting shall means the harvesting of standing timber for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any woodyard or processing plant located inside or outside this state. Such term shall not apply to landscaping or removal of dead or diseased trees from public or private property. 
( Ord. No. 16-12, § 1, 8-23-2016 )  
Sec. 78-102. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this article to protect the public streets and roads of the city from damage, including erosion and deposits of sedimentation, that often occur from timber harvesting activities. This article is enacted pursuant to the authority of a municipal corporation to regulate streets or roads within its jurisdiction in accordance with O.C.G.A. Title 32. Nothing in this article is intended to preclude the city from imposing regulations on private land use activities relating to development, such as zoning, tree protection, landscaping, or streamside buffer regulations. 
( Ord. No. 16-12, § 1, 8-23-2016 )  
Sec. 78-103. - Timber harvesting requirements and application process. 
(a)  All timber harvesters harvesting timber in the City of Griffin must comply with all relevant provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24 in order to use any public street or road(s) in the city for transporting harvested timber, other than a federal or state highway. 
(b)  An appointment for ingress/egress inspection shall be scheduled 48 hours in advance of the commencement of activity with the public works department to allow the public works director or his designated agent to inspect the site prior to any activity at the proposed ingress/egress location. 
(c)  The following minimum standards shall be met unless directed otherwise by the public works director or his designated agent: 
(1)  Use geotextile underliner minimum 20 feet wide under gravel pad. 
(2)  Minimum drive width shall be 20 feet. 
(3)  Minimum thickness of six inches constructed of one and one-half inches to three and one-half inches of coarse aggregate for a minimum drive length of 50 feet. 
(4)  The street or road, at each ingress/egress point, shall be posted with four 48-inch orange "Trucks Entering Highway" advance warning signs placed on the shoulder of the road at 500 feet and 1,000 feet intervals from both directions. Signs and posts shall conform to the current edition of the Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(5)  All tree harvesting activities shall be performed in accordance with generally accepted forestry land management practices and/or agricultural operations, not incidental to development, on tracts zoned for or used for forestry, silvicultural, or agricultural purpose. 
(d)  No harvester equipment or vehicle(s) may be parked on a public right-of-way or use the public right-of-way as a loading facility. 
(e)  Once items (a) through (c)(4) have been accomplished and notification given to the public works director or his designated agent, the timber harvester must provide the following to the public works department: 
(1)  Persons or firms conducting timber harvesting activities in the City of Griffin shall furnish to the city, a surety bond in the sum of $5,000.00 in a form required by law and approved by the city attorney prior to beginning any timber harvesting activities or, at the option of the person or firm harvesting timber, a valid irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan association, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 7-1-4, in the amount of and in lieu of such bond. A separate surety bond or letter of credit shall be required for each tract for which timber harvesting is to occur. In addition, a map of the area identifying the location of the tract to be harvested and the main point and any alternate points of ingress to such tract from a public road and, if different, any point of egress from such a tract to a public road. Said bond or letter of credit shall indemnify and protect the city from any damage to public street or road(s) or clean-up cost associated with any timber harvesting activity conducted. 
(2)  Said bond(s) or letter(s) of credit shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued. 
(3)  Timber harvester shall submit a fully completed notice of timber harvesting activity, in the form approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission, as found on its website, along with all requested additional information and surety bond(s) or bank letter(s) of credit to the public works department, which then shall review the documentation submitted and notify the timber harvester of approval or denial to proceed with the timber harvesting process. It shall be the duty of the public works director to promptly provide a copy of every approved notice of timber harvesting activity to the County Manager of Spalding County, Georgia. 
Pursuant to the soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control ordinance, subsection 42-67(c), a citation will be issued immediately upon proof of any sediment entering onto a public street or road or sedimentation entering any waters of the state or United States. 
( Ord. No. 16-12, § 1, 8-23-2016 )  
Sec. 78-104. - Liability for violation of this article. 
(a)  Liability. 
(1)  Violation of the notice requirements of this article shall result in the immediate issuance of a stop-work order against the timber harvester, and issuance of a citation, returnable to the Municipal Court of Griffin, Georgia. Upon conviction, a violator shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00. 
(2)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by the law nor impose any liability upon the city for damages to any person or property. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, any rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder, any local ordinance(s) enacted pursuant thereto, or to pollute any waters of the state or United States, as defined thereby. 
( Ord. No. 16-12, § 1, 8-23-2016 )  
Chapter 82 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-7(2); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-7(9); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-7(14); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-171 et seq.; excise tax for alcoholic beverages, § 6-76 et seq.; businesses, ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I; limitation on taxing power of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VIII; ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; municipal ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 82-1. - Administration. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article the finance officer shall be charged with the duty to administer the imposition, collection and enforcement of all taxes and special assessments levied or imposed by the city in accordance with the administrative procedures set forth in this article. To the extent this article fails to provide a designated procedure, such officer shall act in the manner established, if any, for county tax collectors under applicable state law. 
(b)  In determining the fair market value of property within its taxing jurisdiction, the city shall use the fair market value as finally determined for the property for county ad valorem tax purposes. 
(c)  Following adoption of its current fiscal year budget, the board of commissioners shall, by resolution, adopt a millage rate upon which property subject to ad valorem tax will be billed. Prior to adoption of such millage rate, the board of commissioners shall publish the notice of proposed ad valorem tax rate as required by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-32. Millage rates shall be calculated using 40 percent of the assessed fair market value of the property upon which the tax is levied. 
(d)  The finance officer shall cause a bill to be sent to all taxpayers at the address last shown on the county tax digest by regular U.S. mail, with adequate postage thereon; provided, however, failure by the taxpayer to receive a bill shall not constitute grounds for nonpayment or late payment of the tax. The bill shall state the location or description of the property taxed, the fair market value of the property (100 percent) and its taxable value (40 percent of fair market value), and the amount of tax due thereon. The bill shall also state the due date after which taxes shall be in default. The bill may also contain such additional information as allowed by law or authorized by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1968, § 21-1) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.  
Sec. 82-2. - Due date; payment; interest on past due taxes. 
(a)  All ad valorem taxes shall be due and payable in full within 60 days after notice, unless the due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, in which case it shall be postponed until the first day following which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. Supplemental ad valorem taxes and special assessments shall be due and payable on the date set forth in the ordinance imposing the tax or assessment. 
(b)  All taxes and assessments imposed by the city shall be paid in full in legal tender of the United States; except where specially authorized by law or ordinance of the board of commissioners, no partial payments shall be accepted. 
(c)  Taxes and special assessments shall bear interest at an annual rate equal to the bank prime loan rate as posted by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Statistical Release H.15, or any publication that may supercede it, plus three percent, to accrue monthly. Such annual interest rate shall be determined for each calendar year based on the first weekly posting of Statistical Release H.15 on or after January 1 of each calendar year. Interest shall begin to accrue from the date the tax is due until the date the tax is paid. Any period less than one month shall be considered to be one month. The finance officer may waive the collection of any interest, in whole or in part, due the city on unpaid taxes or assessments whenever or to the extent that he reasonably determines that the delay in payment was attributable to the action or inaction of his department. 
(Code 1968, § 21-2; Ord. No. 16-14, § 1, 9-27-2016 )  
Sec. 82-3. - Penalties. 
(a)  All penalties imposed by this article are part of the tax or assessment and are to be collected as such. The proceedings to collect the original tax, the tax constituted from penalties imposed, and the interest shall all be conducted in the same manner. Any provision of law for criminal prosecution shall not operate to relieve any taxpayer of any tax, penalty, or interest imposed by this article. 
(b)  In any instance in which any taxpayer fails to pay a tax or assessment within 90 days of the due date, he shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax due, together with interest as specified in this article. 
(c)  The board of commissioners may waive, in whole or in part, the collection of any amount due as a penalty under this article to the extent such body finds and determines the default giving rise to the penalty was due to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect or disregard of this article. 
(Code 1968, § 21-3)  
Sec. 82-4. - Executions on delinquent taxes and assessments. 
(a)  As soon as the last day for the payment of taxes and assessments has arrived, the finance officer shall notify in writing the taxpayer of the fact that the taxes have not been paid and that, unless paid within 30 days, an execution shall be issued. 
(b)  The finance officer shall issue executions for the nonpayment of taxes and assessments at any time after 30 days have elapsed since giving notice as provided in subsection (a) of this section. The execution shall identify the defendant in fi. fa. (taxpayer), the year for which delinquent taxes are being executed, and the amount thereof. Executions shall be directed to all and singular sheriffs and constables of the state. 
(c)  The finance officer shall cause all executions issued to be recorded on the general execution docket of the county where the property is located, in the case of real property; and, in the case of personal property, in the county of the taxpayer's residence if a resident of the state, otherwise in the county where any real or personal property of the taxpayer may be found. If the taxpayer is not a resident of the state and has no known real or personal property within the state, the execution shall be recorded in the county in which the act or activity giving rise to tax liability took place. 
(d)  All executions issued shall continue to bear interest and penalties at the rates established in this article for past-due taxes and assessments. 
(e)  The finance officer shall cause all executions issued to be placed in the hands of the city marshal for collection or levy and sale of property. The marshal shall exercise his best efforts to collect the full amount of taxes and assessments due, together with all interest, penalties, and any costs due thereon, from the defendant in fi. fa. In the event he is unable to do so, the marshal shall levy the execution on a sufficient amount of the defendant in fi. fa.'s property, whether real or personal, to satisfy the obligations due at a sale to be held and conducted in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1968, § 21-4)  
Sec. 82-5. - Levy of executions; sale of property. 
(a)  The chief of police is hereby designated as the marshal of the city and delegated the duties set forth in this article. The marshal shall be subject to being ruled for money in his hands arising from the public sale of any property pursuant to process issued by the municipality. After first paying the finance officer the amount due on the process under which the sale was made, the marshal shall pay any surplus to any lawful claimant holding an interest subordinate to the lien for taxes, else to the defendant in fi. fa. 
(b)  In all cases of levying on real property, within five days' written notice of the levy must be given personally, or delivered by certified mail, to the defendant in fi. fa. and to any tenants in possession. If the land is unoccupied, a copy of the notice of levy shall also be conspicuously posted on the land. In the case of personal property, the marshal shall enter the property on the execution and plainly describe the property levied on and the amount of the interest of the defendant in fi. fa. therein. 
(c)  Whenever any real property is levied upon for taxes or assessments, it shall be the marshal's duty before proceeding to advertise the property for sale to give 20 days' written notice of the levy to the record owner of the property and the holder of each security deed of record. The 20-day period shall begin to run from the time the notice is personally delivered or, when delivered by registered or certified mail with return receipt requested, from the date of mailing. The notice shall contain a description of the land levied upon, the name of the owner of the land, the year or years for which the taxes were assessed, and a statement of the amount of the taxes due, together with accrued costs. The marshal shall keep a copy of the notice on which he shall enter the date the notice was delivered or mailed and how, where, and to whom the notice was delivered. The marshal shall file the copy with the finance officer. 
(d)  When a levy is made upon real or personal property, the property shall be advertised and sold by the marshal in the same manner as provided for executions and judicial sales; provided, however, in addition to such other notice as may be required by law, the defendant in fi. fa. shall be given at least ten days' written notice of such sale by registered or certified mail. The notice shall be addressed to the taxpayer at the last known address listed in the records of the county tax commissioner. In addition, if the United States has a claim or lien on the property subject to being sold and such lien was filed or recorded more than 30 days before the proposed sale, the marshal shall cause written notice of the sale to be given to the Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate not less than 25 days before the sale. Notice may be given either by personal service or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(e)  The marshal shall publish weekly for four weeks in the official legal organ of the county in which the sale will be conducted an advertisement of the date, place, and hours during which the sale will be conducted, together with a full and complete description of the property to be sold, making known the name of the owner of record and any person who may be in possession of the property. The notice shall state the property is being sold for collection of taxes due to the city and the year for which taxes have been executed. 
(f)  Sales of property under execution shall be made by the marshal in the board of commissioners chambers on the first Tuesday in each month between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. eastern standard time or eastern daylight savings time, whichever is applicable, and at public outcry to the highest bidder for cash; provided, however, should the first Tuesday of the month fall on New Year's Day or Independence Day, such sales shall take place on the immediately following Wednesday. The purchaser shall look for himself as to the title and soundness of all property sold under tax executions and neither the marshal conducting the sale nor the city make any representations or warranty of title, condition, or fitness for a particular purpose, expressed or implied. 
(g)  The marshal shall sell the property to the highest bidder for cash and, upon collection of the sales price, make a deed or bill of sale to the purchaser. Any person who becomes the purchaser of any property sold at the sale, who fails or refuses to comply with the terms of sale when requested by the marshal to do so, shall be liable for the amount of the purchase money. It shall be the option of the marshal either to proceed against the purchaser for the full amount of the purchase money or to resell the property and then proceed against the first purchaser for any deficiency. A tax deed for real property, or bill of sale for personal property, made and delivered as evidence of a sale for taxes conducted pursuant to this article shall convey the title as effectually as if the sale were made by the person against whom the process was issued. Sales of personal property shall be final; real property sold by virtue of an execution issued for the collection of taxes or for any special assessments is subject to redemption rights of the defendant in fi. fa. or any person having any right, title, or interest in or lien upon such property at the time of levy and sale. Recitals in a deed or bill of sale under power of sale for taxes shall be prima facie evidence of the facts recited in the instrument. The marshal shall put the purchaser in possession of the property so sold; provided, however, the purchaser of real property is not entitled to be placed in possession until after the time for redemption has expired. 
(h)  Whenever no bids are forthcoming on property sold for taxes after the property has been offered a reasonable time, the marshal may either readvertise and sell the property at a later date or abandon the property. The marshal shall make a proper notation on the execution whenever property levied upon and exposed for sale has been abandoned due to lack of bids. 
(Code 1968, § 21-5)  
Sec. 82-6. - Bidding by city at tax sales; disposition of property acquired. 
(a)  If, during any sale of property for taxes and after the property has been offered a reasonable time, no one present at the sale bids an amount for the property being sold which is as much as the total of the taxes due (including any priority liens for taxes due the state, county, and school and other special tax districts of the state) plus the marshal's cost due on the sale, then the city manager, or his designee, may purchase the property for the city. If the city purchases property at a sale, the marshal shall make to the city a deed to the property sold and shall deliver the deed to the city manager. The marshal shall put the city in possession of the property so sold. 
(b)  Property acquired by the city pursuant to a sale for taxes or assessments may be divested or alienated by the city only by public sale of the property to the highest bidder; however, when the city has not parted with title to the property, the city may quitclaim the property to the owner at the time of the tax sale, or to the owner's administrators, executors, heirs, or assigns, upon full payment of the redemption price provided in section 82-9. 
(c)  The right of redemption in real property purchased by the city at a tax sale shall be foreclosed in the manner set forth in section 82-9. 
(Code 1968, § 21-6)  
Sec. 82-7. - Accounting by marshal; final return or settlement. 
(a)  The marshal shall make a prompt accounting to the finance officer for all executions placed in his hands for collection or levy and sale. He shall pay over to the finance officer all amounts due the city for taxes and assessments, interest, penalties, and costs and shall file a final written return or settlement showing the amounts so paid, together with disposition of any excess proceeds derived from the sale. If there is any excess after paying taxes, costs, and all expenses of a sale, it shall be immediately paid to the person authorized to receive the excess. 
(b)  In any event, within 90 days from the date executions are placed in his hands, if the marshal finds an execution to be either uncollectible or not collectable in full, he shall so notify the finance officer in writing. It shall be the duty of the finance officer to cause cancellation of executions on the general execution docket of the county upon their final payment or collection. 
(Code 1968, § 21-7)  
Sec. 82-8. - Garnishments by city; reduction of executions to judgment. 
(a)  Whenever the marshal can find no property belonging to a defendant in fi. fa. on which to levy any tax execution in his hands, he shall make an entry to that effect on the execution. The finance officer, in the name of the city, may then petition any court of competent jurisdiction to issue a summons of garnishment against any person whom he believes to be indebted to the defendant in fi. fa. or who has property, money, or effects in his hands belonging to the defendant in fi. fa. The finance officer shall enter upon the execution the names of the persons garnished and the court and file number of the action where the garnishment is filed. All subsequent proceedings shall be the same as provided by law in other cases where judgments have been obtained or execution issued. 
(b)  When an execution for taxes remains unsatisfied and an entry of "nulla bona" has been duly entered by the marshal on the execution within the immediately preceding 30-day period and the finance officer has reason to believe the defendant in fi. fa. may have or may come into ownership of assets outside the state, the finance officer, in the name of the city, may petition the superior court of the county in this state in which the defendant in fi. fa. maintains a known residence, place of business, or agent to receive service to reduce the execution to judgment. If the defendant in fi. fa. does not maintain a known residence in this state, the action may be brought in the county where the tax obligation arose. This and all subsequent proceedings shall be brought in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-1 et seq. 
(Code 1968, § 21-8)  
Sec. 82-9. - Redemption rights of defendant in fi. fa.; vesting of title in grantee. 
(a)  Whenever real property is sold for taxes or any special assessment, the defendant in fi. fa. or any person having any right, title, or interest in or lien upon such property may redeem the property from the sale by the payment of the redemption price or the amount required for redemption as fixed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-42, at any time within 12 months from the date of sale, and at any time after the sale until the right to redeem is foreclosed by the giving of the notice provided for in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-45, which sections by reference are incorporated herein as a part of this article. 
(b)  Where notice of foreclosure of the right to redeem real property sold at a tax sale has not been given as required in subsection (a) of this section, title shall ripen by prescription after a period of four years from the date of recording of the deed in the county where the property is situated, provided the defendant in fi. fa. was not laboring under any legal disability at the time of sale. Unless the tax deed indicates a lesser interest was levied upon and sold, a fee simple title to the property shall vest absolutely in the grantee in the deed or in the grantee's heirs or assigns. In the event the defendant in fi. fa. is laboring under any legal disability, the prescriptive term shall begin from the time the disabilities are removed or abated. 
(Code 1968, § 21-9)  
Sec. 82-10. - Costs. 
(a)  For issuing executions, the city shall receive only an amount equal to any filing fees charged by the clerk of superior court for recording and cancellation of the tax fi. fa. 
(b)  Once a levy is made or posted on the property of a defendant in fi. fa., in addition to all taxes, interest, penalties and costs heretofore accrued, the marshal shall collect a levy administration fee of five percent of the taxes due or $250.00, whichever is the lesser; however, no levy administration fee shall be less than $50.00. 
(c)  In addition to the foregoing fees, after levy but prior to the sale, the marshal shall collect his actual cost for advertising the sale, postage and service fees, and any attorney's fees incurred in examination of title to property, plus a commission for conducting the sale, not to exceed eight percent on sums of $50.00 or less, six percent on sums above $50.00 up to $550.00, and three on all sums exceeding $550.00. 
(d)  The costs provided in this section shall be cumulative and in addition to any statutory premiums allowed as a part of the redemption price. 
(Code 1968, § 21-10)  
Sec. 82-11. - Homestead exemption. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, "homestead" means the real property owned by and in the possession of the applicant on January 1 of the taxable year and upon which the applicant principally resides including, but not limited to, the land immediately surrounding the residence. It is the intent of this section that the term "homestead" be given consistent meaning with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40 as applied for state, county and school tax purposes. 
(b)  The homestead of each resident of this city actually occupied by the owner as a residence and homestead on January 1 of the taxable year shall be exempted from all ad valorem taxation for city purposes, except taxes levied to pay interest on and to retire bonded indebtedness, for as long as the residence and homestead is actually occupied by the owner primarily as a residence and homestead. The exemption shall not exceed $10,000.00 of the market value of the homestead. Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, the market value of all homestead property in excess of $10,000.00 shall remain subject to taxation. The exemption shall be returned and claimed in the same manner prescribed by law for state, county and school tax purposes by Spalding County homeowners. 
(c)  The homestead of each resident of the city who is totally disabled or who is 62 years of age or older and who received less than $12,500.00 of specified income during the preceding calendar year shall be entirely exempt from ad valorem taxation by the city. For purposes of this provision, the term "homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40, but shall not include more than the residence and three acres of land. The "specified income" of the resident owner of the homestead shall include the gross income from all sources of the person plus the gross income from all sources of each member of the person's family who resides in the homestead. A person is totally disabled if the person has a medically demonstrable condition which renders the person wholly and permanently unable to pursue any gainful employment. 
(d)  Persons claiming eligibility for such homestead exemption shall make application annually, between January 1 and April 1 of each calendar year, by filing on forms provided for the purpose with the finance officer of the city. The finance officer may require appropriate proof of such person's income and of the income of each member of the person's family who resides in the homestead on a regular basis to substantiate such person's eligibility for the exemption provided. Appropriate proof may include copies of federal and state income tax returns, W-2's and 1099's, bank statements, statements of earnings on investments including dividends and interest, and such other documentation that supports the person's claim of eligibility for the exemption. For the purpose of determining total disability, the finance officer may require on an annual basis the affidavits of not more than two physicians, licensed to practice medicine in the state, as to the person's disability. 
(Code 1968, § 21-11; Ord. No. 05-10, § 1, 6-21-2005)  
Secs. 82-12—82-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - INSURANCE PREMIUMS TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local tax on life insurance companies, 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
 
Sec. 82-31. - Insurer license fees. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $75.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 82-32, which is operating on behalf of insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $75.00. For the purposes of this section, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Code 1968, § 21-26(a))  
Sec. 82-32. - License fee for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application of insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, such insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $26.25 per location for the year 1985 and for each year thereafter. 
(Code 1968, § 21-26(b))  
Sec. 82-33. - Insurance agency license fees, independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. 
There is levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 82-31 in the amount of $100.00 for each such location within the city. 
(Code 1968, § 21-26(c))  
Sec. 82-34. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby imposed an annual tax based upon gross direct premiums, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4, upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year. The tax imposed by this section shall be returned, paid and collected in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The tax imposed by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 82-31. 
(Code 1968, § 21-26(d))  
Sec. 82-35. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in Class 1 of O.C.G.A., § 33-3-5, doing business within the city in an amount equal to two and one-half percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. The term " gross direct premiums ," as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). The tax imposed by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 82-31. 
(Code 1968, § 21-26(e))  
Sec. 82-36. - Due data for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 82-31 through 82-33 shall be due and payable on January 1, 1985, and on January 1 of each subsequent year. 
(Code 1968, § 21-26(f))  
Sec. 82-37. - Certification. 
The city clerk is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of this section to the insurance commissioner of the state. 
(Code 1968, § 21-26(g))  
Secs. 82-38—82-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EXCISE TAX ON SHORT-TERM RENTALS OF ROOMS, LODGINGS, AND ACCOMMODATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-07, § 1, adopted June 23, 2015 , repealed the former Art. III, §§ 82-61—82-71, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to excise tax on hotels and derived from Ord. No. 12-09, adopted August 28, 2012. 
 
Sec. 82-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
City. The City of Griffin, Georgia, wherein the city government is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. and Act 288 of the 2015-2016 Regular Session of the General Assembly of Georgia. 
City manager. The duly appointed city manager, or his designee. 
Destination marketing organization. A private sector nonprofit organization or other private entity which is exempt from federal income tax under Section 501(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 that is supported by the tax under this article, government budget allocations, private membership, or any combination thereof and the primary responsibilities of which are to encourage travelers to visit destinations, encourage meetings and expositions in the area, and provide visitor assistance and support as needed. 
Due date. The 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Estimated tax liability. The innkeeper's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
Facility. For purposes of this article, any facility or any portion of a facility, including any hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto or trailer court, truck stop, tourist cabin, campground, lodge, inn, bed and breakfast, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest accommodations and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any student dormitory, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other facility in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Folio. Primary documentation produced by an innkeeper that demonstrates interaction between the innkeeper and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax, and the method(s) of payment. 
Guest room. Accommodations occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for transient or short-term occupancy, not exceeding 30 consecutive days, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Innkeeper. Any person operating a facility in the city including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sub-lessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such facility; and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
Monthly period. The calendar month of any year. 
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any guest room in a facility or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the guest room. 
Occupant. Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guest room in a facility under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use, or otherwise. 
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the State of Georgia and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
Promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows . As used in this article, such phrase means planning, conducting, or participating in programs of information and publicity designed to attract or advertise tourism, conventions, or trade shows. 
Rent. The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the lodging provider to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Tax. The excise tax on occupants imposed by this article, as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
Tourism product development. The expenditure of funds for the creation and expansion of physical attractions which are available and open to the public and which improve destination appeal to visitors, support visitors' experience, and are used by visitors. Such expenditures may include capital costs and operating expenses. For examples, see O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50.2. 
( Ord. No. 15-07, § 1, 6-23-2015 )  
Sec. 82-62. - Intent and authority to levy the tax. 
(a)  It is the intent of this article to levy and impose an excise tax, at the rate of eight percent, of the charge for the furnishing for value to the public of any room or rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished by any person or legal entity licensed by, or required to pay business or occupation taxes to, the City of Griffin for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, campground, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly or periodically furnished for value. Such lodgings shall include "bed and breakfast" houses and other short-term rentals of single-family homes, apartments, and condominiums when the intended occupancy shall be for 30 days or less. 
(b)  The authority to levy an excise tax at the rate of eight is granted in Act 288 (HB 664) of the 2015-2016 Regular Session of the General Assembly of Georgia, enacted in accordance with the procedure set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b). 
(c)  In each fiscal year in which the tax is collected at the rate of eight percent, the city shall expend an amount equal to not less than 50 percent of the total amount of taxes collected that exceeds the amount of taxes that would be collected at the rate of five percent for "promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows", as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50.2(4) by a "destination marketing organization", as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50.2(1), designated by the city; and, the remaining amount of taxes collected at the rate of eight percent that exceed the amount of taxes that would be collected at a rate of five percent, which are not otherwise expended above, shall be expended for "tourism product development", as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50.2(6), and more specifically shall be allocated for maintenance and operation of the facility known as "The Griffin Welcome Center". Any remaining amount collected shall be deposited into the city's general fund for the provision of other local government services. 
(d)  The board of commissioners hereby designates the Griffin Business & Tourism Association, Inc., a Georgia non-profit corporation, as its destination marketing organization for purposes of carrying out this article. For each fiscal year in which the tax is levied and collected at the rate of eight percent, the city shall adopt a budget plan specifying how the proceeds of the tax are to be expended. Prior to adopting the budget, the city shall contract with the destination marketing organization to meet the budget expenditure requirements of this section. Following the end of each fiscal year, the destination marketing organization shall provide the city with audit verification that the funds were expended in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
( Ord. No. 15-07, § 1, 6-23-2015 )  
Sec. 82-63. - Imposition and levy; tax rate. 
There is hereby levied and imposed, effective August 1, 2015, a tax at the rate of eight for the furnishing for value to the public of any room or rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished by any person or legal entity licensed by, or required to pay business or occupation taxes to, the City of Griffin for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, campground, or any other facility in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly or periodically furnished for value. Such lodgings shall include "bed and breakfast" houses and other short-term rentals of single-family homes, apartments, or condominiums when the intended occupancy shall be for 30 days or less. 
( Ord. No. 15-07, § 1, 6-23-2015 )  
Sec. 82-64. - Collection by innkeeper; receipt to occupant; reporting and remittance of taxes collected. 
Every innkeeper in the city shall collect a tax of eight percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exemption is provided under section 82-65. The innkeeper shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other taxes applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the innkeeper at the same time that the rent is collected. The innkeeper shall be liable to the city for the full amount received or collected as tax, whether collected appropriately or inappropriately; and for any amount of tax that should have been collected, but was not. 
(1)  Liability of innkeeper. Any person who receives or collects the tax or any consideration represented to be the tax from another person holds the amount so collected in trust for the benefit of the city and is liable to the city for the full amount collected, plus penalty and interest. An individual who controls or supervises the collection of the tax from another person, or an individual who controls the accounting for or remittance of the tax, and who willfully fails to remit or cause to be remitted the tax is liable as a responsible individual for an amount equal to the tax not remitted or caused to be remitted, plus penalty and interest. The dissolution of a corporation, partnership or other business or fraternal association does not affect a responsible individual's liability under this sub-section. Furthermore, the liability imposed by this sub-section shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. 
(2)  Return; remittance; time of filing; innkeeper required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city tax and license clerk. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the tax and license clerk. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed $2,500.00 for an innkeeper who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater than $2,500.00 in any three consecutive months, such lodging provider shall file an estimated return and remit not less than 50 percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the 20th day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the 20th day of the succeeding month. 
(3)  Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements; remittance; penalty and interest. The board of commissioners may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than 30 days. No extension shall be granted more than once in any calendar quarter. An innkeeper granted an extension shall remit a tax equaling not less than 100 percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten days of the extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected on the unpaid balance at an annual rate equal to the bank prime loan rate as posted by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Statistical Release H.15, or any publication that may supercede it, plus 3 percent, to accrue monthly. Such annual interest rate shall be determined for each calendar year based on the first weekly posting of Statistical Release H.15 on or after January 1 of each calendar year. Interest shall begin to accrue from the date the tax is due until the date the tax is paid. Any period less than one month shall be considered to be one month. 
(4)  Collection fee allowed innkeepers. Innkeepers collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
( Ord. No. 15-07, § 1, 6-23-2015 ; Ord. No. 16-14, § 1, 9-27-2016 )  
Sec. 82-65. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be collected from an occupant who has occupied any guest room for more than 30 continuous days; or from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; or from the United States, the State of Georgia, or any instrumentality of either thereof; or from any official or employee of the state, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card; or from a foreign sovereign enjoying exemption by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State. Occupancy provided without charge is not subject to this tax. 
( Ord. No. 15-07, § 1, 6-23-2015 )  
Sec. 82-66. - Due date of taxes; payments; civil penalties and interest. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the city tax and license clerk monthly on or before the 20th day of the month next succeeding the respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for any monthly period after the 20th day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)  Civil penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. An innkeeper who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific civil penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent of the amount due or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one month or less; and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at an annual rate equal to the bank prime loan rate as posted by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Statistical Release H.15, or any publication that may supercede it, plus 3 percent, to accrue monthly. Such annual interest rate shall be determined for each calendar year based on the first weekly posting of Statistical Release H.15 on or after January 1 of each calendar year. Interest shall begin to accrue from the date the tax is due until the date the tax is paid. Any period less than one month shall be considered to be one month. 
(c)  Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, such return may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(d)  Waiving of penalty and interest; authority. O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and § 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the Georgia Commissioner of Revenue, and the city shall stand in lieu of the state. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a civil penalty of 50 percent shall be assessed. 
( Ord. No. 15-07, § 1, 6-23-2015 ; Ord. No. 16-14, § 1, 9-27-2016 )  
Sec. 82-67. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city manager is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any innkeeper, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 82-66. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city manager shall give to the innkeeper written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the innkeeper at his address as it appears in the occupation tax records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(e)  Appeal or protest of deficiency determination. The procedure for contesting a deficiency determination shall be as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. 
( Ord. No. 15-07, § 1, 6-23-2015 )  
Sec. 82-68. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any innkeeper fails to make a return, the city manager shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the innkeeper, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the lodging provider failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city manager. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection 82-67(c). 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 82-66. 
( Ord. No. 15-07, § 1, 6-23-2015 )  
Sec. 82-69. - Registration of lodging provider; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an innkeeper in the city shall immediately register with the city tax and license clerk on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the date that this article becomes effective [August 1, 2015]. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place(s) of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by this article. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city tax and license clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each innkeeper to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each separate place of business of an innkeeper within the city. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
( Ord. No. 15-07, § 1, 6-23-2015 )  
Sec. 82-70. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city manager may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Innkeeper selling or quitting business. If any innkeeper liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(c)  Duty of successors or assignees of lodging provider to withhold tax from purchase money. If any innkeeper liable for any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city manager either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(d)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(e)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be refunded by the governing authority. If the innkeeper or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city manager, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claimant may request a hearing before the board of commissioners at which the claim and any other information available will be considered. The board of commissioners shall approve or disapprove the claim, and notify the claimant of its action. 
( Ord. No. 15-07, § 1, 6-23-2015 )  
Sec. 82-71. - Administration of ordinance; record keeping. 
(a) Authority of city manager. The city manager shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. The city manager may delegate such duties, in writing, to the city tax and license clerk. 
(b)  Records required from lodging providers, etc. Every innkeeper renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city manager may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The city manager or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any innkeeper renting guest rooms and any person liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the innkeeper, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. Such examination shall be conducted at the place of lodging provision, unless the city manager shall stipulate another place within the city. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city manager may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city manager when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city manager may prescribe. 
( Ord. No. 15-07, § 1, 6-23-2015 )  
Sec. 82-72. - Criminal penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any innkeeper to willfully fail to make a return and pay the taxes due under this article by the due date provided. If the tax liability is $10,000.00 or less, any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. If the tax liability is more than $10,000.00, any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a felony. (O.C.G.A. § 48-13-58.1). 
(b)  Any innkeeper who fails, neglects, or refuses to collect the tax as provided this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, in addition to being liable for payment of the tax, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement in the county jail for a term not to exceed three months, or both. (O.C.G.A. § 48-13-59). 
(c)  Any innkeeper who fails or refuses to make any return as provided by this article, to keep adequate records, or to open them for inspection by the city, or to furnish other data reasonably requested by the city manager shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-61, 48-13-62). 
(d)  Any innkeeper who makes a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $300.00, or confinement for a term not less than 30 days nor more than three months in the county jail, or both. (O.C.G.A. § 48-13-60). 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any innkeeper to violate any other provision of this article for which punishment is not otherwise provided in this section. Each and every day during any portion of which any such violation under this article is committed, continued or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense. A person violating this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (O.C.G.A. § 48-13-63). 
( Ord. No. 15-07, § 1, 6-23-2015 )  
Secs. 82-73—82-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUSINESS LICENSE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
 
Sec. 82-91. - Financial institutions' business license tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such institutions. The term "gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Code 1968, § 21-60)  
Sec. 82-92. - Due date; filing of return. 
(a)  Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Such returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in such return. 
(b)  The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Code 1968, § 21-61)  
Secs. 82-93—82-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - GROSS RECEIPTS TAX ON SECONDARY ELECTRIC SUPPLIERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Power of municipality to grant franchises or make contracts with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); limitation on action expanding the power of regulation over any business activity regulated by the public service commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(5). 
 
Sec. 82-121. - Gross receipts business tax established; verified statement of revenues to be filed. 
Each secondary electric supplier (including specifically electric membership corporations whether operated for profit or not), within the meaning of O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq., distributing and selling electric power within the city which is not otherwise paying a franchise fee pursuant to a franchise agreement, and whether or not such electric supplier has, operates and maintains offices within the city, shall pay a gross receipts tax at the rate of four percent of any and all gross revenue derived from distribution and sale of electric power to their customers, members, or purchasers within the city, according to the verified statement of gross receipts which shall be submitted by such electric supplier at the time such taxes are paid. This gross receipts business tax is levied pursuant to authority granted the city in Georgia Laws 1991, H.B. 361 (amending § 6.1, Taxation and Finance, of the Charter of the City of Griffin, Georgia Laws 1921, p. 959). 
(Code 1968, § 22-121)  
Sec. 82-122. - Taxes payable monthly; taxes to be in lieu of certain other taxes. 
The taxes set out in this article shall be due and payable to the city on the 20th day of each month, calculated on gross revenues billed for the immediately preceding month. Also, the percentage of such gross receipts prescribed to be collected shall be in lieu of all other license and business or occupation taxes, but shall not at any time be considered to interfere with, or in any way prevent the collection of ad valorem taxes upon the property of such electric supplier in the same manner as all other property, real or personal, in the city is taxed. 
(Code 1968, § 22-122)  
Sec. 82-123. - Electric service within the city. 
Electric suppliers distributing and selling electric power within the city, and which do not have a franchise agreement with the city, do not acquire any additional rights by the payment of the tax levied under this article other than those rights granted under the Georgia Electric Territorial Service Act. 
(Code 1968, § 22-123)  
Sec. 82-124. - Enforcement and administration. 
(a)  The city finance officer shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article and shall have the power to prepare and provide the necessary forms and for the collection of the tax levied in this article. 
(b)  The city finance officer shall issue executions for the collection of all outstanding and unpaid taxes imposed and assessed by this article. The unpaid taxes and executions shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of other taxes due the city. 
(Code 1968, § 22-124)  
Secs. 82-125—82-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT TAX INCENTIVE PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 82-141. - Purpose. 
The existence of real property which is maintained in a blighted condition increases the burden of the state and local government by increasing the need for government services, including but not limited to social services, public safety services, and code enforcement services. Rehabilitation of blighted property decreases this need for such government services. 
In furtherance of its objective to eradicate conditions of slum and blight within the city, this board of commissioners, in exercise of the powers granted to municipal corporations at Chapter 61, Urban Redevelopment, of Title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, has designated those areas of the city where conditions of slum and blight are found or are likely to spread. 
In recognition of the need for enhanced governmental services and in order to encourage private property owners to maintain their real property and the buildings, structures and improvement thereon in good condition and repair, and as an incentive to encourage community redevelopment, a community redevelopment tax incentive program is hereby established as authorized by Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VII(d) of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, § 1, 5-12-2009)  
Sec. 82-142. - Definitions. 
Blighted property, blighted, or blight means any urbanized or developed property which: 
(1)  Presents two or more of the following conditions: 
a.  Uninhabitable, unsafe, or abandoned structure; 
b.  Inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air, or sanitation; 
c.  An imminent harm to life or other property caused by fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm, or other natural catastrophe respecting which the governor has declared a state of emergency under the state law or has certified the need for disaster assistance under federal law; provided, however, this division shall not apply to property unless the relevant public agency has given notice in writing to the property owner regarding specific harm caused by the property and the owner has failed to take reasonable measures to remedy the harm; 
d.  A site identified by the federal Environmental Protection Agency as a superfund site pursuant to 42 U.S.C. Section 9601, et seq., or having environmental contamination to an extent that requires remedial investigation or a feasibility study; 
e.  Repeated illegal activity on the individual property of which the property owner knew or should have known; or 
f.  The maintenance of the property is below state, county, or municipal codes for at least one year after written notice of the code violation to its owner; and 
(2)  Is conducive to ill health, transmission of disease, infant mortality, or crime in the immediate proximity of the property. 
Property shall not be deemed blighted solely because of esthetic conditions. 
Building inspector means a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
Community redevelopment means any activity, project, or service necessary or incidental to achieving the redevelopment or revitalization of a redevelopment area or portion thereof designated for redevelopment through an urban redevelopment plan or thorough local ordinances relating to the repair, closing, and demolition of buildings and structures unfit for human habitation. 
Governing authority means the board of commissioners of the City of Griffin, a Georgia municipal corporation. 
Millage or millage rate means the levy, in mills, which is established by the governing authority for purposes of financing, in whole or in part, the levying jurisdiction's general fund expenses for the fiscal year. 
Person means such individual(s), partnership, corporations, business entities and associations which return real property for ad valorem taxation or who are chargeable by law for the taxes on the property. 
Public officer means the city manager or such officer or employee of the city as designated by the city manager to perform the duties and responsibilities hereafter set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, § 1, 5-12-2009)  
Sec. 82-143. - Levy of increase ad valorem tax on blighted real property. 
There is hereby levied on all real property within the city which has been officially identified as maintained in a blighted condition an increased ad valorem tax by applying a factor of seven (7.0) to the millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a higher millage rate generally applied in the municipality, or otherwise provided by general law; provided, however, real property on which there is situated a dwelling house which is being occupied as the primary residence of one or more persons shall not be subject to official identification as maintained in a blighted condition and shall not be subject to increased taxation. 
Such increased ad valorem tax shall be applied and reflected in the first tax bill rendered following official designation of a real property as blighted. 
Revenues arising from the increased rate of ad valorem taxation shall, upon receipt, be segregated by the city manager and used only for community redevelopment purposes, as identified in an approved urban redevelopment program, including defraying the cost of the city's program to close, repair, or demolish unfit building and structures. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, § 1, 5-12-2009; Ord. No. 11-06, § 1, 7-12-2011)  
Sec. 82-144. - Official identification of property maintained in blighted condition. 
(a)  In order for a parcel of real property to be officially designated as maintained in a blighted condition and subject to increased taxation, the following steps must be completed: 
(1)  An inspection must be performed on the parcel of property. In order for an inspection to be performed, 
a.  A request may be made by the public officer or by at least five residents of the city for inspection of a parcel of property, said inspection to be based on the criteria as delineated in ordinance, or 
b.  The public officer may cause a survey of existing housing conditions to be performed, or may refer to any such survey conducted or finalized within the previous five years, to locate or identify any parcels which may be in a blighted condition and for which a full inspection should be conducted to determine if that parcel of property meets the criteria set out in this article for designation as being maintained in a blighted condition. 
(2)  A written inspection report of the findings for any parcel of property inspected pursuant to subsection (1) above shall be prepared and submitted to the public officer. Where feasible, photographs of the conditions found to exist on the property on the date of inspection shall be made and supplement the inspection report. Where compliance with minimum construction, housing, occupancy, fire and life safety codes in effect within the city are in question, the inspection shall be conducted by a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
(3)  Following completion of the inspection report, the public officer shall make a determination, in writing, that a property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this article, and is subject to increased taxation. 
(4)  The public officer shall cause a written notice of his determination that the real property at issue is being maintained in a blighted condition to be served upon the person(s) shown on the most recent tax digest of Spalding County as responsible for payment of ad valorem taxes assessed thereon; provided, however, where through the existence of reasonable diligence it becomes known to the public officer that real property has been sold or conveyed since publication of the most recent tax digest, written notice shall be given to the person(s) known or reasonably believed to then own the property or be chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes thereon, at the best address available. Service in the manner set forth at O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12 shall constitute sufficient notice to the property's owner or person chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes for purpose of this section, except that posting of the notice on the property will not be required. 
(b)  The written notice given to the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall notify such person of the public officer's determination the real property is being maintained in a blighted condition and shall advise such person of the hours and location at which the person may inspect and copy the public officer's determination and any supporting documentation. Persons notified that real property of which the person(s) is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall have 30 days from the receipt of notice in which to request a hearing before the city's municipal court. Written request for hearing shall be filed with the public officer and shall be date stamped upon receipt. Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the public officer shall notify the municipal court and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. 
(c)  Within 30 days of the receipt of a request for hearing, the municipal court clerk shall set a date, time and location for the hearing and shall give at least ten business days notice to the person(s) requesting the hearing, the public officer and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. Notice of scheduled hearings shall be published as a legal advertisement in the Griffin Daily News, or other designated legal organ in Spalding County, at least five days prior to the hearing. Hearings may be continued by the municipal court judge upon request of any party, for good cause. 
(d)  At the hearing, the public officer shall have the burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence that the subject property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this article. The municipal court judge shall cause a record of the evidence submitted at the hearing to be maintained. Upon hearing from the public officer and/or their witnesses and the person(s) requesting the hearing and/or their witnesses, the judge of municipal court shall make a determination either affirming or reversing the determination of the public officer. The determination shall be in writing and copies thereof shall be served on the parties by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery. The determination by the court shall be deemed final. A copy of such determination shall also be served upon the Tax Commissioner of Spalding County, who shall include the increased tax on the next regular tax bill rendered on behalf of the city. 
(e)  Persons aggrieved by the determination of the court affirming the determination of the public officer may petition the Superior Court of Spalding County for a writ of certiorari within 30 days of issuance of the court's written determination. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, § 1, 5-12-2009)  
Sec. 82-145. - Remediation or redevelopment to remove designation of blighted condition. 
(a)  A property owner or person(s) who is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on real property which has been officially designated pursuant to this article as property maintained in a blighted condition may petition the public officer to lift the designation, upon proof of compliance with the following: 
(1)  Completion of work required under a plan of remedial action or redevelopment approved by the city's planning and development director which addresses the conditions of blight found to exist on or within the property, including compliance with all applicable minimum codes; or 
(2)  Completion of work required under a court order entered in a proceeding brought pursuant to Article IV, Unfit Buildings and Structures, of Chapter 22 of the Code of Griffin, Georgia. 
(b)  Before action on a petition to lift the designation, the public officer shall cause the property to be thoroughly inspected by a building inspector who, by written inspection report, shall certify that all requisite work has been performed to applicable code in a workmanlike manner, in accordance with the specifications of the plan of remedial action or redevelopment, or applicable court order. Upon finding required work to be satisfactorily performed, the public officer shall issue a written determination that the real property is no longer maintained in a blighted condition. Copies of this determination shall be served upon the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes, and upon the Tax Commissioner of Spalding County. 
(c)  All plans for remedial action or redevelopment shall be in writing, signed by the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on the real property and the director of the city's planning and development department, and contain the following: 
(1)  The plan shall be consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and all laws and ordinances governing the subject property, and shall conform to any urban redevelopment plan adopted for the area within which the property lies; 
(2)  The plan shall set forth in reasonable detail the requirements for repair, closure, demolition, or restoration of existing structures, in accordance with minimal statewide codes; where structures are demolished, the plan shall include provisions for debris removal, stabilization and landscaping of the property; 
(3)  On parcels of five acres or greater, the plan shall address the relationship to local objectives respecting land uses, improved traffic, public transportation, public utilities, recreational and community facilities, and other public improvements; 
(4)  The plan shall contain verifiable funding sources which will be used to complete its requirements and show the feasibility thereof; 
(5)  The plan shall contain a timetable for completion of required work; and 
(6)  Any outstanding ad valorem taxes (state, school, county and city, including the increased tax pursuant to this article) and governmental liens due and payable on the property must be satisfied in full. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, § 1, 5-12-2009)  
Sec. 82-146. - Decreased rate of taxation to be applied after successful remedial action or redevelopment of blighted property. 
(a)  Real property which has had its designation as maintained in a blighted condition removed by the public officer, as provided in section 82-144 of this article, shall be eligible for a decrease in the rate of city ad valorem taxation by applying a factor of 0.5 to the city millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a lower millage rate than the millage rate generally applied in the municipality or otherwise provided by general law; such decreased rate of taxation shall be applied beginning with the next tax bill rendered following removal of official designation of a real property as blighted. The decreased rate of taxation may be given in successive years, depending on the amount of cost expended by the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property to satisfy its remediation or redevelopment, with every $25,000.00 or portion thereof equaling one year of tax reduction; provided, however, that no property shall be entitled to reduction in city ad valorem taxes for more than four successive years. 
(b)  In order to claim entitlement for a decreased rate of taxation, the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property shall submit a notarized affidavit to the public officer, supported by receipts or other evidence of payment, of the amount expended. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, § 1, 5-12-2009)  
Sec. 82-147. - Duty of public officer to provide notice to county tax commissioner. 
It shall be the duty of the public officer to notify the Tax Commissioner of Spalding County in writing as to designation or removal of designation of a specific property as maintained in a blighted condition. Such notice shall identify the specific property by street address and tax map, block and parcel number, as assigned by the Spalding County Tax Assessor's Office. The public officer shall cooperate with the tax commissioner to assure accurate tax billing of those properties subject to increased or reduced ad valorem taxation under this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, § 1, 5-12-2009)  
Secs. 82-148, 82-149. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - OCCUPATIONAL TAXES AND ADMINISTRATIVE FEES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, adopted Jan. 9, 2018 , amended Art. VII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VII, §§ 82-150—82-169, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, adopted Feb. 14, 2017 . 
 
Sec. 82-150. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means the component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Business means engaging in a purposeful activity, trade, profession or occupation for gain or profit. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2, but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
Location and office mean any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. A renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied, imposed and collected annually on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business within the city and enacted by its board of commissioners as a revenue-raising measure. 
Occupation tax certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of the occupation tax and administrative fee. 
Person shall include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, or any other form of business organization, including "practitioners of professions" as defined in this section. 
Practitioners of professions means: 
(1)  Lawyers; 
(2)  Physicians licensed under Chapter 34 of O.C.G.A. Title 43; 
(3)  Osteopaths licensed under Chapter 34 of O.C.G.A. Title 43; 
(4)  Chiropractors; 
(5)  Podiatrists; 
(6)  Dentists; 
(7)  Optometrists; 
(8)  Psychologists; 
(9)  Veterinarians; 
(10)  Landscape architects; 
(11)  Land surveyors; 
(12)  Practitioners of physiotherapy; 
(13)  Public accountants; 
(14)  Embalmers; 
(15)  Funeral directors; 
(16)  Civil, mechanical, hydraulic, or electrical engineers; 
(17)  Architects; 
(18)  Marriage and family therapists, social workers, and professional counselors; 
(19)  Dealers of motor vehicles, as defined in paragraph (1) of O.C.G.A. § 10-1-622; 
(20)  Owners or operators of bona fide coin operated amusement machines, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70, and owners or operators of businesses where bona fide coin operated amusement machines are available for commercial use and play by the public, provided such amusement machines have affixed current stickers showing payment of annual permit fees, in accordance with O.C.G.A § 50-27-78; 
(21)  Merchants or dealers as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-354 as to their deliveries to businesses or practitioners of professions and occupations in areas zoned for commercial use; and 
(22)  Any other business, profession, or occupation for which state licensure or registration is required by state law, unless the state law regulating such business, profession, or occupation specifically allows for regulation by local governments. 
Such term shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
( Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 1-9-2018 )  
Sec. 82-151. - Administrative fee. 
A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $40.00 is required on all occupation tax accounts for the handling and processing of the occupation tax. Payment of the administrative fee shall be due and payable at the time an occupation tax is paid. 
( Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 1-9-2018 )  
Sec. 82-152. - Occupation tax levied. 
(a)  Except for those businesses, practitioners of professions, and occupations exempted by section 82-158 of this article, and those persons exempted by O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1, an occupation tax is hereby levied, assessed, and shall be collected annually from all businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city and, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, upon out-of-state persons with no location or office in the state, having more than nominal business activity within the city, based upon a combination of criteria being: 
(1)  A flat fee in the amount of $50.00 for each business location or office within the city; plus 
(2)  The number of employees of the business or practitioner at that location or office in accordance with the following schedule: 
Number of Employees 	Rate of Tax 
1 to 20 	$60.00 per employee 
21 to 100 	$1,200.00, plus $30.00 for each employee over 20 
101 and above 	$3,600.00, plus $10.00 for each employee over 100 
 
(b)  For purposes of calculating the tax due, the number of employees of the business or practitioner shall be computed on a full-time position equivalent basis. An employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time employee and the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce full-time equivalents. 
(c)  Persons with no location or office in the state, but which perform services or sell products within the corporate limits of the city, shall be subject to the administrative fee and occupation tax if such person has more than nominal business activity within the city, including: 
(1)  One or more employees who exert effort within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns real or personal property which is located within the jurisdiction of the city and which generates business income or is used to generate business income. 
(d)  On or before December 1 of each year the tax and license administrator shall mail to each registered business or practitioner of a profession or occupation subject to the tax a business registration and occupation tax return form for the following calendar year, commencing January 1. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article shall file a return, under oath, by April 1 in every year the tax is due stating the location and number of employees upon which the tax is calculated, and remitting the tax due. It shall not constitute a defense to the payment of the tax levied under this article that a person failed to receive a tax return form from the city. 
( Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 1-9-2018 )  
Sec. 82-153. - Occupation tax limitations. 
(a)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupation tax for each location of a person. A person who has locations or offices elsewhere in the state and who does not have a location or office within the city, but who is subject to occupation tax by virtue of more than nominal business activity within the city, shall be subject to occupation tax by the city, unless the person provides documentation to the city of current payment of an occupation tax to at least one other state local government. A person who has a location or office within this city and one or more locations or offices in other taxing jurisdictions within the state shall be taxed only on a flat tax, plus the number of employees located within the city. 
(b)  Persons from out of state with no office or location in the state subject to an occupation tax under this article shall be required to pay an occupation tax to only one local government in the state. Such local government shall be the government of the municipal corporation or county in which the largest dollar volume of business is done or services are performed by the person. Such persons submitting documentation to the city showing payment of such tax to the appropriate local government in the state shall be exempt from the occupation tax levied by this article. 
(c)  Real estate brokers shall be subject to the occupation tax imposed by this article only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the city. No additional license, occupation, or professional tax shall be levied or collected from the broker's affiliated associate brokers and salespersons. 
( Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 1-9-2018 )  
Sec. 82-154. - Registration of businesses. 
(a)  Before conducting any business or practicing any profession or occupation within the corporate limits of the city, it shall be the duty of each person engaging in a business, trade, profession or occupation, to register with the tax and license administrator on forms provided for that purpose. The registration by each person shall state the location or office address from which business is conducted, identify the dominant line of business, profession or occupation conducted, state the number of employees (based on full-time equivalents) and identify, by name, address and other pertinent information requested, the form of business organization and its ownership. If the person claims entitlement to exemption from the tax, the basis for such exemption shall be stated on the registration form. Registration forms shall be signed, under oath, and dated, by an owner of the business. 
(b)  Registrations shall be renewed annually, between January 1 and April 1 for the current year. Upon any change in the ownership of a registered business organization, notification of such change in ownership shall be reported, in writing, to the tax and license administrator within 30 days on forms provided for this purpose. 
(c)  It is not the intent of the city to require registration as a means of regulating any business, trade, profession or occupation, but solely as a means for acquiring information on those businesses and professions operating within the city for purposes of determining liability for payment of the occupational tax. No fee shall be imposed for filing a registration statement or for ascertaining whether such business or practitioner has paid an occupation tax to another local government. 
( Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 1-9-2018 )  
Sec. 82-155. - Taxation of professionals. 
(a)  Practitioners of professions, as defined in section 82-150, having a location or office within the city shall elect for their occupation tax either: 
(1)  The occupation tax as levied and calculated in section 82-152; or 
(2)  A flat tax of $400.00 for each practitioner who is licensed to practice the profession. 
(b)  Such election shall be made, in writing, on or before February 1. Such election may be changed for subsequent calendar years only by a written request filed by the professional on or before February 1 of the year in which the election is to be changed. The election shall govern all practitioners within the firm or business for the tax period. 
(c)  Practitioners of professions governed by this section shall not be required to provide information relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner if election is made to pay the flat tax per practitioner. 
( Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 1-9-2018 )  
Sec. 82-156. - Due dates; delinquency. 
(a)  Each administrative fee and occupation tax, as applicable, shall be for the calendar year. Any administrative fee and occupation tax shall be due and payable January 1 of each year and shall be delinquent if not paid by April 1 of each year. Any amounts owed which are not paid by April 1 shall be subject to the penalties for delinquency as described in section 82-162. 
(b)  For any new profession, occupation or business begun in the city after January 1 the administrative fee and occupation tax shall be due and payable immediately upon beginning business, and if not so paid within 90 days thereafter shall be delinquent. For taxpayers commencing business after July 1, the rate of tax shall be one-half the rate for the full calendar year. 
(c)  An occupation tax certificate indicating that the profession, occupation or business has paid the fees and taxes owed shall be issued by the tax and license administrator. Unless otherwise exempted by federal or state law, or this article, any person practicing a profession, occupation or business in this city without having valid certificates issued to him or her shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 82-163. 
(d)  In addition to the remedies in subsection (a) of this section, the tax and license administrator may proceed to collect the delinquencies in the same manner as provided by law for ad valorem tax executions. 
( Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 1-9-2018 )  
Sec. 82-157. - Occupation tax certificate. 
Every person subject to payment of the occupation tax imposed by this article shall display a current occupation tax certificate in a conspicuous place at the location or office for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a location or office within the city, the occupation tax certificate shall be shown to any officer of the city charged with enforcing this article upon request. 
( Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 1-9-2018 )  
Sec. 82-158. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No occupation tax shall be levied upon the following: 
(1)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, of the state or a municipality or county of the state; 
(2)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission; 
(3)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.; 
(4)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including any agribusiness; 
(5)  Nonprofit agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105; 
(6)  Motor common carriers pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15; 
(7)  Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cotton seed or cotton seed meal or hulls in carload lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355; 
(8)  Persons selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in the state when the sale or introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is made within 90 days of the introduction of the product into the city; 
(9)  Insurance companies pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8; 
(10)  Depository institutions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; 
(11)  Any state or local authority or nonprofit organization; or 
(12)  Any business where the levy of such occupation tax is otherwise prohibited by the laws of the state or the United States. 
(b)  The exemptions and limitations contained in this article shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes otherwise permitted by law. 
( Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 1-9-2018 )  
Sec. 82-159. - Confidentiality. 
Information provided by a person to the city for the purpose of determining the applicability and the amount of the occupation tax or the levy or collection of occupation tax levied pursuant to this article is confidential and exempt from disclosure. Such information may be provided by the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collecting occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay an occupation tax. 
( Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 1-9-2018 )  
Sec. 82-160. - Evidence of state registration; other qualifications. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed under title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated by the Examining Boards of Secretary of State's Office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure at the time of registering the business in accordance with section 82-154. 
(b)  Any person required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before transacting business within the city, show evidence of such qualification at the time of registering the business in accordance with section 82-154. 
(c)  Any person required to submit an annual application for continuance of that business with state or federal regulatory authorities shall do so before the city registration is issued. 
( Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 1-9-2018 )  
Sec. 82-161. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax required in this article shall be required to file the necessary registration for such business prescribed in this article. In default thereof the officer or agents soliciting for or obtaining business shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a certificate. Each person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise file the registration provided in this article within 30 days of commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any kind of business, trade, profession or occupation without having first filed such registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in this article and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 82-163. 
( Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 1-9-2018 )  
Sec. 82-162. - Penalty and interest on delinquent fees and taxes. 
A penalty is imposed on each business and practitioner of a profession or occupation which fails to pay any and all administrative fees and occupation taxes required by this article prior to such fees and taxes becoming delinquent. Such penalty shall be in the amount of ten percent of the administrative fee and occupational tax determined to be due and owing under the provisions of this article. Such delinquency shall also bear interest at an annual rate equal to the bank prime loan rate as posted by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Statistical Release H. 15, or any publication that may supercede it, plus 3 percent, to accrue monthly. Such annual interest rate shall be determined for each calendar year based on the first weekly posting of Statistical Release H. 15 on or after January 1 of each calendar year. Interest shall begin to accrue from the date the tax is due until the date the tax is paid. Any period less than one month shall be considered to be one month. 
( Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 1-9-2018 )  
Sec. 82-163. - Civil violation and fine. 
In addition to any penalty and interest under section 82-162, a civil fine may be imposed on each business and practitioner of a profession or occupation which fails or refuses to file an annual registration or who fails or refuses to file a return and pay the administrative fee and occupation when due and payable as required by this article. Such violator shall be cited to appear before the municipal court of the city to answer to the charges and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a civil fine not to exceed $500.00, which may be enforced by the contempt power of the court. 
( Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 1-9-2018 )  
Sec. 82-164. - Notification to regulatory authorities. 
Whenever execution is issued against a taxpayer who is licensed, permitted, certified, or otherwise regulated by the state or other regulatory agency, board, commission, or authority to engage in a business, trade, or profession, for failure or refusal to pay the tax imposed by this article when due, notice shall be given to the appropriate regulatory agency, board, commission, or authority of the fact of tax delinquency. Nothing in this article shall affect the authority of the city to suspend or revoke any regulatory permit issued by it to authorize a person, firm, or business entity to engage in such business, trade, or profession within the city. 
( Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 1-9-2018 )  
Sec. 82-165. - Inspection of records. 
The city, through its employees, officers or agents, may inspect and audit the books of any person subject to an occupation tax to determine the accuracy of the returns and other information submitted by a business or practitioner to the city. Failure to submit such books or records within 30 days of an official written request shall be grounds for petitioning a court of competent jurisdiction for a subpoena requiring production of such books and records. It is the duty of all persons subject to this article to keep and maintain adequate business records at the location or office of the business in this city and to make such records available in the city for examination by designated city agents. If, after examination of the books or records it is determined that a deficiency exists, a penalty of ten percent of the deficiency and an additional interest at the rate established in section 82-162 shall be assessed. 
( Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 1-9-2018 )  
Sec. 82-166. - Notice to persons subject to tax. 
Written notice given to the holders of occupation tax certificates under this article shall be deemed sufficient if personally served, served by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by statutory overnight delivery, addressed to an owner of such business or the owner's designated agent, at the address last shown in the business' registration as filed with the tax and license administrator. It shall be the responsibility of the holder of the occupation tax certificate to notify the city, in writing, of any change of address. 
( Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 1-9-2018 )  
Sec. 82-167. - Execution, liens. 
(a)  The finance director, or his designee, shall, upon any tax imposed by this article becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, issue an execution for the amount of such tax against the person liable for such tax, including interest at the rate established in section 82-162. The lien shall cover all property of the person liable for such tax as provided by this article, the Charter of the City and the laws of the state. The lien for such occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time that such tax or installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the appropriate city agent upon the property of the person liable for such tax and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of such execution, with interest and cost allowed by law. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by the Code and Charter of the City and the laws of the state. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality of the tax or otherwise, as provided by the laws of the state in regard to tax executions. 
(b)  When a nulla bona entry has been entered by the proper authority upon execution issued by the city against any person defaulting on an occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for goods sold or services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If at any time after the entry of the nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution pays the tax in full, together with all interest penalties and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges for services and goods due the person as though the person had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
( Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 1-9-2018 )  
Sec. 82-168. - Application to prior delinquencies. 
This article does not repeal or affect the enforcement of any ordinance or part of any ordinance heretofore passed for fees and taxes levied when such fees and taxes have not been paid in full. Such ordinances and parts of ordinances heretofore passed providing for the issuing and enforcing execution for taxes or assessments required by such ordinances or that imposed fines or penalties for nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees pursuant to such ordinances, or failure to comply with the other provisions thereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
( Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 1-9-2018 )  
Sec. 82-169. - Public hearing before future tax increases; use of additional revenues. 
Prior to final action on any future amendment to this article, subsequent to January 1, 1996, which increases the rate of or criterion basis for the occupation tax as set forth in this article, the board of commissioners shall conduct at least one public hearing. In any year when revenue from the occupation taxes generated by this article is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year, the board of commissioners shall hold one or more public hearings as a part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue. 
( Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 1-9-2018 )  
Secs. 82-170—82-174. - Reserved.  
Chapter 86 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Avoiding or attempting to avoid charges for use of cable television service, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-2; municipalities prohibited from granting franchise for cable television within unincorporated area of county, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-3. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 86-1—86-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE REGULATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to Ordinance Number 00-2000, adopted August 22, 2000, the city granted a nonexclusive cable television franchise to Insight Communications Company, L.P. The franchise agreement was transferred to Insight Communications of Indiana, LLC by Ordinance Number 00-23, adopted November 28, 2000. Official copies of the ordinances and franchise agreements are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
State Law reference— Avoiding or attempting to avoid charges for use of cable television service, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-2; municipalities prohibited from granting franchise for cable television within unincorporated area of county, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-3. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 86-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means any applicant for a franchise pursuant to this article. 
Cable television system or cable system has the same meaning as given in 47 USC 522. 
Franchise means an authorization granted under this article to construct, operate and maintain a cable television system within the city. 
(Code 1968, § 22-70) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 86-32. - Franchise to operate necessary. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to commence or engage in the construction, operation or maintenance of a cable television system without a franchise issued by the board of commissioners. This section shall not be deemed to require the grant of a franchise to any particular person or to prohibit the board of commissioners from restricting the number of grantees should it determine such a restriction would be in the public interest. 
(b)  Any persons violating this section shall, upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1968, § 22-71)  
Sec. 86-33. - Term of franchise. 
Any franchise granted by the city shall be for a term of ten years. The board of commissioners may renew the franchise for a successive ten-year period. 
(Code 1968, § 22-72)  
Sec. 86-34. - Limitations of franchise. 
(a)  Any franchise granted under this article shall be nonexclusive and nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the board of commissioners from granting identical franchises to more than one person. 
(b)  All privileges prescribed by the franchise granted to any new grantee shall be conditioned on the requirement that such new grantee shall indemnify and hold harmless the board of commissioners, applicable utilities and any existing grantee from and against all costs and expenses resulting from the activities of such new grantee. 
(c)  Any franchise granted under this article shall not authorize an additional grantee to operate within the franchise area of any existing grantee on terms or conditions more favorable or less burdensome to such new grantee than those being applied to any existing grantee at the time the new franchise is granted. 
(Code 1968, § 22-73)  
Secs. 86-35—86-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - APPLICATION PROCEDURES AND CONTENTS 
 
Sec. 86-51. - Initial fee. 
Application for a new franchise shall be submitted to the city manager or his designee with an initial application fee as set out in the schedule of fees and charges. To the extent that the board of commissioners's cost of processing the application does not exceed the fee set out in the schedule of fees and charges, the difference will be refunded to the applicant. To the extent such costs exceed the fees set out in the schedule of fees and charges, such costs shall be paid by the applicant prior to final consideration of the request by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1968, § 22-84)  
Sec. 86-52. - Scope and contents. 
All applications for a new franchise shall be filed in conformance with and subject to the provisions of this article. This article shall not be construed to prescribe the detail in which the applicant shall make its presentation nor in any way to restrict the scope of its presentation. However, at a minimum, the following matters must be carefully covered and in such detail that the board of commissioners can make fully informed judgments concerning the adequacy of the proposal and applicant's legal, character, financial, technical and other qualifications to construct and operate a cable television system in the city. 
(Code 1968, § 22-85)  
Sec. 86-53. - Franchise area. 
The applicant shall submit a sufficiently detailed plan and timetable for providing service to all citizens within the corporate limits to allow the board of commissioners to determine whether the requested franchise is in the public interest, considering the size of the area requested relative to the technical, fiscal and legal qualifications of the applicant; and the extent to which existing cable operators have installed facilities and equipment in the area. 
(Code 1968, § 22-86)  
Sec. 86-54. - Legal qualifications. 
(a)  Identification of applicant. All applications shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the applicant and of the principal or the representative to whom inquiries should be made. 
(b)  Ownership information. The application shall identify persons or other entities having an ownership interest in the applicant, and for each such entity shall provide information as to names, addresses, amount of interest, type of interest, basis for acquiring ownership, existence of any buy-out agreements, and ownership interests in other media. 
(c)  Affiliates, subscribers and parent companies. Provide full identification and ownership details, as in subsection (b) of this section, for all affiliates, subsidiaries and parent companies of applicant. 
(Code 1968, § 22-87)  
Sec. 86-55. - Character qualifications. 
(a)  Litigation and proceedings. Applicant shall supply all records applicable to any past or current involvement of the applicant or any of its principals or managers as a party in criminal or civil proceedings. The application shall also supply detailed information concerning whether the applicant or any principal, owner, director or manager of the applicant has ever been subject to a penalty for failure to comply with any cable television franchise, has been involved in any legal action involving any franchising authority, or has ever had any license of any type revoked or suspended, or had renewal denied. 
(b)  Other cable system operations. Applicant shall provide information as to other cable systems (including SMATV) owned by or affiliated with the applicant, the principals or managers, including location, miles of plant, percent completed, density of area served, number of homes passed, number of subscribers, channel capacity, services offered, rates charged and market penetration. 
(Code 1968, § 22-88)  
Sec. 86-56. - Financial qualifications. 
(a)  Financial plan. Each application must describe in detail the financing plan for the construction and initial operation of the proposed cable communications system and provide proof of financial capability. Proof of financial capability shall include: 
(1)  A showing of sources and amount of equity capital. If equity contribution is borrowed, describe collateral and terms of the loan. All equity commitments must be evidenced by appropriate documentation. 
(2)  A showing of sources, amount and terms of debt capital, both primary and secondary, accompanied by appropriate documentation. If funding is to be provided by a parent or affiliated equity, its source of funding must also be documented. 
(b)  Pro forma financial statements. Pro forma financial statements are required for a minimum of five years, beginning with the date the franchise is accepted. Such pro formas shall include income statements, sources and uses of funds, loan amortization information, anticipated capital expenditures, construction costs, depreciation schedules, and operating expenses, along with detailed assumptions on which the projections are based. 
(c)  Annual report. If the applicant is an existing entity, a certified annual report for the last two years shall be submitted or, if existing for less than two years, for such period of existence. 
(Code 1968, § 22-88.1)  
Sec. 86-57. - Technical qualifications. 
Describe any qualifications and cable system experience of applicant, including, but not limited to, the ownership, construction, management and operation of other cable communications systems, specifying the manner in which applicant participated; available personnel with technical qualifications and experience committed to the proposed system design, construction and operation; construction contractors to be used, if any; and technical consultants, if any. Indicate the type of participation and the qualifications of persons, consultants, contractors, etc., whose services will be utilized. 
(Code 1968, § 22-89)  
Sec. 86-58. - System construction plan. 
The applicant shall submit to the office of the city manager or his designee a detailed construction plan, supported by detailed maps indicating areas of construction and projected timeframes for the completion of the system. The applicant shall demonstrate that sufficient pole and conduit space exists for the placement of its facilities and shall provide a copy of any agreement between the applicant and the utility providing for the use of any utility facilities. 
(Code 1968, § 22-90)  
Sec. 86-59. - System design, layout and equipment. 
The board of commissioners seeks a comprehensive, but concise, description of the proposed system design. Such description shall include the system configuration, the manufacturer and model of each type of equipment used, a spectrum utilization chart, and a complete list of all services, video or otherwise, which will be offered. 
(Code 1968, § 22-91)  
Sec. 86-60. - Customer services. 
The applicant shall set forth detailed plans for system maintenance, customer complaints, billing procedures and inquiries, subscriber privacy, and policies related to outages. 
(Code 1968, § 22-92)  
Sec. 86-61. - Impact of an additional grantee. 
To assist the board of commissioners in making its evaluation of the impact of additional grantees, the applicant shall provide detailed information relating to: 
(1)  The extent of installation of facilities and equipment of existing cable operators, detailing the per-strand-mile density of areas served, unserved areas and the per-strand-mile density of such and the location of the facilities and equipment of the existing operators in the area for which the applicant is applying, if information is available to applicant. 
(2)  The per-strand-mile densities of the areas the applicant proposes to serve and the extent to which the applicant intends to utilize bulk contracts. 
(Code 1968, § 22-93)  
Secs. 86-62—86-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - REVIEW OF APPLICATION 
 
Sec. 86-81. - Initial review. 
Upon the submission of an application for a franchise, the city manager or his designee shall review the application to ensure that all information provided is correct and that the applicant has the financial, technical and managerial background and resources to provide the proposed services. If necessary, the city manager or his designee may request an applicant to provide additional information. 
(Code 1968, § 22-104)  
Sec. 86-82. - Completeness of application. 
The city manager or his designee shall accept, reject as incomplete or deficient, or accept with conditions the application. Within 60 days of receipt of the application, the city manager or his designee shall notify the applicant as to any facial deficiencies. Upon acceptance or, if accepted with conditions, upon the conditions being met, the city manager or his designee shall notify the city clerk to advertise the public hearing at which the board of commissioners will consider the application. Existing grantee and members of the public will be given an opportunity to submit relevant comments and the advertisement shall provide for at least a 30-day period for the submission of such material. The public hearing shall commence after acceptance of the application by the city manager or his designee, or if accepted with conditions, after all conditions are met, but in no event sooner than 30 days following the date on which written comments are due. 
(Code 1968, § 22-105)  
Sec. 86-83. - Summary report. 
The city manager or his designee shall issue, or cause to be issued, a report summarizing the application which shall contain a recommendation to the board of commissioners as to approval, denial or approval with conditions. The board of commissioners may obtain a consultant to perform studies and reviews to assist the city manager or his designee. In the event an application is filed proposing a franchise area which overlaps, in whole or in part, an existing grantee's franchise area, a consultant's report shall be obtained to address the factors set forth in section 86-102. 
(Code 1968, § 22-106)  
Secs. 86-84—86-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CONSIDERATION BY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 
 
Sec. 86-101. - General evaluation criteria by franchise authority. 
The board of commissioners may consider the information and criteria set forth in this article, and any other information it deems appropriate in determining whether to award a franchise. 
(Code 1968, § 22-117)  
Sec. 86-102. - Evaluation criteria; desirability of an additional grantee. 
In the event an application is filed proposing a franchise area which overlaps, in whole or in part, an existing grantee's franchise area, the board of commissioners, in considering such application, shall take into account: 
(1)  The availability of space on existing poles and conduits; 
(2)  The likelihood that more than one grantee can maintain financially feasible operations over an extended period of time so as to provide long-term benefits to subscribers; and 
(3)  Whether access to cable service might be denied to certain potential subscribers based on the income of residents of a particular area. 
(Code 1968, § 22-118)  
Sec. 86-103. - Action by board of commissioners. 
Upon consideration of all relevant information and completion of the public hearing process, the board of commissioners may reject the application or award a franchise with or without conditions. 
(Code 1968, § 22-119)  
Sec. 86-104. - Performance bond. 
Upon acceptance of the franchise, applicant shall post a corporate surety bond with the city in the amount of $500,000.00 to secure the faithful performance by applicant of all obligations under the franchise. 
(Code 1968, § 22-120)  
Secs. 86-105—120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - STATE-ISSUED CABLE OR VIDEO FRANCHISES 
 
Sec. 86-121. - Franchise fee for state-issued cable or video franchise. 
The city hereby requires a franchise fee of five percent of gross revenues generated within the city for any cable or video state franchise issued in its corporate boundaries by the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 07-14, § 1, 1-8-2008)  
Sec. 86-122. - Authorized designee. 
The city hereby authorizes its city manager, upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the secretary of state and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the five percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. 
(Ord. No. 07-14, § 1, 1-8-2008)  
Secs. 86-120—86-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TELECOMMUNICATION ANTENNAS AND TOWER STANDARDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, adopted Jan. 22, 2019 , repealed the former Art. III, §§ 86-131—86-145, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 15-17, § 1, adopted Dec. 8, 2015 . 
 
Sec. 86-131. - Purposes. 
This article is designed and intended to balance the interests of the residents of the city, telecommunications providers, and telecommunications customers in the siting of towers and other wireless support structures within the city so as to protect the health, safety and integrity of residential neighborhoods and foster, through appropriate zoning and land use controls, a competitive environment for telecommunication service providers that does not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services. These regulations shall not prohibit or have the effect of materially inhibiting the provision of personal wireless services, and are intended to promote the city as in the availability of personal wireless telecommunications services, 5G and broadband. To that end, this article shall: 
(1)  Provide for the appropriate location and development of wired and wireless telecommunications facilities in the city, other than on or within the city's public rights-of-way; 
(2)  Protect the city's built and natural environment by promoting compatible design standards for wired and wireless facilities; 
(3)  Minimize adverse visual impacts of telecommunications facilities through careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
(4)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower or antennae failure through engineering and careful siting of support structures and antennas; 
(5)  Maximize use of any new and existing wireless support structures so as to minimize the need to construct new structures and minimize the total number of structures throughout the city; 
(6)  Maximize and encourage use of alternative wireless support structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional towers; and 
(7)  Encourage and promote the location of towers and support structures in areas which are not zoned for residential use. 
( Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 1-22-2019 )  
Sec. 86-132. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory equipment means any equipment serving or being used in conjunction with a tower or support structure and includes, but is not limited to, utility or transmission equipment, power supplies, generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings, equipment cabinets, storage sheds, shelters, or similar structures. 
Antenna means any communications equipment that transmit, receives, or transmits and receives electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of all types of wireless communications services. For the purposes of this article, the term "antenna" does not include any tower and antenna expressly excluded under section 86-133. 
Application means a formal written request submitted to the city manager or his designee to construct, collocate, or modify a tower or support structure or other telecommunications facility within the city. 
Base station means a structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass a tower as defined in 47 C.F.R. Sec. 1.40001 or any equipment associated with a tower. 
Building official means the building official of the city or his or her designee. 
Collocate or collocation means the mounting or installation of antenna and equipment on an existing tower or support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes. 
Complete application means an application containing all documents, information, and fees specifically enumerated in this article pertaining to the location, construction, collocation, modification, or operation of wireless facilities. 
Eligible tower or support structure means any tower or support structure, as herein defined, existing at the time a request is filed with the city for: (a) collocation of new transmission equipment, (b) removal of transmission equipment, or (c) replacement of transmission equipment. 
Equipment compound means an area surrounding or adjacent to the base of a tower or support structure within which accessory equipment is placed. 
Governing body means the board of commissioners of the city. 
Modification or modify means the improvement, upgrade, expansion, removal, or replacement of existing wireless facilities on an existing tower or wireless support structure or within an existing equipment compound. 
Monopole tower means a telecommunications tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy wires or ground anchors. 
Personal wireless services means commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services, as such terms are defined and used in 47 U.S.C. § 332. 
Personal wireless service facilities means facilities for the provision of personal wireless services, as herein defined. 
Substantial change means, for purposes of this article, such term as expressly defined in 47 C.F.R. Sec. 1.40001, which by reference is expressly made a part hereof. 
Tower means any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services, such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site. 
Wireless facility means the set of equipment and network components, exclusive of the underlying wireless support structure, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and accessory equipment, used to provide wireless data and wireless telecommunications services. 
Wireless support structure means a freestanding structure, such as a monopole, tower (either guyed or self-supporting), or suitable existing or alternative structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities, such as an elevated water tank. Such term shall not include any telephone or electrical utility pole or any utility tower used for the distribution or transmission of electrical service. 
( Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 1-22-2019 )  
Sec. 86-133. - Exclusions. 
The following shall be exempt from this article: 
(1)  Any wireless support structure and antenna under 70 feet in total height which is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission; 
(2)  Any device designed for over-the-air reception of television broadcast signals, multichannel multipoint distribution service or direct broadcast satellite service, of one meter or less in diameter; 
(3)  Any telecommunications facilities located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the city, provided a written lease authorizing the wireless facility has been approved by the governing body, the city did not mandate placement of a wireless support structure on proprietary property, and the rental charge is limited to fair market value for the rental or use of similarly situated property; 
(4)  Any cable television headend or hub towers and antennas used solely for cable television services; 
(5)  Any radio or television broadcast towers and antennas, whose placement is regulated by Article 7 of the Unified Development Code of Griffin, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 1-22-2019 )  
Sec. 86-134. - Initial siting of wireless support structures. 
(a)  Wireless support structures shall be allowed as a use by right in the central business district (CBD), planned commercial district (PCD), planned industrial district (PID) and institutional district (INST), as shown on the official zoning map of the city. In all other zoning districts, wireless support structures shall be allowed by special use permit following procedures of the Unified Development Code of Griffin, Georgia. No wireless support structure shall be sited at any location where it causes obstruction or interference with navigable air space. 
(b)  Wireless support structures, other than monopole towers, designed and intended to accommodate at least one user are permitted up to a height of 100 feet following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the building official. Wireless support structures, other than monopole towers, designed and intended to accommodate at least two users are permitted up to a height of 120 feet following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the building official. Wireless support structures designed and intended to accommodate at least three users are permitted up to a height of 140 feet following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the building official. A height variance may be sought following procedures of the Unified Development Code of Griffin, Georgia. No variance shall be granted for a wireless support structure of a height greater than 160 feet. The standard for granting a height variance for a wireless support structure, other than monopole towers, shall be the willingness of the owner to provide space on the structure for future collocation. 
(c)  Monopoles are permitted up to a height of 80 feet to accommodate single users. Monopoles are permitted up to a height of 100 feet if designed and intended to accommodate at least two users. A height variance may be sought following procedures of the Unified Development Code of Griffin, Georgia. No variance shall be granted for a monopole of a height greater than 120 feet. The standard for granting a height variance for a monopole tower shall be the willingness of the owner to provide space on the structure for future collocation. 
(d)  Larger satellite dishes of greater than one meter in diameter, but less than two meters in diameter, shall not be located within the downtown commercial historic district of the city, as listed on the National Register of Historical Places, or within the front yard setback or roof of a single-family residence, unless a building permit is issued by the building official following design review in which the applicant demonstrates he cannot receive acceptable signals in preferred locations. 
(e)  It is the intent of the city, in exercising its police power under this article, to streamline its procedures for initial siting of wireless facilities, not to unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services nor prohibit or have the effect of materially inhibiting the provision of personal wireless services. In considering an application for the initial siting of a wireless support structure, the city, its staff and governing body, shall not seek or require information about, evaluate, or consider the technical, business, or service characteristics of such proposed wireless facilities, the provider(s), nor the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions. 
(f)  All decisions as to the initial siting of wireless support structures shall be made within 150 calendar days of the initial filing of an application, as extended only by the tolling of such period if the application has been returned to the applicant, within 30 days from the date of initial filing, as incomplete in accordance with FCC regulations issued under 47 U.S.C. § 331(c)(7). Any decision to deny the application must be in writing, supported by substantial evidence, and served upon the applicant prior to expiration of said period (as calculated in the manner provided in said regulations); failure to timely notify the applicant of a denial, in writing, shall be deemed to be an approval of the application, as filed. Notice of incompleteness given under this section must specify the code provision or other requirement that is missing; following a resubmission by the applicant, any further notice of incompleteness shall be given within ten days and reference specifically only missing items noticed in the first notice of incompleteness. 
( Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 1-22-2019 )  
Sec. 86-135. - Preferred and disfavored location sites. 
(a)  Preferred location sites. Preferred location sites are prioritized from highest to lowest as follows: 
(1)  Collocation sites: Any existing wireless support structure currently being used for transmitting or receiving electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of all types of wireless communications services shall be the highest preferred location site regardless of the underlying zoning designation of the site; provided, however, that collocations which meet this criteria shall be subject to the design and siting components of this article and collocation sites shall not become an antenna farm or otherwise be deemed by the building official or the governing authority to be visually obtrusive. 
(2)  Publicly owned structures: Publicly owned structures are the next highest preferred locations throughout the city because they appear in virtually all neighborhoods, are dispersed throughout the city, and, due to their institutional or infrastructure uses, are generally similar in appearance to or readily adaptable for telecommunications facilities. Therefore, wireless support structures should be less noticeable when placed on publicly owned structures than when placed on industrial or commercial structures. Publicly owned structures include, but are not limited to, facilities such as police or fire stations, libraries, community centers, civic centers, courthouses, utility structures, water towers, elevated roadways, bridges, flag poles, schools, hospitals, clock or bell towers, light poles and churches. 
(3)  Industrial and commercial structures: Wholly industrial and commercial structures such as warehouses, factories, retail outlets, supermarkets, banks, garages, or service stations shall be preferred locations particularly where existing visual obstructions or clutter on the roof or along a roofline can and will be removed as part of the installation of the wireless support structure. 
(4)  Mixed use buildings in high-density districts: Mixed use buildings (housing above commercial or other nonresidential space) are also preferred location sites. 
(b)  Disfavored location sites. Any single-family residential district or site adjoining a single-family residence, duplex, or multifamily housing complex shall be a disfavored site for the location of wireless facilities; provided, however, larger satellite dishes may be sited in rear or side yard setbacks as a matter of right. 
( Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 1-22-2019 )  
Sec. 86-136. - Requirements for all wireless support structures. 
(a)  General requirements for all wireless support structures. The requirements set forth in this section shall govern the design and construction of all wireless support structures governed by this article. 
(1)  Building codes and safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of wireless support structures, the owner shall ensure that proposed facilities are designed, constructed, and maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building codes and any applicable standards for such wireless support structures, as amended from time to time. Compliance shall be shown by the seal and signature of a registered engineer licensed in the State of Georgia on the design plans. Owners of wireless facilities shall conduct periodic inspections of such facilities at least once every year to ensure structural integrity. Inspections shall be conducted by a qualified, professional engineer licensed to practice in this state. The results of such inspection shall be provided, in writing, to the building official. 
(2)  Regulatory compliance. 
a.  All wireless support structures must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration, the Federal Communication Commission and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate telecommunications facilities. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the telecommunications facilities governed by this article shall bring such telecommunications facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within the date established by the agency promulgating the standards or regulations. 
b.  Owners of wireless support structures shall provide documentation to the building official, upon written request, showing that each wireless facility is in compliance with all applicable federal and state requirements. Evidence of compliance may be requested every 12 months. 
c.  It shall be the duty of every owner of a wireless support structure existing in the city as of February 22, 2012, or constructed thereafter, to provide the building official with an "as-built" scaled diagram showing the dimensions of every wireless support structure, the equipment compound in which located, together with the number of equipment cabinets within the compound. Such drawing shall show the height of the wireless support structure, the width of the structure at each point where antenna are proposed to be affixed, the height at which each antenna is affixed to the structure, and the distance the antennae projects above or horizontally from the structure. 
(3)  Security. All wireless support structures shall be fenced and equipped with an appropriate security system, including, if applicable, an anticlimbing device or other similar protective device, to prevent unauthorized access to the structure. 
(4)  Lighting. No illumination is permitted on telecommunications facilities unless required by the Federal Communication Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration, or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction or unless necessary for air traffic safety. If lighting is required or necessary, the building official may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views. 
(5)  Advertising. No advertising is permitted on wireless facilities. However, a whip antenna may be allowed on any legally permitted permanent billboard or outdoor advertising sign as long as the other requirements of this article are met. 
(6)  Visual impact. 
a.  Wireless facilities shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the Federal Aviation Administration or other applicable federal or state agency, be painted a neutral color or painted and/or textured to match the existing structure so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
b.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and associated electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. Roof-mounted antennas shall be made visually unobtrusive by screening to match existing air conditioning units, stairs, elevator towers or other background. 
c.  Where feasible, wireless facilities should be placed directly above, below or incorporated with vertical design elements of a building to help in camouflaging. 
d.  Wireless facilities should not be placed in a direct line of sight within historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the governing body, local historic preservation commission, or by any state or federal agency. 
e.  Any equipment cabinet that supports wireless facilities must be concealed from public view or made compatible with the architecture of the surrounding structures or placed underground. Equipment compounds or cabinets shall be screened from public view by using landscaping or materials and colors consistent with the surrounding backdrop. The compound or cabinet must be regularly maintained. 
(7)  Landscaping. 
a.  Landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the wireless facility from adjacent public ways, public property and residential property. 
b.  Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost. 
c.  The building official may waive or modify the landscaping requirement where lesser requirements are desirable for adequate visibility for security purposes, for continued operation of existing bona fide agricultural or forest uses such as farms, nurseries and tree farms, or where an antenna is placed on an existing structure. In certain locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, such as remote agricultural or rural locations or developed heavy industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be modified or waived by the zoning administrator. 
(8)  Maintenance impacts. Equipment at a wireless facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts or has access to a collector or local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector or local street. 
(9)  Principal, accessory and joint uses. 
a.  Accessory structures used in direct support of a wireless facility shall be allowed but not be used for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a wireless facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the wireless facility. 
b.  Wireless facilities may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same buildable area. 
(10)  Lot size and setbacks. 
a.  The following setback requirements shall apply to wireless facilities, provided, however, that the building official may reduce the standard setback requirements of this section if the goals of this article would be better served thereby: 
1.  Towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from any off-site residential structure. 
2.  Towers, guy wires and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. 
3.  Wireless facilities must be set back from any property line a sufficient distance to protect adjoining property from the potential impact of wireless facility failure by being large enough to accommodate such failure on the site, based on the engineer's analysis required in this article. 
b.  For antennas attached to the roof or a supporting structure on a rooftop, a 1:1 setback ratio (example: ten-foot-high antenna and supporting structure requires ten-foot setback from edge of roof) shall be maintained unless an alternative placement is shown to reduce visual impact. 
(b)  Additional requirements for towers. 
(1)  Site location and development shall preserve the preexisting character of the surrounding buildings and land uses and the zoning district as much as possible. Personal wireless telecommunication towers shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical. Concealment elements, or "stealth-design", may be a reasonable condition of permit approval. 
(2)  Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography shall be minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual impact of the site to the surrounding area. 
(3)  At a tower site the design of the buildings and related structures shall to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower and related facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
(4)  Towers shall not be located any closer than 1,500 feet from an existing tower unless technologically required or visually preferable. 
(5)  When a tower is adjacent to a residential use, it must be set back from the nearest residence a distance at least equal to its total height. 
(6)  In no case shall a tower be located in the required front yard, back yard or side yard in a residential district. 
(7)  Towers shall not be sited where they will negatively affect historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the governing body, a local historic preservation commission, or any state or federal agency, or where they will create visual clutter. 
(8)  Towers shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anticlimbing device or other similar protective device designed to prevent tower access. 
(9)  Placement of more than one tower on a lot may be permitted, provided all setback, design and landscape requirements are met as to each tower. Structures may be located as close to each other as technically feasible, provided tower failure characteristics of the towers on the site will not lead to multiple failures in the event that one fails. 
(10)  Wireless facilities shall meet all requirements of the city's stormwater regulations, including post-construction maintenance and inspection requirements. 
( Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 1-22-2019 )  
Sec. 86-137. - Application procedures. 
(a)  General application requirements for all building and special use permits. Application for a building permit or special use permit for any wireless facility shall be made to the building official by the person, company, or organization that will own and operate the wireless facility. An application will not be considered until it is complete and appropriate fee has been tendered. The following information shall be submitted when applying for any building permit, special use permit, or variance included in this article and must be submitted for an application to be considered complete: 
(1)  Basic information. 
a.  Site plan or plans to scale specifying the location of wireless facilities, base station and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas, drainage, and adjacent land uses. Applicants shall submit both a paper location map and a digitized location map in a format compatible with the GIS software currently utilized by the city. 
b.  Evidence of legal ownership or interest, such as a deed to the property or a lease between the legal owner(s) and applicant for the building permit. 
c.  Landscape plan to scale indicating size, spacing and type of plantings required in subsection 86-136(a)(7). 
d.  A full description of the immediate area surrounding the proposed wireless facility, including any adjacent residential structures and districts, structures and sites of historic significance, streetscapes or scenic view corridors. 
e.  Report from a qualified professional engineer licensed in this state, documenting the following: 
1.  Height of the proposed wireless facility, width at base, and design, including any pertinent design factors governing the proposed facility; 
2.  Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility, including number and types of antenna which can be accommodated; 
3.  Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure; and 
4.  Structural failure characteristics of the wireless support structure and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris. 
f.  The identity of a community liaison officer appointed by the applicant to resolve issues of concern to neighbors and residents relating to the construction and operation of the facility. Include name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and email address, if applicable. 
g.  Identification of the geographic service area for the subject installation, including a map showing the proposed site and the nearest wireless facilities to the proposed site. Describe the distance between the proposed wireless facility site and existing sites. 
h.  Designation of which location preference, identified in section 86-134, the proposed facility is meeting. If the proposed location is not a preferred location one through four or is a disfavored site, describe: (i) what collocation site, publicly owned facility, or other preferred location site(s) are located within the geographic service area; (ii) what good faith efforts and measures were taken to secure each of these preferred location sites; (iii) why each such site was not feasible and/or why such efforts were unsuccessful; and (iv) why the proposed site is essential to meet service demands for the geographic service area. 
(2)  Additional information requirements for towers. 
a.  If the proposed site is zoned for residential use, applicants must justify why any alternate sites in commercial or industrial zones have not been proposed. The building official will not consider justifications that appeal only to undue expense and/or to undue difficulties in entering into a lease agreement. The building official shall not deny a building permit if the applicant refuses to site its wireless facility on public property; otherwise, it shall be ground for denial if collocation space on an existing tower is available and the applicant refuses to collocate. 
b.  The applicant must provide a utilities inventory showing the locations of all water, sewage, drainage, gas and power lines impacting the proposed tower site. 
(3)  Applicant required to provide information . The applicant must provide any other information which may be requested by the building official to fully evaluate and review the application and the potential impact of a proposed wireless facility. 
(b)  Expedited review for building permits only. When a wireless facility will be a use of right pursuant to section 86-134 and requires only a building permit and design review before it may be erected, the building official will expedite review of the application and render a decision on the application within 30 days after receipt of a complete application. 
(c)  Special use permits. 
(1)  A request for a special use permit shall be initiated by application to the zoning administrator and handled in accordance with the special use permit procedures of Section 406 of the Unified Development Code of Griffin, Georgia. The governing body may issue a special use permit under this section, provided it shall have determined that all of the requirements of section 86-136 have been satisfied and, further, that the benefits of and need for the proposed tower are greater than any possible depreciating effects and damage to the neighboring properties. 
(2)  In granting a special use permit, the governing body may impose additional reasonable conditions to the extent determined necessary to buffer or otherwise minimize adverse effects of the proposed tower or antenna on surrounding properties. 
( Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 1-22-2019 )  
Sec. 86-138. - Appeals. 
Any decision by the building official denying a request to site or construct a wireless facility shall be in writing and specifically stating the reason(s) for denial. Appeals from any decision of the building official under this article may be taken by any person aggrieved by the decision. Such appeal shall be made, in writing, to the city manager and filed within ten days of a written denial. The city manager shall hear the appeal in an administrative hearing within 15 days or at a time mutually agreed for a hearing by the parties. Any decision by the city manager denying or approving with conditions a request to site or construct a wireless facility shall be final; served upon the appellant in writing and supported by substantial evidence in a written record, which shall be provided the appellant contemporaneously with the letter of denial. 
Applicants who are aggrieved by a final decision of the city manager may, within 30 days of the date of written notice of denial, elect to: (a) seek judicial review in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, Newnan Division, or (b) make application for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Spalding County, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 1-22-2019 )  
Sec. 86-139. - Modification—Colocation, removal or replacement of antennae. 
(a)  The owner of all existing tower or wireless support structure shall allow other personal wireless service companies, including public and quasi-public agencies, using functionally equivalent personal wireless technology to collocate antennas, equipment and facilities on an existing telecommunications facility unless specific technical constraints prohibit such collocation. Personal wireless carriers shall provide a mechanism for the construction and maintenance of shared facilities and infrastructure and shall provide for equitable sharing of cost in accordance with industry standards. 
(b)  Review of applications to modify eligible support structures. All modifications (collocation of new transmission equipment; removal of transmission equipment; or replacement of transmission equipment) of an eligible support structure shall be made by written application to the building official. Section 6409 of the Spectrum Act, codified at 47 U.S.C. § 1455, requires the city to approve any eligible facilities request for a modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station. Where the application and supporting documentation submitted by the applicant demonstrates the modification has been designed and will be constructed to observe all building and safety codes, maintain any concealment element or "stealth" condition, and extends less than 10' vertically and 6' horizontally, the application shall be approved and permit issued; provided, however, the owner of the facility shall submit modified "as-built" plans and drawings to the building inspector reflecting the modification(s) made. 
(c)  All other applications for modifications which substantially change the physical dimensions of an existing tower or base station shall follow the format of section 86-137 and be supported by documentation or information reasonably demonstrating the modification will meet the criteria of this article. Within 90 days of the date on which an applicant submits an application seeking approval of a substantial modification, the city shall approve, deny, or approve with reasonable conditions the application, in writing. If denied, the letter of denial shall contain a statement of the specific grounds for denial. The 90-day period begins to run on the date the application is filed with the building official and may be tolled only if the city, within 30 days of receipt of the application, notifies the applicant, in writing, that the application is not complete, clearly and specifically delineating all missing documents or information (such delineated documents or information limited to the requirements of this section). 
(d)  In the event the city fails to approve or deny a request for substantial modification within the timeframe for review (accounting for any tolling), the request shall be deemed granted; provided, however, the request shall not become effective until the applicant notifies the city's building official, in writing, served upon the building official by either personal service, or certified mail (return receipt requested) that the review period (accounting for any tolling) has expired and that the application has been deemed granted. 
(e)  If a building permit is not forthcoming from the city, the applicant may bring a claim related to 47 U.S.C. § 1455 in any federal district court of competent jurisdiction. 
( Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 1-22-2019 )  
Sec. 86-140. - Nuisances. 
Wireless facilities, including, without limitation, power source, ventilation and cooling, shall be operated at all times so as not to cause unreasonable noise or the generation of heat that adversely affects a building's occupants and shall be maintained or operated in such a manner as to not become a nuisance. 
( Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 1-22-2019 )  
Sec. 86-141. - Maintenance of antennas and towers. 
All wireless facilities shall be maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building and technical codes so as to ensure the structural integrity of such facilities. If upon inspection by the building official any such telecommunications facility is determined not to comply with the code standards or to constitute a danger to persons or property, then, upon written notice being provided to the owner of the facility and the owner of the property, if such owner is different, such owners shall have 30 days to bring such facility into compliance. In the event such wireless facility is not brought into compliance within 30 days, the city may provide notice to the owners requiring the wireless facility to be removed. In the event such wireless facility is not removed within 30 days of receipt of such notice, the city may remove such facility and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. Delay by the city in taking action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to ensure that wireless facilities not in compliance with the code standards or which constitute a danger to persons or property are brought into compliance or removed. The city may seek to have the wireless facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's future intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
( Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 1-22-2019 )  
Sec. 86-142. - Abandoned towers. 
(a)  Any wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make future use of it or any part of it. The owner of a wireless facility and the owner of the property where the facility is located shall be under a duty to remove the abandoned wireless facility. If such antenna and/or tower is not removed within 60 days of receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner of such abandonment, the city may remove such tower and/or antenna and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to ensure that abandoned wireless facilities are removed. Delay by the city in taking action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. The city may seek to have the wireless facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's future intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(b)  If the owner of an abandoned tower or antenna wishes to use such abandoned tower or antenna, the owner first must apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this article as if such tower or antenna were a new tower or antenna. 
( Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 1-22-2019 )  
Sec. 86-143. - Preexisting towers/nonconforming uses. 
(a)  All wireless facilities operative on November 15, 1997, shall be allowed to continue their present usage as a nonconforming use and shall be treated as a nonconforming use in accordance with this article. Routine maintenance, including replacement with a new tower or antenna of like construction and height, shall be permitted on such existing telecommunications facilities. New construction other than routine maintenance shall comply with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  A telecommunications facility that has received city approval as of November 15, 1997, in the form of either a building permit or special use permit, but has not yet been constructed or placed in operation shall be considered an existing wireless facility so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
(c)  Placement of an antenna on a nonconforming structure shall not be considered an expansion of the nonconforming structure. 
( Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 1-22-2019 )  
Sec. 86-144. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person who attempts to erect or erects a wireless facility covered by this article without having first obtained the necessary building permit, special use permit, or variance in the manner provided in this article shall be deemed in violation of this article. Any responsible party or other persons convicted in the municipal court of the city of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the city and shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(b)  If any structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained in violation of this article or without obtaining the required permits, or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of this article, the building official, in addition to any other remedies, may institute proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use or to correct or abate such violations. Each and every day such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use continues may be deemed a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 1-22-2019 )  
Sec. 86-145. - Coordination with federal law. 
Whenever it is brought to the attention of the governing authority, in writing, that the application of this article would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services or prohibit or has the effect of materially inhibiting the provision of personal wireless services, a waiver of the offending provisions of this article may be granted. Whenever the provisions of this article are found in conflict with applicable federal law, the provisions of the federal law shall prevail. 
( Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 1-22-2019 )  
Chapter 90 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicle operations at airport, § 18-121 et seq.; courts, ch. 38; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; vehicle for hire, ch. 102. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq.; traffic offenses triable on complaint without indictment except in superior courts, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-3; jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 90-1. - Use of coasters, skates, toy vehicles. 
No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicles, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinance of this city. 
(Code 1968, § 13-2)  
Sec. 90-2. - Escort required for vehicles over 12 feet wide. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or tow any vehicle any portion of which is more than 12 feet wide (hereinafter referred to as an overwide vehicle) on any public street other than a designated route on the state highway system in the city without first obtaining a police escort under the following procedures: Any person desiring to move such vehicle along any public street in the city shall notify the chief of police or his designee of the intended movement and of the route proposed to be taken at least two hours in advance of such movement and shall at the same time tender a sum as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges to the chief of police or his designee to defray the cost providing such escort. Such cost shall be computed at a rate as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges per hour or major fraction thereof, but in no event shall the fee for providing such escort be less than an amount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. The balance, if any, shall be paid upon termination of the movement within the city. When so notified, the police department shall provide an escort before and behind such overwide vehicle during its entire movement within the city limits. In the event that the width of such vehicle is so great that the movement cannot be made without causing damage to utility poles, mailboxes and other property on or near the street or right-of-way, the chief of police shall have the authority to require the person moving such overwide vehicle to repay all such damages forthwith or to pay the owners of the damaged property for the damages sustained by each and to detain such vehicle within the city until all such damages have been satisfied; provided, nevertheless, that if the person moving such overwide vehicle disputes the amount of damages caused by his movement, he may, in lieu of paying for such damages instantly, post an indemnity bond in a form and with a surety acceptable to the chief of police, undertaking to pay the amount of all such damages when such amount shall have been judiciously determined. If such person shall fail either to pay the damages or to post bond, the chief of police or his designee may detain such vehicle until execution shall issue bearing teste the name of the city. Such execution may be levied and enforced in the same way as executions for delinquent taxes with the proceeds of sale to be held in escrow to pay all such damages after the damages have been judicially determined, with the balance, if any, to be paid to the owner of such property. 
(Code 1968, § 13-4)  
Sec. 90-3. - Truck routes. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, a "truck" means a motorized unit having a gross vehicle weight in excess of 12,000 pounds or a length in excess of 20 feet; provided, however, this section shall not apply to a recreational vehicle intended for camping or travel use, such as a motor home or truck camper. A "truck tractor" means a non-cargo power unit that operates in combination with a semitrailer or trailer. A "semitrailer" means a detachable load-carrying unit designed to be attached to a coupling on the rear of a truck tractor by which it is partly supported. A "trailer" means a detachable load-carrying unit designed to be attached to a coupling at the rear of a truck, truck tractor, or semitrailer and incapable of support without the truck or truck tractor. "Combination of vehicles" means a semitrailer pulled by a truck tractor or a semitrailer and trailer pulled by a truck tractor operating in combination. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck or truck tractor, operated in combination with a semitrailer or semitrailer and trailer, not have [having] a delivery or pickup to make in the city, or not having the city as its place of destination, to operate such vehicle or combination of vehicles over any highways, roads, streets, or alleys, except those streets and highways designated as federal or state routes or as posted truck routes. It shall be the duty of the operator to have on board such vehicle proper documentation showing its place of destination or delivery while within the city. 
(Code 1968, § 13-5; Ord. No. 06-09, § 1, 11-14-2006)  
Sec. 90-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-09, § 2, adopted Nov. 14, 2006, deleted § 90-4, which pertained to criminal trespass by motor vehicle and derived from Code 1968, § 13-14.  
Sec. 90-5. - Obedience to angle parking signs and markings. 
Upon those streets which have been signed or marked by the city manager for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(Code 1968, § 13-46)  
Sec. 90-6. - Duty to park within single space. 
Any vehicle parked in an area in which parking spaces are marked, whether parallel or at an angle, shall be parked entirely within a single space; provided, however, vehicles shall be parked entirely off the roadway or travel lanes so as not to obstruct or hinder passing motorists or pose a safety hazard in the ordinary course of travel. 
(Code 1968, § 13-47; Ord. No. 06-09, § 3, 11-14-2006)  
Sec. 90-7. - Special parking permits. 
The chief of police is authorized to issue special permits to permit the standing or backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading, unloading or such other purposes as may be deemed reasonable in the construction, destruction, remodeling, stocking, restocking, de- stocking or refurbishing of a business or residence. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle, to include all commercial vehicles, and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized in this section, and it shall be unlawful for any permittee or other such person to violate any special terms or conditions of any such permits. Any permits issued shall be for a specific period of time at a specific location and are not transferable to any other person or location. The fee charged for such permit shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges per day per vehicle. 
(Code 1968, § 13-51)  
Sec. 90-8. - Refrigerated trucks; parking prohibited. 
It shall be an offense against the city to park any refrigerated truck or refrigerated trailer upon which the motor or engine driving the system is left operating in or near a residential section. 
(Code 1968, § 13-57.2)  
Sec. 90-9. - Repairs to motor vehicles on city streets, rights-of-way or public property prohibited. 
No person, firm or corporation shall cause or undertake the repair of any motor vehicle, owned by or under the possession and control of such person, firm or corporation, while such vehicle is parked upon a public street, road or highway, within the right-of-way thereof, or upon other public property, except in an emergency situation where the motor vehicle causes a threat to public health and safety. 
(Code 1968, § 13-96)  
Secs. 90-10—90-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - UNIFORM RULES OF THE ROAD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; adoption of Uniform Rules of the Road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 
 
Sec. 90-31. - Adoption by reference. 
Pursuant to tit. 40, ch. 6 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Code sections 40-6-1 through 40-6-354 inclusive, except for subpart (b) of Code section 40-6-270; 40-6-390; 40-6-391; 40-6-391.1; 40-6-392; 40-6-395 and 40-6-397; together with the definitions found in Code section 40-1-1; are adopted by reference as and for the traffic regulations of this municipality, with like effect as if fully recited herein. 
(Code 1968, § 13-01; Ord. No. 03-16, § 1, 5-27-03)  
Sec. 90-32. - Penalties. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1968, § 13-02)  
Secs. 90-33—90-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SPEED ZONES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
 
Sec. 90-61. - Speed zones enumerated. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard for the actual and potential hazards then existing. Consistently with the foregoing, every person shall drive at a reasonable and prudent speed when approaching and crossing an intersection or railroad grade crossing, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching and traversing a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions. 
(b)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183, and the limitations imposed therein, the following maximum speeds area imposed for streets, roads, and highways on the State Highway System within the limits of the city, to-wit: 
State Route 	Within the City/Town Limits of and/or School Name 	From 	Mile Point 	To 	Mile Point 	Length in Miles 	Speed Limit 
S.R. 3 	Griffin 	1250 feet south of Kalamazoo Drive (South City Limits of Griffin) 	2.26 	S.R. 362 	3.00 	0.74 	55 
S.R. 3 	Griffin 	1500 feet south of Poplar Street Bridge 	3.8 	316 feet north of the N Expressway overpass 	5.46 	1.66 	55 
S.R. 3 	Griffin 	316 feet north of the N Expressway overpass 	5.46 	1150 feet north of Beatty St. 	6.48 	1.02 	45 
S.R. 3 	Griffin 	1150 feet north of Beatty St. 	6.48 	580 feet north of Lucky Street (North City Limits of Griffin) 	6.72 	0.24 	55 
S.R. 16 	Griffin 	700 feet west of Pine Hill Road (West City Limits of Griffin) 	11.12 	West side of intersection of Pine Hill Road and S.R. 16 	11.3 	0.18 	45 
S.R. 16 	Griffin 	West side of intersection of S.R. 3 and S.R. 16 	11.9 	100 feet west of S.R. 92 	12.58 	1.23 	45 
S.R. 16 	Griffin 	100 feet west of S.R. 92 	12.58 	50 feet west of school driveway/Second Street 	14.35 	1.77 	35 
S.R. 16 	Griffin 	50 feet west of school driveway/Second Street 	14.35 	50 feet west of Old US 41/Old Macon Road 	15.38 	1.03 	45 
S.R. 16 	Griffin 	50 feet west of Old US 41/Old Macon Road 	15.38 	50 feet west of Wilson Road (East City Limits of Griffin) 	16.11 	0.73 	55 
S.R. 92 	Griffin 	S.R. 16 	0.00 	S.R. 3 	1.28 	1.28 	45 
S.R. 92 runs in common with S.R. 3 from M.P. 1.28 to M.P. 1.94 
S.R. 92 	Griffin 	S.R. 3 	1.94 	375 feet south of Lake Side Drive (West City Limits of Griffin) 	2.28 	0.34 	45 
S.R. 155 	Griffin 	100 feet south of Pine Avenue (South City Limits of Griffin) 	1.90 	200 south of Milner Avenue 	3.15 	1.25 	45 
S.R. 155 	Griffin 
Crescent Elementary 
7:30 to 8:30 a.m. 
2:30 to 3:30 p.m. 
SCHOOL DAYS ONLY 	500 feet south of Crescent Road 	2.85 	500 feet north of Crescent Road 	3.03 	0.18 	25 
S.R. 155 	Griffin 	200 feet south of Milner Avenue 	3.15 	100 feet east of Searcy Avenue 	5.02 	1.87 	35 
S.R. 155 	Griffin 	100 feet east of Searcy Avenue 	5.02 	50 feet west of Dora Street (North City Limits of Griffin) 	5.60 	0.58 	45 
 
(c)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183 and the limitations imposed therein, based upon an engineering and traffic investigation of arterial and collector streets, off the State Highway System, within the city, to-wit: 
Road Name 	Within the City/Town Limits of and/or School Name 	From 	To 	Length in Miles 	Speed Limit 
Abby Road 	Griffin 	Wesminster Road 	0.50 miles from Wesminster Road to at dead end 	0.50 	25 
Anne Street 	Griffin 	Meriwether Street 	Everee Inn Road 	0.90 	30 
Anne Street 
SCHOOL ZONE 	Griffin 
Anne Street School Zone 
7:30 to 8:30 a.m. 
2:30 to 3:30 p.m. 
SCHOOL DAYS ONLY 	Beck Street 	Charles Circle 	0.20 	25 
Armstead Circle 	Griffin 	Ella Street 	North Hill Street 	0.50 	30 
Audubon Circle 	Griffin 	Quail Drive 	Quail Drive 	0.40 	25 
A.Z. Kelsey Street 
SCHOOL ZONE 	Griffin 
Mainstay Academy A.Z. Kelsey Street School Zone 
7:30 to 8:30 a.m. 
2:30 to 3:30 p.m. 
SCHOOL DAYS ONLY 	Haskelward Drive 	North Third Street 	0.20 	25 
Beatty Street 	Griffin 	Old Atlanta Road 	S.R. 3 	0.40 	30 
Beck Street 	Griffin 	Camp Northern Road 	Everee Inn Road 	0.80 	30 
Bieze Street 	Griffin 	Tilney Avenue 	Springer Drive 	0.75 	30 
Brown Acres Road 	Griffin 	Maddox Road 	Maddox Road 	0.40 	30 
Cardinal Drive 	Griffin 	North Pinehill Road 	0.60 miles east of North Pinehill Road 	0.60 	25 
Carver Road 	Griffin 	S.R. 16 	West Poplar Street 	030 	30 
Carver Road 	Griffin 	West Poplar Street 	Pinebrook Drive 	0.50 	35 
Carriage Hills Drive 	Griffin 	Carver Road 	Pinehill Road 	0.60 	25 
Carriage Trace 	Griffin 	Carriage Hill Drive 	Chariot Drive 	0.40 	25 
Central Avenue 	Griffin 	North Hill Street 	Morris Street 	0.70 	30 
Chappell Street 	Griffin 	North Tenth Street 	Pelly Avenue 	1.00 	30 
Chariot Drive 	Griffin 	South Pinehill Road 	Surrey Lane 	0.30 	25 
Cherokee Avenue 	Griffin 	Hammond Drive 	South Eighteenth Street 	0.25 	25 
Circus Street 	Griffin 	East Tinsley Street 	0.25 miles from East Tinsley Street dead end 	0.25 	25 
Coach Drive 	Griffin 	Carriage Hills Drive 	Chariot Drive 	0.25 	25 
Coldwater Drive 	Griffin 	Coldwater Lane 	Coldwater Way 	0.30 	25 
Coldwater Lane 	Griffin 	Ethridgemill Road 	0.45 miles from Ethridgemill Road to the dead end 	0.45 	25 
Coldwater Way 	Griffin 	Coldwater Drive 	Coldwater Drive 	0.35 	25 
Crescent Lane 	Griffin 	Crescent Road 	0.55 miles from Crescent Road to the dead end 	0.55 	25 
Crescent Road 	Griffin 	S.R. 155 	Maple Drive 	0.40 	30 
Crescent Road 
SCHOOL ZONE 	Griffin 
Crescent Elementary School Zone 
7:30 to 8:30 a.m. 
2:30 to 3:30 p.m. 
SCHOOL DAYS ONLY 	S.R. 155 	Woodland Drive 	0.25 	25 
Crystal Brook 	Griffin 	Ellis Road 	0.60 miles south of Ellis Road 	0.60 	30 
Dauset Drive 	Griffin 	Maddox Road 	Wesley Drive 	0.50 	30 
D.F. Fuller 	Griffin 	Hammond Drive 	Soiuth Fifteenth Street 	0.55 	25 
Drewry Avenue 	Griffin 	Experiment Street 	Herndon Street 	0.35 	25 
East College Street 	Griffin 	South Hill Street 	0.60 miles east of Finley Street (East City Limits of Griffin) 	1.80 	30 
East Poplar Street 	Griffin 	South Third Street 	South Hill Street 	0.35 	25 
East Poplar Street 
SCHOOL ZONE 	Griffin 
Taylor Street School Zone 
7:30 to 8:30 a.m. 
2:30 to 3:30 p.m. 
SCHOOL DAYS ONLY 	South Sixth Street 	South Third Street 	0.30 	25 
East Quilly Street 	Griffin 	North Hill Street 	North Second Street 	0.45 	30 
East Slaton Avenue 	Griffin 	North Fifth Street 	0.55 miles from North Fifth Street at the dead end 	0.55 	30 
East Solomon Street 	Griffin 	S.R. 155 	South Third Street 	0.30 	30 
East Solomon Street 	Griffin 	South Third Street 	Melton Street 	0.80 	35 
Ella Street 	Griffin 	North Hill Street 	0.30 miles east of North Hill Street 	0.30 	30 
Ellis Road 	Griffin 	Experiment Street 	0.40 miles west of S.R. 3 (West City Limits of Griffin) 	1.00 	35 
Ethridge Mill Road 	Griffin 	Zebulon Road 	0.50 miles south of Zebulon Road (South City Limits of Griffin) 	0.50 	35 
Everee Inn Road 	Griffin 	Meriwether Street 	Cain Lane 	0.60 	35 
Experiment Street 	Griffin 	Old Atlanta Road 	Cowart Street 	0.40 	30 
Experiment Street 	Griffin 	Cowart Street 	Lyndon Avenue 	0.70 	35 
Experiment Street 	Griffin 	Lyndon Avenue 	West Broad Street 	0.50 	25 
Finley Street 	Griffin 	East College Street 	Tupelo Street 	0.35 	30 
Forrest Avenue 	Griffin 	Maple Drive 	East College Street 	0.50 	25 
Four Oaks Drive 	Griffin 	Maple Drive 	0.40 miles west of Maple Drive 	0.40 	30 
Grandview Drive 	Griffin 	East College Drive 	Maple Drive 	0.55 	30 
Grantland Road 	Griffin 	Grandview Drive 	MaCarthur Drive 	0.50 	25 
Greenview Drive 	Griffin 	Meriwether Street 	Meriwether Street 	0.45 	25 
Hallmark Hill Drive 	Griffin 	Hallmark Drive 	0.28 miles from Hallmark Drive to the dead end 	0.28 	30 
Hillandale Drive 	Griffin 	S.R. 155 	Valley Road 	0.28 	30 
Hammond Drive 	Griffin 	S.R. 16 	Meriwether Street 	0.80 	30 
Honeybee Creek Drive 	Griffin 	Middlebrooks Road 	0.30 miles east of Middlebrooks 	0.30 	25 
Ivy Road 	Griffin 	Skyline Drive 	Skyline Drive 	0.60 	25 
Kalamazoo Drive 	Griffin 	S.R. 3 	Carver Road 	0.50 	35 
Kincaid Avenue/Crescent Road 	Griffin 	Maple Drive 	East College Street 	0.50 	30 
Lane Street 	Griffin 	West Cherry Street 	Grove Place 	0.28 	25 
Laramie Road 	Griffin 	Greenwood Street 	Valley Road 	0.28 	25 
Larcom Lane 	Griffin 	Greenwood Street 	Valley Road 	0.35 	25 
Leola Drive 	Griffin 	West Poplar Street 	Pinebrook Drive 	0.40 	25 
Lincoln Road 	Griffin 	Tuskegee Street 	North Hill Street 	0.30 	25 
Lincoln Road 
SCHOOL ZONE 	Griffin 
Atkinson Elementary School Zone 
7:30 to 8:30 a.m. 
2:30 to 3:30 p.m. 
SCHOOL DAYS ONLY 	320 feet north of Talladega Avenue 	Atkins Drive 	0.11 	20 
Lyndon Avenue 	Griffin 	North Expressway 	Experiment Street 	0.70 	30 
Maddox Road 	Griffin 	Ethridge Mill Road 	1.50 miles east of Ethridge Mill Road (East City Limits of Griffin) 	1.50 	30 
Maple Drive 	Griffin 	Milner Avenue 	0.70 miles south of Wesley Drive (South City Limits of Griffin) 	1.50 	30 
Maplewood Drive 	Griffin 	Maple Drive 	0.60 miles east of Maple Drive 	0.60 	25 
McLaurin Street 	Griffin 	Tilney Avenue 	Hale Avenue 	0.55 	25 
Melton Street 	Griffin 	Stallings Street 	Jackson Road 	0.28 	25 
Melrose Avenue 	Griffin 	Hillside Circle 	Ellis Road 	0.70 	25 
Meriwether Street 	Griffin 	0.40 miles west of Greenview Drive (West City Limits of Griffin) 	Greenview Drive 	0.40 	45 
Meriwether Street 	Griffin 	Greenview Drive 	Anne Street 	0.60 	35 
Meriwether Street 	Griffin 	Anne Street 	West College Street 	0.40 	25 
Meriwether Street 	Griffin 	West College Street 	0.05 miles west of West Poplar Street 	0.25 	30 
Meriwether Street 	Griffin 	0.05 miles west of West Poplar Street 	West Taylor Street 	0.25 	30 
Middlebrooks Road 	Griffin 	Maddox Road 	Honeybee Creek Drive 	040 	30 
Mobley Street 	Griffin 	Ridge Street 	Old Atlanta Road 	0.28 	25 
Morris Street 	Griffin 	East Broadway Street 	North Second Street 	0.55 	30 
North Fourth Street 	Griffin 	East Broadway Street 	Dead end 	0.25 	25 
North Fifth Street 	Griffin 	East Broadway Street 	North Fifth Street 	0.40 	25 
North Hill Street 	Griffin 	Broadway Street 	Lynn Street 	0.80 	25 
North Hill Street 	Griffin 	Lynn Street 	0.30 miles north of Lynn Street (North City Limits of Griffin) 	0.30 	35 
North Second Street 	Griffin 	Morris Street 	East Broadway Street 	0.60 	35 
North Sixth Street 	Griffin 	East Solomon Street 	North Hill Street 	0.80 	30 
North Third Street 	Griffin 	East Broadway Street 	Blanton Street 	0.70 	25 
North Third Street 
SCHOOL ZONE 	Griffin 
Griffin Academy School Zone 
7:30 to 8:30 a.m. 
2:30 to 3:30 p.m. 
SCHOOL DAYS ONLY 	Jefferson Street 	Blanton Street 	0.70 	25 
North Ninth Street 	Griffin 	West Solomon Street 	Cherry Street 	0.50 	30 
North Ninth Street 	Griffin 	Cherry Street 	0.50 miles north of Cherry Street (North City Limits of Griffin) 	0.50 	35 
North Thirteenth Street 	Griffin 	West Solomon Street 	0.35 miles north of Experiment Street 	0.65 	30 
North Fourteenth Street 	Griffin 	West Solomon Street 	Experiment Street 	0.40 	30 
North Fifteenth Street 	Griffin 	West Solomon Street 	Experiment Street 	0.50 	30 
North Sixteenth Street 	Griffin 	West Solomon Street 	Experiment Street 	0.60 	30 
North Seventeenth Street 	Griffin 	West Solomon Street 	Ellis Road 	0.70 	30 
North Pinehill Road 	Griffin 	Old Mt. Zion Road 	0.21 miles south of W Ellis Road (at City Limits) 	0.30 	35 
Oakdale Drive 	Griffin 	Meriwether Street 	Greenview Drive 	0.35 	30 
Oakview Drive 	Griffin 	Rosewood Drive 	Ridgewood Drive 	0.40 	30 
Old Atlanta Road 	Griffin 	0.40 miles north of Bowling Lane (North City Limits of Griffin) 	Experiment Street 	0.45 	30 
Pamela Drive 	Griffin 	Beck Street 	Anne Street 	0.28 	25 
Piedmont Road 	Griffin 	Carver Road 	0.25 miles north of Piedmont Road (City Limits of Griffin) 	0.25 	25 
Pineridge Road 	Griffin 	Maple Drive 	Hill Top Drive 	0.35 	30 
Pinevalley Road 	Griffin 	Maple Drive 	Maple Drive 	0.55 	30 
Placid Road 	Griffin 	Skyline Drive 	Grandview Drive 	0.40 	30 
Quail Drive 	Griffin 	North Pinehill Road 	Stillwater Trace 	0.35 	25 
Realty Street 	Griffin 	North Hill Street 	Dead End 	0.28 	30 
Ridge Street 	Griffin 	Lucky Street 	Beatty Street 	0.30 	30 
Ridgewood Drive 	Griffin 	S.R. 3 	Rosewood Drive 	0.40 	30 
Riley Circle 	Griffin 	North Hill Street 	0.30 miles west of North Hill Street 	0.30 	25 
Searcy Avenue 	Griffin 	East Solomon Avenue 	Harlow Street 	0.40 	30 
Skyline Drive 	Griffin 	Brookwood Terrace 	Hilltop Drive 	0.45 	25 
South Six Street 	Griffin 	East College Street 	Tinley Avenue 	0.40 	25 
South Eight Street 	Griffin 	Oak Street 	S.R. 155 	0.90 	30 
South Pinehill Road 	Griffin 	S.R. 16 	West Poplar Street 	0.40 	35 
Southworth Drive 	Griffin 	Maddox Road 	0.28 miles from Maddox Road to the dead end 	0.28 	30 
Spalding Street 	Griffin 	East Solomon Street 	1 st Street (City Limits of Griffin) 	0.28 	30 
Spellman Avenue 	Griffin 	Tuskegee Avenue 	Lincoln Road 	0.28 	30 
Springer Drive 	Griffin 	Forrest Avenue 	Hilltop Drive 	0.65 	30 
Sweetbriar Lane 	Griffin 	Honeybee Creek Drive 	Honeybee Creek Drive 	0.30 	25 
Tilney Avenue 	Griffin 	S.R. 155 	McLaurin Street 	0.45 	30 
Tinsley Street 	Griffin 	Pelly Avenue 	North Tenth Street 	1.10 	30 
Upland Drive 	Griffin 	Ridge Street 	Old Atlanta Road 	0.28 	25 
Wesminster Drive 	Griffin 	S.R. 16 	0.60 miles from S.R. 16 to the dead end 	0.60 	25 
Westchester Drive 	Griffin 	Wexford Drive 	Wexford Drive 	0.70 	25 
Wesley Drive 	Griffin 	Maple Drive 	Maddox Drive 	0.85 	30 
West Broad Street 	Griffin 	Hillwood Avenue 	North Tenth Street 	0.95 	30 
West Broad Street 	Griffin 	North Tenth Street 	North Hill Street 	0.30 	25 
West Cherry Street 	Griffin 	North Hill Street 	North Twelfth Street 	0.35 	25 
West Poplar Street 	Griffin 	0.50 miles west of Leola Drive (West City Limits of Griffin) 	Leola Drive 	0.50 	35 
West Poplar Street 
SCHOOL ZONE 	Griffin 
Griffin High School Zone 
7:30 to 8:30 a.m. 
2:30-3:30 p.m. 
SCHOOL DAYS ONLY 	Leola Drive 	Carver Road 	0.40 	25 
West Poplar Street 	Griffin 	Carver Road 	South Sixteenth Street 	1.10 	35 
West Poplar Street 	Griffin 	South Sixteenth Street 	South Hill Street 	0.80 	25 
West Quilly Street 	Griffin 	North Hill Street 	1045 feet north of Belle Street (North City Limits of Griffin) 	0.80 	25 
West Slaton Avenue 	Griffin 	North Tenth Street 	North Eighteenth Street 	0.80 	30 
West Solomon Street 	Griffin 	S.R. 3 	South Eighteenth Street 	0.30 	35 
West Solomon Street 	Griffin 	South Eighteenth Street 	South Hill Street 	1.00 	30 
Woodland Drive 	Griffin 	Milner Avenue 	Crescent Road 	0.35 	25 
 
(d)  Maximum speeds for local streets other than arterials or collectors, off the State Highway System, within the city. Except as expressly set forth in subsections (b) and (c) above, the maximum speed limit on any local street within a district classified as urban or residential shall be 25 miles per hour, and the maximum speed limit on any local street outside a district classified as urban or residential shall be 30 miles per hour; provided, however, the maximum speed limit in any designated school zone or designated work zone shall not exceed 25 miles per hour. 
(e)  The speed limits specified in this section, or hereafter established as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183, consistent with sound traffic engineering and traffic investigation standards, shall be the maximum lawful vehicle speeds, except when a special hazard exists that requires a lower speed for compliance with subsection (a) above. There shall be no minimum speed limitation on any street within the city, unless posted by proper signage on physically divided highways on the State Highway System, or portions thereof, having a posted speed of at least 55 miles per hour; provided, however, no person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation. 
(f)  Signage required. In order to enforce the speed limitations imposed by this section, appropriate signage shall be erected in conformance with the provisions of this section and in conformity with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. The Georgia Department of Transportation shall erect speed limit and school zone signs on those portions of the State Highway System within the city. The City Public Works Department, Street Division, shall erect all other required speed limit and school zone signs on streets within the city, not on the State Highway System. School zone signs shall state the hours during which school zones are enforced on days when school is in session. 
(g)  Enforcement; fines. Unless a different maximum fine or greater minimum fine is specifically provided in Chapter 6, Title 40 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, the maximum fine which may be imposed for a first offense of violating any speed limit established by this section by exceeding the maximum lawful speed limit: 
(1)  By five miles per hour or less shall be no dollars; 
(2)  By more than five but not more than ten miles per hour shall not exceed $25.00; 
(3)  By more than ten but not more than 14 miles per hour shall not exceed $100.00; 
(4)  By more than 14 but not more than 19 miles per hour shall not exceed $125.00; 
(5)  By more than 19 but not more than 24 miles per hour shall not exceed $150.00; or 
(6)  By more than 24 but less than 34 miles per hour shall not exceed $500.00. 
All other persons convicted of violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, 5-25-1999; Ord. No. 11-10, § 1, 11-8-2011; Ord. No. 15-05, § 1, 5-26-2015 ; Ord. No. 19-06, 2-26-2019 )  
Secs. 90-62—90-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PARKING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-02, § 1, adopted Jan. 25, 2011, repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 90-81—90-83, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 04-07, § 1, adopted May 25, 2004. Formerly, Ord. No. 94-07, § 1, amended art. IV in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former art. IV derived from Code 1968, §§ 13-58—13-61; and Ord. No. 01-15, § 1, adopted Aug. 28, 2001. 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq. 
 
Sec. 90-81. - Limitations on parking on public streets and adjacent rights-of-way, and in off-street lots designated for public parking. 
(a)  The use of public street and rights-of-way adjacent thereto for the purpose of parking motor vehicles is a privilege and not a right, and the privilege must be accepted with such reasonable burdens as the city may impose as a condition of the use and enjoyment of that privilege. The city manager, upon written recommendation of the chief of police, shall by written administrative order cause to be properly marked and/or designated with appropriate signage those areas of public streets and rights-of-way, including those properties owned or leased by the city and designated for the off-street parking of motor vehicles, on which the stopping, standing, or parking of motor vehicles shall be allowed, prohibited, or restricted. This privilege is extended only to operable motor vehicles displaying a current license tag or tag decal; where vehicle safety or emission inspection is required, a current inspection sticker must also be displayed. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, § 1, 1-25-2011; Ord. No. 13-04, § 1a., 4-23-2013)  
Sec. 90-82. - Enforcement of parking restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for any operator to park, stop, or stand a motor vehicle on the public streets and rights-of-way of the city, including on any properties owned or leased by the city for parking, in a manner inconsistent with the markings or signage designating those areas where parking is allowed, prohibited, or restricted. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article to park, stop, or stand a motor vehicle in a parking space designated for a specific use or purpose, or restricted to parking by permit, in any manner inconsistent with the specified use or purpose, or without first meeting permit requirements. 
(c)  Enforcement of parking shall be the responsibility of the city police department; provided, however, issuance of parking citations shall not require a certified law enforcement officer. Any person receiving a parking citation shall have ten business days, excluding the day the ticket was issued, Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays observed by the city, in which to pay the face amount thereof by cash, cashier's check, or money order, at the Customer Service Office, One Griffin Center, 100 South Hill Street, Griffin, GA 30223, or by mail, in the envelope provided, addressed to the City of Griffin, P.O. Drawer T, Griffin, GA 30224. All checks shall be payable to the "City of Griffin". 
(d)  Any parking citation not paid within ten business days of its issuance shall be returnable to the next regular term of municipal court and bench warrants may issue for the appearance of any person to whom an unpaid parking citation has been issued. Persons wishing to contest parking citations shall file written request with the municipal court clerk within ten business days of the issuance of the citation in order to receive an appearance date; payment of the parking fine shown on the citation shall be suspended until such court appearance. 
(e)  Motor vehicles parked, stopped or standing on public streets and rights-of-way, including properties owned or leased by the city for parking, in a manner inconsistent with the markings or signage designating those areas where parking is allowed, prohibited, or restricted, are subject to being impounded by the city. Persons whose vehicles are impounded should contact the Griffin Police Department to ascertain the location where the vehicle may be reclaimed and the costs associated with release of an impounded vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, § 1, 1-25-2011)  
Secs. 90-83—90-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - HEAVY VEHICLE PARKING 
 
Sec. 90-100. - Parking of heavy vehicles. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, "heavy vehicle" is defined as any large vehicle, cab, trailer, truck, tractor trailer, or car carrier (including rollbacks and wreckers). Recreation vehicles are specifically excluded from the definition of heavy vehicle; however, such vehicles shall not be parked on through streets or in any manner which would impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic or constitute a visual obstruction to motorists. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or cause any heavy vehicle to be pulled, pushed, or in any way moved across any curb in the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or cause any heavy vehicle to be parked or stored in a commercial or institutional zoned district unless the vehicle is actually engaged in loading or unloading activity where the driver is present and in charge thereof. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or cause any heavy vehicle to be parked or stored on public streets or public rights-of-way unless the vehicle is actually engaged in loading or unloading activity where the driver is present and in charge thereof. A minimum of two signs on interior light poles must be posted in commercial and institutional zoned parking lots to notify operators of heavy vehicles that it is illegal to park heavy vehicles in the lot unless they are parked in those areas designated and posted as loading zones and/or loading docks, in compliance with all provisions of this section. Each sign is required to be a minimum of 18 inches by 24 inches. In no case will operators of heavy vehicles be allowed to use the loading zones and/or loading docks or the specially designed parking spaces for sleeping or parking overnight. However, heavy vehicles may be parked in the parking lots of hotels and motels provided the operators of these vehicles are registered guests of the hotel or motel and provided they are parked in the designated parking spaces. 
(d)  No parking lot in the city, regardless of the zoning district in which it is located, shall be used for camping or overnight stays unless expressly authorized by the owner of the lot and prior notification to the city. 
(e)  Heavy vehicles used for temporary storage facilities may be permitted after registration with and inspection by the city fire department. During such time as approved for temporary storage a placard must be affixed in plain view noting the approved location, contents, date(s) of approval, and dates of periodic inspections by the appropriate personnel. 
(Ord. No. 05-09, § 1, 11-22-2005)  
Secs. 90-101—90-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - NO PARKING ZONES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-14, § 1, adopted June 22, 2004, created a new art. V and redesignated the former arts. V and VI as arts. VI and VII to read as herein set out. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1). 
 
Sec. 90-111. - Enumeration of zones. 
Parking is hereby prohibited on the state highway system within the city at the following locations, and appropriate signage shall be installed to designate such locations as "No Parking" zones: 
(1)  State Route 3 (19 and 41), North Expressway, from Railroad Bridge, M.P. 5.71, to north city limits, M.P. 6.61, a distance of 0.90 miles to be zoned for "No Parking" both sides. 
(2)  State Route 16, West Taylor Street, from the west city limits, M.P. 11.93, to New Orleans Street, M.P. 13.68, a distance of 1.75 miles to be zoned for "No Parking" both sides. 
(3)  State Route 16, East Taylor Street, from 4th Street, M.P. 14.18, to 2nd Street, M.P. 14.36, a distance of 0.18 miles to be zoned for "No Parking" north side only. 
(4)  State Route 16, East Taylor Street, from 2nd Street, M.P. 14.36, to Old US 41, M.P. 15.39, a distance of 1.03 miles to be zoned for "No Parking" both sides. 
(5)  State Route 92, North Expressway, from SR-16, West Taylor Street, M.P. 0.00, to Ellis Road, M.P. 0.99, a distance of 0.99 miles to be zoned for "No Parking" both sides. 
(6)  State Route 92, West McIntosh Road, from SR-3 (19 and 41), M.P. 1.94, to the west city limits, M.P. 2.28, a distance of 0.34 miles to be zoned for "No Parking" both sides. 
(7)  State Route 155, South Hill Street, from the south city limits, M.P. 190, to Poplar Street, M.P. 3.83, a distance of 1.93 miles to be zoned for "No Parking" both sides. 
(8)  State Route 155, East Broadway Street, from North Hill Street, M.P. 4.17, to Searcy Avenue, M.P. 3.83, a distance of 0.89 miles to be zoned for "No Parking" both sides. 
(Code 1968, § 13-57.1(a))  
Sec. 90-112. - General stopping, standing, or parking restrictions. 
(a)  Stopping, standing or parking of motor vehicles and equipment trailered or towed by a motorized vehicle is prohibited, restricted or limited on all streets under the jurisdiction of the city where posted by official traffic-control devices, signage or yellow curbing, when such prohibition, restriction or limitation has been directed by written administrative order of the city's public safety director. A copy of such administrative order(s) shall be maintained on file in the city manager's office, available for public inspection and copying; a certified copy of such order(s) shall be admissible in any proceeding to enforce violations of this provision. 
(b)  Exception from the restriction or prohibition of this section may be made for emergency conditions, such as mechanical breakdown or disability of a motor vehicle and/or equipment trailer, when such condition is promptly reported to the police department. When work in progress dictates the need to park vehicles and equipment trailers on streets where parking is restricted or prohibited, it shall be the duty of the operator of such vehicle or equipment to move the vehicle as close to the curb as possible and to warn other motorists, by establishing a worksite in accordance with the Uniform Manual For Traffic Control Devices, Federal Highway Administration. 
(c)  For purposes of this subsection, a "commercial vehicle" means any motor vehicle whose gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) exceeds 26,000 pounds, or a trailer whose gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) exceeds 10,000 pounds, including truck tractor/semitrailer combinations, dump trucks, wreckers, heavy construction and earth-moving equipment; provided, however, agricultural vehicles and school buses are excluded from this definition. Parking, stopping, storing or maintaining any commercial vehicle on a street or the right-of-way thereof in any residential zoning district of the city, except on a designated federal or state route or designated truck route, is prohibited, unless in an emergency situation or when actually making a delivery or pickup in the city. Whenever a commercial vehicle is to be parked or stopped on a city-maintained street for more than one hour's duration, it shall be the duty of the operator to notify the police department of the situation. 
(Code 1968, § 13-57.1(b); Ord. No. 04-01, § 1, 1-13-2004; Ord. No. 06-12, § 1, 11-28-2006)  
Sec. 90-113. - Application to disabled vehicles. 
The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled while on the roadway in such a manner and to the extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position; provided, however, it shall be the duty of the driver to move the disabled vehicle from the roadway as expeditiously as possible. Any disabled vehicle in the roadway shall activate its emergency flashers while stopped, standing or parked, if so equipped. 
(Code 1968, § 13-57.1(c))  
Sec. 90-114. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person operating or controlling a motor vehicle stopped, standing or parked in violation of this section, whether attended or unattended, shall be subject to punishment in the municipal court and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1968, § 13-57.1(d))  
Secs. 90-115—90-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - JUNKED OR INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-02, adopted Jan. 22, 2019 , repealed the former Art. VII, §§ 90-141—90-144, and enacted a new Art. VII as set out herein. The former Art. VII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 18-03, § 1, adopted April 10, 2018 . 
State Law reference— Authority to provide by ordinance for removal and disposal of junked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; when police officers may remove vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-206; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; removal of improperly parked cars or trespassing personal property, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. 
 
Sec. 90-141. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this article shall be construed so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. The following specific definitions shall be applied in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
Enforcement officer means the code enforcement officer of the city department of development services or officers of the city police department. 
Junk yard means any use on private property involving the parking, storage or disassembly of junked or inoperable motor vehicles; storage, bailing, or otherwise dealing in junk, animal hides, scrap iron or other metals, used paper, used cloth, used plumbing fixtures, old stoves, old refrigerators and other old household appliances, used brick, wood, or other building materials. These uses shall be considered junk yards whether or not all or parts of these operations are conducted inside a building or in conjunction with, in addition to, or accessory to other use of the premises. 
Junked or inoperable motor vehicle means any motor vehicle, as defined in this article, that is wrecked, wholly or partially dismantled, majorly disassembled, or missing a key component, such as a motor, transmission or body parts, so as to be incapable of normal operation in the manner intended, including disassembled parts, pieces, or components thereof; failure to display a current license tag, tag decal, or (if required) current vehicle safety or emission sticker, shall create a presumption the motor vehicle is junked or inoperable. 
Motor vehicle means a motor vehicle, including but not limited to an automobile, truck, motorcycle, semi-tractor truck, non-motorized trailers designed to be towed or pulled by a motor vehicle (all types; open or enclosed), or parts thereof, including motor parts, transmission parts, body parts, and tire or wheel assemblies. 
Motor vehicle under repair means any motor vehicle, as defined in this article, being serviced for malfunctioning or broken parts or systems, or being serviced by adding or removing features or components to or from that motor vehicle, or otherwise customizing that vehicle. 
Owner means the owner of the subject real property or premises, such term shall include the owner of record title as shown upon the deed records of the county, the occupant in possession including a tenant or lessee, and any person designated by the owner or occupant to manage the premises. When known to the enforcement officer, the term "owner" shall also include the person to whom the motor vehicle is currently or was formerly titled or who last purchased a license tag or decal for such vehicle. 
Person means every natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, trust, or other form of recognized business entity capable of owning real property in the State of Georgia, including governmental authorities, but excludes a federal agency, the state or a state agency, a county, or municipal corporation. 
( Ord. No. 19-02, 1-22-2019 )  
Sec. 90-142. - Keeping or storage of junked or inoperative motor vehicles prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  For the purpose of promoting the health, safety and welfare of the city, every owner and occupant of private real property within the city is required to keep his property free and clear of conditions which tend or are likely to breed snakes, rodents, mosquitoes, or other vermin, create a fire or safety hazard that endangers the lives and property of citizens, or other hazard to public health and safety, or unsightly nuisance. In furtherance thereof, except as allowed by this article, the existence of any junked or inoperable motor vehicle on public or private property is hereby declared and shall be deemed a public nuisance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to intentionally park, keep, store, deposit, or discard any junked or inoperable motor vehicle or motor vehicle under repair on any public street, adjoining street right-of-way, or on property owned or leased by the city and designated for off-street parking, except in accordance with this article and the zoning and business regulations of the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally park, keep, store, leave or permit the parking, storage, or keeping of any junked or inoperable motor vehicle, whether attended or not, on any private real property within the city; except that this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  A junked or inoperable motor vehicle that is located within a completely enclosed building or structure, lawfully erected on the property, so that the junked or inoperable motor vehicle is not visible from other adjoining properties or from a public street right-of-way; or 
(2)  A junked or inoperable motor vehicle that is stored or kept on real property in connection with a business of a licensed motor vehicle towing service, automobile repossession service, junkyard, or used motor vehicle parts merchant wholesaler, located in other than a residential zoning district, when the keeping or presence of such junked or inoperable motor vehicle is appropriate because the business is operated as a lawful storage place or depositary for junked or inoperable motor vehicles, provided that the junked or inoperable motor vehicles are safely maintained within the parcel and screened from all adjoining properties and/or rights-of-way by a six foot fence of opaque character or an equivalent landscape barrier; or 
(3)  A junked or inoperable motor vehicle that is stored or kept on real property in connection with a commercial business operated in a lawful manner located in an industrial zoned district. 
(d)  In furtherance of subsection (a) of this Code section, a business conducting automotive repair, including, but not limited to, an automotive engine repair and replacement shop, automotive tire dealer, and automotive body, paint, and interior repair and maintenance shop shall have no more than four motor vehicles per exterior service bay, which is a bay/garage door located on the outside of the principal business structure or shall have no more than those which can be legally parked in a paved, striped parking lot in conformance with the Unified Development Code, Articles 8 and 9, as required. 
( Ord. No. 19-02, 1-22-2019 )  
Sec. 90-143. - Intentional violations; punishment of violators. 
Any person found to have intentionally violated the provisions of this article shall be cited to appear before the municipal court; upon conviction, such violator shall be punished in the manner provided in section 1-12 of chapter 1, administration, of this Code. In addition to any fine or sentence of incarceration imposed, the court may require the violator to remove and properly dispose of the junked or inoperable motor vehicle from the subject real property, and/or order payment of restitution for the cost of removal if removed by city forces. 
( Ord. No. 19-02, 1-22-2019 )  
Sec. 90-144. - Authority of city to order removal and proper disposal; nuisance. 
(a)  Whenever it is determined by an enforcement officer that a junked or inoperable motor vehicle is kept or stored on any private real property within the city in violation of this article, written notice shall be given to the owner of the subject real property, and, if known, to the person in whom the vehicle is currently or was last formerly titled or who last purchased a license tag or decal for said vehicle, giving notice to remove and properly dispose of the junked or inoperable motor vehicle within five business days of the receipt of such notice. Where personal service of notice is not possible on an owner residing within Spalding County, Georgia, notice shall be given by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested, to the owner at the address last shown upon the most recent tax digest of Spalding County; or if none, at the best address available. 
(b)  In the event the owner, tenant, or person in possession of the property fails or refuses to remove or properly dispose of such junked or inoperable motor vehicle, the city manager or his designee shall initiate a Complaint In Rem, pursuant to article II, nuisances, of chapter 42 of this Code. 
(c)  Pursuant to order of the municipal court, the city and its agents shall be authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without being deemed a trespasser, and cause to be removed therefrom the junked or inoperable motor vehicle. The vehicle shall be towed by a licensed wrecker service and stored in an impound yard; it shall be the responsibility of the impound yard operator to comply with the procedures of O.C.G.A. § 40-11-9 governing disposition of derelict motor vehicles. Any costs incurred by the city shall be filed as a lien against the real property from which the junked or inoperable motor vehicle was removed. 
( Ord. No. 19-02, 1-22-2019 )  
Secs. 90-145—90-154. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL MONITORING DEVICES 
 
Sec. 90-155. - Use of traffic-control signal monitoring devices; penalty. 
(a)  The city elects to use traffic-control signal monitoring devices within the jurisdictional limits of the city as provided by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(f). 
(b)  The driver of a motor vehicle shall be liable for a civil monetary penalty of not more than $70.00 per violation if such motor vehicle is found, as evidenced by recorded images produced by a traffic-control signal monitoring device, to have been operated within the city limits in disregard or disobedience of a circular red or red arrow signal in violation of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(a). 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 1(1), 11-22-2005)  
Sec. 90-156. - Signage required for use of traffic-control signal monitoring devices. 
(a)  Prior to placing any traffic-control signal monitoring devices in use, the public works department shall erect signs on every highway that comprises a part of the state highway system at that point on the highway which intersects the jurisdictional limits of the city. The department shall also erect a sign on each public road on the approach to the next traffic-control signal for such road when a traffic-control device is monitoring such next signal for such road. Such signs shall be at least 30 inches by 30 inches in measurement and shall warn motorists that traffic-control signal monitoring devices are being employed. 
(b)  The city project manager shall inspect and certify the placement of all required signage before placing any traffic-control signal monitoring devices in use and shall periodically inspect to assure required signage has not been removed, modified or otherwise rendered ineffective. It shall be the duty of the city project manager to replace and re-erect such signage as required by law or this ordinance during all times the traffic-control signal monitoring device program is in effect within the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 1(2), 11-22-2005)  
Sec. 90-157. - Traffic-control signal monitoring program. 
(a)  The city project manager shall operate a traffic-control signal monitoring program using approved traffic-control signal monitoring devices in strict accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(f) and §§ 40-14-20 through 40-14-24. All definitions of terms used therein are expressly incorporated by reference for the purposes of this article. 
(b)  The timing of any traffic-control signal which is being monitored by a traffic-control signal monitoring device shall conform to regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Transportation pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 32-6-50. The city project manager shall cause each traffic-control signal monitoring device placed in operation within the city to be independently tested for accuracy by a qualified technician, other than its manufacturer, at regular intervals and record and maintain the results of each test. The test results log shall be a public record subject to inspection. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 1(3), 11-22-2005)  
Sec. 90-158. - Reporting of traffic-control signal monitoring device use. 
The city project manager or his or her designee shall submit not later than February 1 of each year a report on traffic-control signal monitoring device use during the preceding calendar year to the governor, the lieutenant governor, the speaker of the House of Representatives, the board of commissioners, the city manager, and the judge of the municipal court. Such report shall include: 
(1)  A description of the locations where the traffic-control signal monitoring devices were used; 
(2)  The number of violations recorded at each location and in the aggregate on a monthly basis; 
(3)  The total number of citations issued; 
(4)  The number of civil monetary penalties and total amount of such penalties paid after citation without contest; 
(5)  The number of violations adjudicated and results of such adjudications, including a breakdown of dispositions made; 
(6)  The total amount of civil monetary penalties paid; and 
(7)  The quality of the civil adjudication process and its results. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 1(4), 11-22-2005)  
Sec. 90-159. - Designation of city project manager. 
For purposes of administering this article and any traffic-control signal monitoring program operated in accordance herewith, the chief of police of the Griffin Police Department is hereby designated as the city project manager. 
(Ord. No. 05-08, § 1(1), 11-22-2005)  
Secs. 90-160—90-174. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - RIGHT-OF-WAY PROTECTION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-13, § 1, adopted Nov. 28, 2006, added art. VIII, consisting of §§ 90-150—90-153, to the Code. Inasmuch as art. VIII and §§ 90-150—90-153 already existed, said provisions have been redesignated to read as set out herein at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 90-175. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the term "right-of-way" shall mean that real property, titled in the city in fee simple or held in perpetual easement for street-related purposes, lying between the edge of street paving (or if the affected street is unpaved, from the outer edge of the surface intended for motor-vehicle travel) and the adjoining property boundary with private property. The term shall encompass all areas adjoining the public street or roadway wherein utilities and sidewalks are located and maintained. 
(Ord. No. 06-13, § 1, 11-28-2006)  
Sec. 90-176. - Parking on rights-of-way prohibited; exceptions. 
No motor vehicles, trailers or related equipment (pulled or conveyed by a separate motor vehicle) shall stop, stand or park upon any unimproved right-of-way within the city, except for those areas clearly designated for parking on a paved driveway or parking pad. The public works department shall cause to be prepared an inventory of existing areas, within rights-of-way, designated for parking of motor vehicles, and shall be responsible for permitting, upon application on forms provided by the city, any future areas where parking is sought to be designated. In considering applications for parking permits on the rights-of-way, the public works director shall consider the use of rights-of-way for utilities (existing or future uses) and reasonable utilities protection requirements; landscaping and protection of street trees and vegetation; and the sufficiency and suitability of adjoining private property to meet the applicant's parking needs. Only owners in fee simple of adjoining private property may apply for permits to park on the right-of-way. It is the intent of the board of commissioners that future permits for parking on rights-of-way not be granted unless the applicant demonstrates unreasonable hardship and that no other reasonable alternative exists. Denial of permits may be appealed to the city manager, whose decision shall be final. It shall be the responsibility of the public works department to post signage at reasonable intervals throughout the city warning that parking on rights-of-way is prohibited, except where clearly designated. This section shall not impair any motor-vehicle operator's ability to park on streets, except where parking is posted as prohibited or restricted. Wheel stops, curbs, or other barriers shall be erected, as appropriate, to protect utilities and trees from rights-of-way encroachment. 
(Ord. No. 06-13, § 1, 11-28-2006)  
Sec. 90-177. - Exceptions. 
Other than those areas designated for parking on the rights-of-way, this section shall not be enforced against owners or operators of motor vehicles and trailers standing or parked on the rights-of-way when mechanically disabled, provided prompt notice is given to the police department of the condition and location of such vehicle or equipment. Exception is also made for the standing or parking of motor vehicles and trailers on rights-of-way when necessary to perform work related to construction or maintenance of improvements, either in, under or above the right-of-way or on adjoining private property, provided notice is given the city's public works department prior to commencement of said work. Overnight parking of motor vehicles and equipment while work is in progress and cannot reasonably be completed in one business day shall require a permit from the public works department, which shall be conspicuously affixed to the vehicle or equipment. 
(Ord. No. 06-13, § 1, 11-28-2006)  
Sec. 90-178. - Citation; sanction. 
Any person that operates a motor vehicle, trailer or related equipment, except in an emergency situation or while performing work at a location within the right-of-way, found to be stopped, standing or parked in violation of this article shall be issued a warning for the first offense; all subsequent offenses shall be deemed a violation of the above section and punished in the manner provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. 06-13, § 1, 11-28-2006)  
Secs. 90-179—90-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - BICYCLES 
 
Sec. 90-201. - Downtown Business District, defined. 
For purposes of this article, the terms defined herein shall have the meaning ascribed thereto: 
Downtown Business District shall mean the area within the city bounded on the north by Broad Street, east by Fifth Street, south by Poplar Street, and west by Tenth Street, and the sidewalks adjacent thereto on either side of said streets. 
Sidewalk shall mean a paved or impervious surface within the public right-of-way of a street, road, or highway, adjacent to the roadway, intended primarily for use by pedestrian travel. 
(Ord. No. 11-05, § 1, 6-14-2011)  
Sec. 90-202. - Riding bicycles on public sidewalks in Downtown Business District; riding roller skates, roller blades, or skateboards on public sidewalks or on public streets in Downtown Business District. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person over 12 years of age to ride a bicycle on any public sidewalk in the Downtown Business District. It shall be unlawful for a person of any age to rollerskate, rollerblade, or ride a skateboard, on any public sidewalk located within the area designated as the Downtown Business District. Persons under age 13 riding bicycles on sidewalks in the Downtown Business District shall at all times be accompanied by, and under the supervision of, a parent, guardian, or person of responsible age. It shall not be a violation of this section for a person of any age to "walk" a bicycle on a sidewalk in the Downtown Business District. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 13 years to ride a bicycle on any public street within the area designated as the Downtown Business District, except during sanctioned events involving bicycle rides or competitions. Bicycles may cross public streets in the designated crosswalks. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to rollerskate, rollerblade, ride a skateboard, or ride a bicycle on any portion of a public sidewalk outside the Downtown Business District where the chief of police, in consultation with the city manager, has determined sidewalk conditions are unsafe for intended use by pedestrians. The beginning and end of each such portion of sidewalk shall have a sign stating that riding a bicycle, rollerskating, rollerblading, or skateboarding on the sidewalk is prohibited between the signs. 
(d)  Every person who is riding a bicycle, rollerskating, rollerblading, or skateboarding upon a sidewalk shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian or motorized wheel chair. 
(e)  No person under 13 years of age who violates the provisions of this section shall be fined or imprisoned; provided, however, persons under age 13 may be detained and placed in the custody of a parent or guardian. Persons at least 13 years of age and under 17 years of age may be cited for violating this section, with such citation returnable to the Juvenile Court of Spalding County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 11-05, § 1, 6-14-2011)  
Secs. 90-203—90-209. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - PERSONAL TRANSPORTATION VEHICLES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-15, § 1, adopted Sept. 27, 2016 , repealed the former Art. XI, §§ 90-210—90-222, and enacted a new Art. XI as set out herein. The former Art. XI pertained to motorized carts and derived from Ord. No. 13-09, § 1, adopted July 23, 2013. 
 
Sec. 90-210. - Findings and intent. 
This article is adopted to address the interest of public safety. Personal transportation vehicles ("PTV") and other similar vehicles are not generally designed or manufactured to be used on public highways, streets and roads, (hereafter "public roads") and the City of Griffin in no way advocates their operation on the public roads within its jurisdiction. Adoption of this article is not to be relied upon as a determination by the city that operation of personal transportation vehicles and other similar vehicles on public roads is safe or advisable, even if done in accordance with this article. By regulating such operation the city is merely addressing safety issues. All persons who operate or ride in personal transportation vehicles and other similar vehicles on public roads do so with their own judgment and at their own risk, and must be observant of, and attentive to the safety of themselves and others, including their passengers, other motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians. Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the city accepts no liability in negligence, nuisance or under any other cause of action for losses resulting from the use of personal transportation vehicles and other similar vehicles on roads, sidewalks, recreation paths, rights-of-way or other public property under this article. Any person who operates personal transportation vehicles and other similar vehicles is responsible for procuring appropriate insurance as may be required by state law or this article as a condition of operating personal transportation vehicles and other similar vehicles on the public roads of the city. 
( Ord. No. 16-15, § 1, 9-27-2016 )  
Sec. 90-211. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the definitions respectively ascribed to them in this article. 
All-terrain vehicle (ATV) means any motorized recreational vehicle designed for "off-road" use, which is equipped with three or more non-highway tires, a seat for the operator, and a steering wheel or handlebars for guiding the vehicle. For purposes of this article, the term "All-Terrain Vehicle" shall include a Class I, Class II, and Class III all-terrain vehicle as defined at O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(8.01), (8.1) and (8.2). 
Electric personal assistive mobility device (EPAMD) means a self-balancing, two non-tandem wheeled device designed to transport only one person and having an electric propulsion system with average power of 750 watts (1 horsepower) and a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour on a paved level surface when powered solely by such propulsion system and ridden by an operator who weighs 170 pounds. 
Golf car or golf cart means a motorized vehicle designed or intended for the purpose and exclusive use of conveying one or more persons and equipment to play the game of golf on a land area designated as a golf course, or sport of sporting clays on a land area designated as a sporting clays course, and not designed or intended for use on public roads or recreational paths. For such a vehicle to be considered a golf car or golf cart, its average speed shall be less than 15 miles per hour (24 kilometers per hour) on a level road surface with a 0.5% grade comprising a straight course composed of a concrete or asphalt road surface that is dry and free from loose material or surface contamination with a minimum coefficient of friction of 0.8 between tire and surface. 
Gross weight means the unladen weight of the vehicle plus the weight of any load thereon. 
Low-speed vehicle (LSV) means any four-wheeled electric vehicle whose top speed attainable in one mile is greater than 20 miles per hour but not greater than 25 miles per hour on a paved level surface, displays a current motor vehicle tag, and which is manufactured in compliance with those federal motor vehicle safety standards for low-speed vehicles set forth in 49 C.F.R. Section 571.500 and in effect on January 1, 2001. 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled other than an electric personal assistive mobility device (EPAMD). 
Multipurpose off-highway vehicle means any motorized vehicle having features specifically intended for utility use and having the following characteristics: 
(1)  Has the capability to transport persons, cargo, or both; 
(2)  Operates between 25 miles per hour (40.2 kilometers per hour) and 50 miles per hour (80.4 kilometers per hour); 
(3)  Has an overall width of 80 inches (2,030 millimeters) or less, exclusive of accessories or attachments; 
(4)  Is designed to travel on four or more wheels; 
(5)  Uses a steering wheel for steering control; 
(6)  Contains a nonstraddle seat; 
(7)  Has a gross vehicle weight rating of 4,000 pounds (1,814 kilograms); and 
(8)  Has a minimum cargo capacity of 350 pounds (159 kilograms). 
Pedestrian means any person afoot. 
Personal transportation vehicle (PTV) means: 
(1)  Any motor vehicle having no fewer than three wheels and an unladen weight of 1,300 pounds or less and which cannot operate at more than 20 miles per hour; if such vehicle was authorized to operate on public streets of the city prior to January 1, 2012, it may also be referred to in prior Codes and ordinances as a "motorized cart"; and 
(2)  Any motor vehicle with a minimum of four wheels, capable of a maximum level ground speed of less than 20 miles per hour with a maximum gross vehicle unladen or empty weight of 1,375 pounds and capable of transporting not more than eight persons. 
The term does not include mobility aids, including power wheelchairs and scooters, which can be used indoors and outdoors for the express purpose of enabling mobility for a person with a disability. The term also does not include any all-terrain vehicle or multipurpose off-highway vehicle. 
Public road means the entire width between the boundary lines of every right-of-way or place open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel within the boundaries of the city, including streets and alleys. 
Sidewalk means the improved surface or path within the public right-of-way, outside of the roadway intended primarily for the movement of vehicular traffic, that is intended primarily for the movement of pedestrian traffic and other permitted uses. 
Unladen weight means the weight of a vehicle without load as per the manufacturer's specifications for such vehicle. 
Valid driver's license means any current and valid certificate issued by the state, other state of the United States of America, or international agency which permits persons to operate motor vehicles on the public roads of the state. 
( Ord. No. 16-15, § 1, 9-27-2016 )  
Sec. 90-212. - Nomenclature; exemptions; exceptions. 
(a)  Any "motorized cart", as defined under prior Code provisions or ordinances, shall be subject to the requirements, including minimum equipment, for personal transportation vehicles under general state law and this article in order to operate upon public streets of the city. A "motorized cart", when equipped as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-330.1, shall be considered a "personal transportation vehicle", or "PTV", for purposes of this article. 
(b)  This article shall not apply to any motor vehicle, regardless of how classified, owned or leased by a government entity and used for governmental purposes. 
(c)  This article shall not apply to any golf cars, golf carts, or personal transportation vehicles owned by golf courses, country clubs, shooting clubs, or other such organized entities which own or lease such vehicles and make them available to or for use by members and/or the public on a short-term rental basis, provided the vehicles are used only on the premises of the entity and not operated on public streets except at designated street crossings. 
(d)  This article shall not apply to any PTV's used by a private business or entity only on the premises of the entity to transport officers, employees and business guests about the premises. 
(e)  Any contractor or construction firm, upon a showing of necessity, may seek an exception from the city manager for the limited use of motorized vehicles otherwise subject to this article. 
( Ord. No. 16-15, § 1, 9-27-2016 )  
Sec. 90-213. - Registration of PTV's. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every owner of a PTV that is operated on public roads, recreation paths, rights-of-way, or other public property in the jurisdiction of the city to register the PTV with the city at its police department. There is hereby imposed an annual fee of $15.00 to register a PTV for use on public roads to cover the costs of implementing and maintaining this article. Purchasers of new carts or owners bringing carts into the city for the first time after the effective date of this article shall register within ten business days of the date of purchase and before first use on a public road within the city. If initially registering after July 1 of the year, the fee will be $7.50. 
(b)  Registration with the city shall include a record of the make, model, any vehicle identification number or serial number on such PTV, the name and address of the owner, a contact phone number, driver's license number, and any other such information as the city shall require, all of which shall be maintained by the police department of the city. 
(c)  Upon registration with the city each PTV shall be issued a license decal evidencing such registration. The decal must be affixed to the driver's side of the PTV in such a manner as to be visible at all times. Annual renewal registration shall occur between January 1 and April 1 of each year. 
(d)  The failure to have a current registration decal affixed to a PTV used on public roads, recreation paths, rights-of-way or other public property in the city shall be a violation of this article and subject the owner of such motorized cart to the penalties set forth in section 90-221(b). 
(e)  If the PTV is not registered with the city within ten business days of purchase or first use on a public road within the city, it shall be considered an unregistered PTV and subject the owner of such PTV to penalties set forth in section 90-221(b). Furthermore, any PTV operated on public roads not registered within ten business days of purchase or first use, or whose registration is not timely renewed, shall be assessed a late registration penalty of an additional $15.00. 
(f)  The decal issued by the city shall be non-transferrable from the personal transportation vehicle for which is it was obtained. 
(g)  Personal transportation vehicle dealers and distributors, along with other commercial establishments, may rent PTV's to the public for use on public roads, rights-of-way or other public property. Each such establishment renting PTV's shall be required to register each such PTV in accordance with this section and shall maintain a written record of each person who rents each PTV. Renters shall be required to furnish positive identification, shall be provided a copy of this article to read, must be at least 16 years of age, and possess a valid driver's license. All licensing and operating regulations shall be consistent with the provisions of this article as pertains to PTV's. 
(h)  Only those persons 16 years of age and older, possessing a valid driver's license, may register a PTV. PTV registration shall be in one person's name only, and the registration form must be signed by that person, as witnessed by a notary public. 
(i)  Any owner registering a PTV with the city agrees to abide by all of the requirements of state law and this code. By registering a PTV with the city the owner verifies that the vehicle meets all minimum equipment requirements of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-330.1 and qualifies to be classified as a PTV under state law and this code. 
(j)  The city manager may, at his discretion, waive registration requirements for special events of a limited duration to which out-of-city residents may bring motorized carts as participants. Such special events shall last no longer than seven calendar days. 
( Ord. No. 16-15, § 1, 9-27-2016 )  
Sec. 90-214. - Personal transportation regulations. 
(a)  Only low-speed vehicles, bearing a current state license tag, and registered personal transportation vehicles may be operated on public roads within the jurisdictional limits of the city, subject to the limitations provided in O.C.G.A. Title 40, Part 5. 
(b)  A PTV or LSV may be operated only on public roads within the city having a posted speed limit of 35 mph or less. This does not prohibit crossing a street or highway where the road being crossed has a posted speed limit in excess of 35 mph, provided the crossing has been properly designated as a "cart crossing", proper signage and signalization erected in accordance with the MUTCD, and the road being crossed into has a posted speed limit of 35 mph or less. 
(c)  PTV's and LSV's shall not be operated on sidewalks at any time. 
(d)  Subject to the limitations imposed by subparagraph (b), PTV's may be driven on all public roads within the jurisdiction of the city which have a speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less. No PTV shall be driven on public roads having a posted speed limit in excess of 35 miles per hour or on highways classified on the Federal or State Highway System, regardless of posted speed limit, unless such route is designated for cart use by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(e)  Public roads on which the operation of PTV's is authorized shall be clearly marked by proper signage for PTV use. Rights of way on the State Highway System and public property owned or managed by other government entities are under the control of the state or respective entity, and cannot be designated for authorized use by PTV's, unless written consent has been given to the city by the state or other public entity to designate the property for use by PTV's. 
(f)  The operator of a PTV and LSV shall possess and have on his or her person during all periods of operation a valid driver's license. 
(g)  No PTV may cross any public street, road, or highway on which the use of PTV's is prohibited, except at a crossing or intersection designated by the city and signalized in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as adopted by the State of Georgia. Crossings at intersections on the State Highway System shall be designated for that purpose by the Georgia Department of Transportation. All intersections where PTV's may cross shall be controlled by a signalized traffic control device and posted with signage designating their use by PTV's. 
(h)  PTV's shall have their head lamps and tail lamps on at all times while operating on public roads. Unless equipped with turn signals and brake lights, the operator shall give hand and arm signals, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-125, when turning or braking. 
(i)  PTV owners shall maintain their PTV in a manner which ensures that an unobstructed view from the driver's seat to the rear is maintained at all times the PTV is in operation on public roads. 
(j)  The maximum occupancy of a PTV while traveling on public roads, shall be one person per designated seat. 
(k)  All operators of PTV's shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the public roads of the city. Where dedicated PTV paths exist for PTV usage in lieu of public roads, they shall be used exclusively in preference to public roads, with the exclusion of privately-held paths. 
( Ord. No. 16-15, § 1, 9-27-2016 )  
Sec. 90-215. - All-terrain vehicle operation regulations. 
(a)  No all-terrain vehicle or multipurpose off-highway vehicle shall be authorized for operation on public roads of the city at any time. Further, it shall be a violation of this article to operate an all-terrain vehicle or multipurpose off-highway vehicle on any private property without the express written permission of the owner of the property or his agent. 
(b)  Violators may be prosecuted under O.C.G.A. Title 40, Chapter 7, pertaining to "off-road vehicles". 
( Ord. No. 16-15, § 1, 9-27-2016 )  
Sec. 90-216. - Gasoline-powered personal transportation vehicles. 
(a)  Every gasoline-powered personal transportation vehicle shall at all times be equipped with an exhaust system in good working order and in constant operation, meeting the following specifications: 
(1)  The exhaust system shall include the piping leading from the flange of the exhaust manifold to and including the muffler and tail pipe, and shall include any and all parts or components specified by the manufacturer. 
(2)  The exhaust system shall be securely fastened, including the consideration of missing or broken brackets or hangers. 
(3)  The engine and power mechanism of every gasoline-powered personal transportation vehicle shall be so equipped, adjusted, and tuned, as to prevent the discharge of exhaust emissions in excess of those allowed under the Federal Clean Air Act. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any gasoline-powered personal transportation vehicle to operate or permit the operation of a gasoline-powered personal transportation vehicle on which any device controlling or abating exhaust emissions, which is placed on the gasoline-powered personal transportation vehicle by the manufacturer, to render the device unserviceable by removal, alteration, or other interference with its operation. 
(c)  All gasoline-powered personal transportation vehicles shall be maintained in such condition so that they are incapable of "backfiring", or otherwise operating so as to make loud noises; or create excessive noise as a result of an operators equipping the gasoline-powered personal transportation vehicle with a certain device. 
( Ord. No. 16-15, § 1, 9-27-2016 )  
Sec. 90-217. - Personal transportation vehicles—Minimum equipment required. 
(a)  To be operated on public roads within the city, all personal transportation vehicles shall be equipped with: 
(1)  A braking system sufficient for the weight and passenger capacity of the vehicle, including a parking brake; 
(2)  A reverse warning device functional at all times when the directional control is in the reverse position; 
(3)  A main power switch. When the switch is in the 'off' position, or the key or other device that activates the switch is removed, the motive power circuit shall be inoperative. If the switch uses a key, it shall be removable only in the 'off' position; 
(4)  Head lamps; 
(5)  Reflex reflectors, on front, rear and sides of vehicle; 
(6)  Tail lamps; 
(7)  A horn; 
(8)  A rearview mirror; 
(9)  Safety warning labels, installed by manufacturer or required by law; and 
(10)  Hip restraints and hand holds or a combination thereof. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owner of the PTV to properly maintain all minimum required equipment at all times and to keep the same in proper working condition. 
( Ord. No. 16-15, § 1, 9-27-2016 )  
Sec. 90-218. - Personal transportation vehicle and low-speed vehicle operator licensing regulations. 
Only those persons possessing a valid driver's license issued by the state, other state of the United States of America, or international agency which permits such person to operate a motor vehicle on the public roads of the state may operate a personal transportation vehicle or a low-speed vehicle on the public roads within the city. 
( Ord. No. 16-15, § 1, 9-27-2016 )  
Sec. 90-219. - Insurance. 
(a)  The owner and operator of a PTV can be sued civilly for negligent operation of a PTV on public roads and recreation paths, which could result in a money judgment against the owner and/or operator. For this reason, the city encourages owners of PTV, and their operators, to seek legal advice from an attorney and to procure liability coverage from an insurance company licensed to operate in Georgia. 
(b)  As required by state law, the owner of a low speed vehicle ("LSV") shall procure motor vehicle liability insurance on the vehicle in the minimum coverages required, and shall keep proof or evidence of required minimum insurance coverage in the low speed vehicle at all times during the operation of the vehicle. 
( Ord. No. 16-15, § 1, 9-27-2016 )  
Sec. 90-220. - Hazardous activities and special rules. 
(a)  Blocking of public access to any public roads, sidewalks, recreation paths, rights-of-way or other public property of the city shall be prohibited, except for permitted events. 
(b)  Operators of PTV's using recreation paths should always give due consideration and reasonable right of way to pedestrians, bicyclists, and other authorized users of the recreation path to ensure safe passage for all parties. 
(c)  A warning or announcement shall be given by PTV using recreation paths when approaching slower moving parties from the rear. The warning or announcement may be verbal, but it is recommended that users operating PTV's utilize the horn or an audible warning device. 
(d)  All operators and passengers of personal transportation vehicles and low-speed vehicles shall remain seated at all times during the operation of the vehicle. 
(e)  EPAMD. Persons may operate an EPAMD only on a sidewalk, or path within designated rights-of-way, and are prohibited from operating an EPAMD on a public road. The operator of an EPAMD may cross only within signalized pedestrian crosswalks, when using the "WALK" signal. An EPAMD may not be operated by any person under the age of 14 years of age. An EPAMD shall only be permitted to operate between one-half hour before sunrise and one-half hour after sunset. It shall be the responsibility of the operator of an EPAMD to warn or announce to persons using sidewalks or paths when approaching from the rear. 
( Ord. No. 16-15, § 1, 9-27-2016 )  
Sec. 90-221. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates the terms of this article in the operation of a PTV, LSV, or ATV (as defined herein) on the public roads of the city shall be cited to appear before the municipal court or other court of appropriate jurisdiction and, upon conviction, punished as provided in section 1-12 of the Code of Griffin, Georgia. 
(b)  In addition to enforcing sanctions against the operator, any violation of this article may also be charged against the owner of the vehicle, and fines and penalties levied against the owner of the vehicle as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense, a fine of not to exceed $250.00; 
(2)  For the second offense committed within one year of conviction for a first offense, a fine of not to exceed $500.00; and 
(3)  For a third offense committed within one year of conviction for a second offense for a vehicle, a fine of not to exceed $1,000.00, and if a personal transportation vehicle, the city registration shall be revoked. The registered owner cannot thereafter register a PTV for use in the city for a period of two years following the third conviction. Additionally, such person shall be prohibited from operating a personal transportation vehicle on the public roads, recreation paths, rights-of-way, or other public property within the city for a period of two years. 
( Ord. No. 16-15, § 1, 9-27-2016 )  
Chapter 94 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; businesses, ch. 26; environment, ch. 42; floods, ch. 50; health and sanitation, ch. 54; damaging, tampering with utility poles, § 58-2; planning, ch. 66; solid waste, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; gross receipts tax on secondary electric suppliers, § 82-121 et seq.; telecommunications, ch. 86; permits for cutting trees in city or around public utilities, § 98-41. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide stormwater, sewerage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6); authority to provide sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6); authority to provide for the development, storage, treatment, purification and distribution of water, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(7); grants of state funds to municipal corporations for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 94-1. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
Sections 22-1 through 22-34 of the 1968 Code relating to utilities are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city.  
Secs. 94-2—94-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SEWER USE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-02, § 1(Att.), adopted Jan. 26, 2016 , repealed the former Art. II, §§ 94-31—94-40, 94-56—94-74, 94-91—94-101, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 00-26, § 1, adopted Nov. 28, 2000; Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, adopted March 11, 2003; Ord. No. 03-13, § 1, adopted May 13, 2003; Ord. No. 04-18, § 1, adopted July 27, 2004. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, adopted May 28, 2019 , amended Div. 1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 1, §§ 94-31—94-40, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 16-02, § 1(Att.), adopted Jan. 26, 2016 . 
 
Sec. 94-31. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  Compliance with state and federal water pollution control laws. This article sets forth uniform requirements for persons who cause wastewater to be discharged into the wastewater collection and treatment system of the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act, as amended, and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403). The federally mandated objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system; and 
(4)  To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the city wastewater system. 
This article provides for the regulation of persons who cause wastewater to be discharged into the city wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain non-domestic users and through enforcement activities, requires user reporting, assumes that existing customers' capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the operation and maintenance of the water and wastewater systems. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall apply to the residents of the city and to all users of the city water and wastewater systems including persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city water and wastewater systems. Except as otherwise provided herein, the director of water and wastewater or his/her designee shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of the article. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-32. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
Approval authority means the director of the state environmental protection division. 
Authorized representative of the user means: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities, if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3), above, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the piping of a building which collects wastewater inside the walls of the building and conveys it to outside the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other point of acceptance, also called "house connection." Proper maintenance of this service line is the owner's responsibility from the building drain to the point of acceptance. At this point, the service line or "lateral" becomes the city's responsibility as it continues from this point to the sanitary sewer trunk line. 
Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
City manager means individual designated by the board of commissioners; city manager is responsible for general supervision of all city departments, including the city water and wastewater departments. 
Customer means every person, firm, association, corporation, government agency, or similar organization who is responsible for contracting (expressly or implicitly) with the city in obtaining, having or using water or wastewater connections with, or sewer taps to the city wastewater system and in obtaining, having or using water or other related services furnished by the city for the purpose of disposing of wastewater through said system. The term customer shall also include illicit users of the water or wastewater systems. 
Composite means the make-up of a number of individual samples, so taken as to represent the nature of sewage or industrial wastes. 
Director means the person designated by the city manager as manager of the city water and wastewater departments. Whenever director is referred to in this article, it shall mean the director or his/her designee. 
Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
Domestic wastewater means that wastewater discharged into the wastewater system from domestic sources such as toilets, washing machines, dishwashers, sinks, showers and bathtubs from normal household usage including public access swimming pools. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Effluent means the discharge flow of a treatment facility. 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Existing source means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act. 
Federal categorical pretreatment standard or federal pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. Categorical standards appear in 40 CFR, Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
Floatable oil and grease means oil, fat or grease (F.O.G) in a physical state such that it will separate by flotation from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility or sand and oil/grease interceptor .Additional information is found in the City of Griffin's published Grease Management Program and section 94-56. 
Flush toilet means the common sanitary flush commode in general use for the disposal of human excrement. 
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. 
Governing body means the board of commissioners of the city. 
Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
Grease trap (under-sink or inline) means a device placed under or in close proximity to sinks or other facilities likely to discharge grease in an attempt to separate, trap or hold oil and grease substances to prevent their entry into the sanitary sewer. 
Grit means matter consisting of sand, gravel, cinders, or other heavy solid materials that has settling velocities or specific gravities greater than those of organic putrescible solids normally encountered in domestic wastewater. 
Health department means the county board of health. 
High strength wastewater means wastewater which contains quantities of specified constituents which exceed the quantities normally encountered in domestic wastewater. 
Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
House connection means same as the "building sewer". 
Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
Industrial customers mean persons who, on account of their particular type of business activity, discharge into the city sanitary sewerage system an unusual amount or unusual type of sewage which present special problems in sewage disposal and sewage treatment. 
Industrial user or contributor means an industry which discharges waste waters having the characteristics of industrial wastes, as distinct from commercial wastes or domestic wastes. 
Infiltration/inflow means groundwater and surface water which leaks into the wastewater system through cracked pipes, joints, manholes or other openings. 
Inflow means water that flows into the wastewater system from the surface, streams, roof drains, down spouts or other such source. 
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interceptor (or separator or trap) means a device so constructed as to separate, trap, and hold fats, oils, greases, sand, and grit substances from the wastewater discharged by a facility to prevent these substances from entering the sanitary sewer. 
Interference means a discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
Main means the pipe, conduit or facility which conveys utility service to individual services or to other mains. 
Medical waste means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
Meter means any device used to measure service rendered to a customer by the city. 
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System or NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342). 
Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers, watercourses, ponds, ditches, lakes or other bodies of surface water or groundwater. 
New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b. or c. above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
Nondomestic user means any user of the city wastewater system who discharges wastewater into the wastewater system from a structure other than a residential user. 
Nondomestic wastewater means the wastewater generated from nondomestic users as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the molar concentration of hydrogen ions in solution. 
Pit privy means shored, vertical pit in the earth used for the disposal of human or animal wastes. 
Point of acceptance means for sewer systems, the point of acceptance is the point at which the city's piping connects with the customer's piping. Commonly called the "tap". 
Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
Pollution means the man-made or man-induced detrimental alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water or soil, or the products which create or cause such alteration. 
POTW treatment plant means that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
Pretreatment coordinator means the person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the industrial pretreatment program. 
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on a nondomestic user. 
Pretreatment standards or standards. Pretreatment standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the wastewater treatment system. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or by process changes or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR section 403.6(d). 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges means Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 94-56. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public access swimming pool means any pool which is owners by a non-private entity and could be accessed by the public. Examples include public municipal or county swimming pool, homeowner associations, golf and swim clubs, and any for profit entity which has a pool available for use for public use. 
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292) which is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any sewers, lift stations and all related appurtenances that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this article, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW. 
Public sewer means a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility, in this case, the city. 
Recycle grease bin means a separate container from a grease interceptor or trap, placed either inside or outside of a food service establishment, to recycle fat, oil, and/or grease. 
Sanitary sewer or sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions. 
Septic tank means a subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with: 
(1)  A sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with the joints sealed, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub out; and 
(2)  A subsurface system of trenches, piping and other materials constructed to drain the clarified discharge from the tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered. 
Service connection means the point of connection of the customer's piping with the meter or service pipe owned by the city. 
Service lateral means the pipe between the utility's mains and the point of delivery and shall include all of the pipe, fittings and valves necessary to make the connection excluding the meter. 
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, businesses, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater. 
Significant industrial user means: 
(1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Slug load or slug means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in this article. 
Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended. 
Standard methods means those procedures or methods established by the latest edition of the "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation, a copy of which is on file in the office of the superintendent. 
Storm drain or storm sewer means a drain or sewer for conveying surface water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source. 
Storm water means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
Suspended solids or total suspended solids (TSS) means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" and referred to as non-filterable residue elsewhere. 
Toxic means constituents of wastes which adversely affect the organisms involved in wastewater treatment. 
Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities. 
User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the city wastewater system. 
Wastewater means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
Wastewater system or city wastewater system means the total wastewater collection and disposal facilities owned and operated by the city. Also the administrative framework which operates the facilities. 
Water meter means those devices, approved by the city for the purpose of establishing the quantity of water consumed by a premise or person. 
Water system or city water system means the total water distribution facilities owned and operated by the city. Also the administrative framework which operates the facilities. 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
Waters of the state means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-33. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD 5 	— 	Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
CFR 	— 	Code of Federal Regulations 
COD 	— 	Chemical Oxygen Demand 
CWA 	— 	Clean Water Act 
EPA 	— 	Environmental Protection Agency 
F.O.G. 	— 	Fats, Oils and Grease (also referred to as Grease Management Program) 
L 	— 	Liter 
mg 	— 	Milligrams 
mg/L 	— 	Milligrams per liter 
NPDES 	— 	National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
O & M 	— 	Operation and maintenance 
POTW 	— 	Publicly Owned Treatment Works 
psi 	— 	Pounds per square inch 
SIC 	— 	Standard Industrial Classification 
TSS 	— 	Total Suspended Solids 
USC 	— 	United States Code 
 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-34. - Sewage and waste disposal; impoundment of surface waters. 
It shall be unlawful to use any waters of the state for the disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes, or to withdraw, divert, or impound any surface waters of the state, except in such a manner as to conform to and comply with Article 2 of O.C.G.A. Title 12, Chapter 5. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-35. - Connection to public water and wastewater systems required; septic tanks and individual sewage management systems; certificate of occupancy. 
In the interest of the public health, sanitation and general welfare, all buildings and structures located within the city sewer service area, of every nature, use and design, intended for human occupancy, shall have a proper source of potable drinking water and sewage disposal. Buildings and structures accessible to a public water system and/or a public sanitary sewer system shall be properly connected on or into such system(s) prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. No permit for the construction of any residence, building or other facility which cannot be served by public sanitary sewer shall be issued, and no certificate for the use and occupancy for any existing residence, building or other facility which cannot be served by public sanitary sewer shall be issued, unless a septic tank or individual sewage management system permit has been issued by the county board of health in conformity with any state-wide minimum standards for sewage management systems and the regulations of the county board of health then in force and effect. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain, or permit to exist upon their property any privy, privy vault, cesspool, or other facility intended for use or disposal of human excrement, and the existence thereof is hereby declared a public nuisance, abatable in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 42, Article II of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-36. - Duty of owner and occupant to properly operate and maintain septic tanks and other permitted individual sewage management systems. 
It shall be the duty of the property owner, and any person occupying private property under lease or by permission of the owner, on which is located a building or structure intended for human occupancy whose sole means of sewage disposal is a septic tank or individual sewage management system, to properly operate and maintain such system in good working condition, free of odor, at all times. In addition to the enforcement provisions of this article, continued violation of this section shall constitute grounds for discontinuance or revocation of any permit issued for such system and for revocation or suspension of any certificate of occupancy for the building or structure served. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-37. - Connection to public sewer required upon failure of septic tank or individual sewage management system. 
At such time as public sanitary sewer becomes accessible in those areas where existing buildings or structures intended for human occupancy are currently served by septic tanks or individual sewage management systems, upon the failure of such septic tank or individual sewage management system, use of such system shall be discontinued and no permit shall be issued for maintenance or bringing the system into compliance, and the property owner shall cause the building or structure to be connected to the public sanitary sewer system. Abandoned septic tanks and individual systems shall either be removed by the owner or filled with suitable material so as not to constitute a hazard or nuisance. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-38. - Separate building sewers required. 
A separate building sewer shall be provided for every building and structure intended for human occupancy and accessible to the public sanitary sewer system. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-39. - Technical specifications for sewer connections. 
(a)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and service lateral, and the methods to be used in construction shall conform to the requirements of the statewide minimum construction codes, applicable regulations of the city sewer department, and American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and the Water Pollution Control Federation (WPCF) Manual of Practice No. 9. All connections to the public sewer system shall be approved in writing by the director, based upon permit application and payment of permit and inspection fees as specified, from time to time, by resolution of the board of commissioners. No work shall be covered until inspected by the director and the connection approved. 
(b)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be at an elevation below the lowest floor of the building or structure and at least three feet above the point of sewer connection. In all buildings in which the building sewer it too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sewage shall be lifted by a means approved, in writing, by the director. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain in proper working condition any lift pumps and/or tanks for such connection. 
(c)  The service lateral and all connections between the building sewer and the public sewer shall be gastight and watertight, as verified by proper testing and inspection. It shall be the duty of the property owner to maintain the service lateral in proper working condition. If any service lateral permits the entrance of infiltration or inflow, the director may require the owner to repair or replace the service lateral; charge the owner a sewer use rate surcharge that reflects the additional cost of treating infiltration and inflow; or require the owner to disconnect the building from the public sewer system. 
(d)  Roof downspouts, foundation drains, yard drains or other sources of surface runoff shall not be connected to the building sewer or service lateral for entry into the public sewer. 
(e)  In all new construction, a backwater valve shall be installed to prevent sewage from backing into the building or structure. In all other existing structures, the director may, in his sole discretion, require installation of a backwater valve by written directive to the property owner to prevent reoccurrence of a sewer backup. The city does not accept legal responsibility for damages to real or personal property caused by sewer backups where backwater valves are required or have been directed to be installed. It shall be the duty of the property owner to maintain backwater valves in proper working condition. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-40. - Tampering with public sewer. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the director. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Secs. 94-41—94-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - NONDOMESTIC (INDUSTRIAL, COMMERCIAL, INSTITUTIONAL) USE OF PUBLIC WASTEWATER FACILITIES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, adopted May 28, 2019 , amended Div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2, §§ 94-56—94-73, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 16-02, § 1(Att.), adopted Jan. 26, 2016 . 
 
Sec. 94-56. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)  Wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 11.0, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment; 
(3)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the sewer system or POTW resulting in interference; 
(4)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
(5)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 104°F (40°C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, 
(6)  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
(8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the director in accordance with section 94-68 of this article; 
(9)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
(10)  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the city's NPDES permit; 
(11)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(12)  Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the director; 
(13)  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
(14)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the director in a wastewater discharge permit; 
(15)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test; 
(16)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
(17)  Wastewater containing more than 100 mg/L of oil and grease consisting of any of the following; fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin, and/or wax, whether emulsified or not; petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, and/or products of mineral oil origin, and/or containing any substance(s) which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 0°C (32°F) and 65°C (150°F). 
(18)  Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more than five percent or any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit of the meter. 
(19)  The following pollutant limits are established to protect against process interference, stream standards violation, or sludge contamination. Discharges by users of the collection and treatment system are limited such that the concentrations of specific pollutants measured at the point of discharge into the collection system do not exceed concentrations specified below: 
LOCAL LIMITS 
No user shall discharge wastewater which exceeds the following daily maximum shown limits (all numbers shown in mg/L). User may also be required to provide a mass loading rate to define each pollutant in pounds/day. Permit may be written to limit pollutant in pounds/day as well as maximum concentration limits: 
Pollutant 	Cabin Creek WPCP 	Potato Creek WPCP 	Shoal Creek WPCP 
Arsenic 	0.44 	0.015 	0.02 
Cadmium 	0.005 	0.011 	0.11 
Total Chromium 	12.3 	3.7 	44.1 
Copper 	0.129 	0.10 	12.3 
Cyanide 	0.12 	0.05 	3.86 
Lead 	0.01 	0.01 	1.44 
Mercury 	0.00025 	0.00017 	0.246 
Molybdenum 	0.22 	0.028 	0.04 
Nickel 	5.06 	0.34 	2.57 
Selenium 	0.02 	0.01 	0.02 
Silver 	11.5 	1.56 	10.8 
Zinc 	1.12 	0.35 	9.66 
Bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate 	— 	0.55 	— 
5-day Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD 5 ) 	500 	500 (750) 	500 
Total Suspended Solids (TSS) 	500 	500 	500 
Ammonia (as N) 	30 	30 	45 
Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) 	1,000 	1,000 (2,000) 	1,000 
Total Phosphorus 	25 	25 	— 
Oil & Grease 	100 	100 	100 
True Color (ADMI) Pt-Co units 	300 	300 	300 
Applies to any of the above: 
*Equivalent mass-based limits pounds/day may be imposed. 
**Specific limits (more or less stringent) may be established through permitting on a case-by-case basis. 
 
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
The city reserves the right to enter into special agreements with industrial users setting out special terms under which they may discharge to the POTW. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. The industrial user may, however, request a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. The industrial user may also request a variance from the categorical pretreatment standard from EPA. Such a request will be approved only if the industrial user can prove that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when establishing that pretreatment standard. An industrial user requesting a fundamentally different factor variance must comply with the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-57. - Federal and state requirements; preemption. 
(a)  Federal pretreatment standards. 
(1)  The federal government has adopted regulations governing wastewater discharges from industries into POTWs. These federal regulations are generally referred to as the federal pretreatment standards, as set forth in 40 CFR Part 403, or the federal categorical pretreatment standards, as set forth in 40 CFR Parts 405—471. Any portion of these federal standards which are more strict than the regulations provided in this Code shall control over the provisions herein, and such regulations will be enforced by the city. 
(2)  It is the affirmative obligation of all industrial users regulated by the federal pretreatment standards, inclusive of the federal categorical pretreatment standards, to comply with the federal standards whether or not the industry has received notification from the city or any other jurisdiction of the existence and nature of the federal standards. 
(3)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(4)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(6)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(b)  State regulations. Any regulations promulgated by the State of Georgia relative to the construction or use of wastewater facilities which are more strict than the regulations provided in this Code shall control over the provisions herein, and such regulations shall be enforced by the city. 
(c)  Modifications to federal and state pretreatment standards. 
(1)  From time to time the federal and state environmental regulatory agencies may alter existing pretreatment standards or promulgate new standards. None of the provisions contained in this Code shall prevent the timely implementation of new or altered pretreatment standards by the industries to whom the new or altered standards apply. Where new or altered standards are more strict than the standards presently being imposed by the city, the city may, without prejudice, immediately revise any industrial wastewater discharge permits to reflect the new or altered standards. If the industrial user is unable to immediately conform to the new or altered standards, a reasonable schedule for compliance shall be provided by the director. 
(2)  Where the city's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the city may apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the federal pretreatment standards. "Consistent removal" shall mean reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the system in 95 percent of the samples taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in section 403.7(c)(2) of 40 CFR Part 403 promulgated pursuant to the Clean Water Act, as amended. The city may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the Federal Pretreatment Standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR Part 403, Section 403.7 are fulfilled and prior approval from the Georgia Environmental Protection Division is obtained. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-58. - Wastewater pretreatment permit application. 
All nondomestic users shall, upon the request of the director, complete and submit to the director a wastewater pretreatment permit application. The wastewater pretreatment permit application shall be on a form provided by the director and shall be used for the purpose of determining whether the industry is a "significant industrial user," issuing a permit, and for other purposes. See sections 94-62(a)(1) and 94-65(a) for additional requirements related to the application submittal. 
The wastewater pretreatment permit application shall include the following information, at a minimum: 
(1)  Name, address and location, if different from the address. 
(2)  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, U.S. Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended. 
(3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not limited to those shown in section 94-56 of this chapter. 
(4)  Time and duration of contribution. 
(5)  Average daily and peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any. 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by size, location and elevation. 
(7)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged. 
(8)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production. 
(9)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day). 
(10)  Number and type of employees and hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system. 
(11)  Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
(12)  All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by the user or an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
The director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-59. - Sampling and testing procedures. 
(a)  Sampling procedures. 
(1)  Except as indicated in subsection (a)(2), below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(2)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, hexavalent chromium, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(b)  Testing procedures. 
(1)  All wastewater monitoring samples required by the city shall be tested by an independent laboratory for the parameters required, with the results submitted to the city on the original laboratory report sheets. The requirement for utilization of an independent laboratory may be waived by the city when the required tests are performed by the city or other approved agency or when duplicate ("split") samples are provided to the city and the city's testing results of such duplicate samples show a reasonably good correlation with the user's in-house testing results. 
(2)  All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, or in accordance with any applicable EPA testing procedure of general acceptance in the chemical testing industry, provided, however, that all such analyses shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of 40 CFR 136, which requirements shall prevail in the event of conflict. 
(3)  The cost(s) incurred for testing shall be the responsibility of the customer. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-60. - Significant industrial users. 
General. All significant industrial users (see definition of significant industrial user in section 94-32) that discharge wastewater effluent into the city wastewater system shall comply with the following: 
(a)  Sampling manhole. In order to provide for accurate sampling and measurement of industrial wastes, each significant industrial user shall provide and maintain, on each of its industrial waste outlet sewers, a large manhole or sampling chamber to be located outside the plant. If inside the plant fence, there shall be a gate near the sampling manhole with a key furnished to the city. There shall be ample room provided in each sampling manhole to enable convenient inspection and sampling by the city, or its agent. In certain sampling manholes where noxious fumes may accumulate, the city may require a fume exhaust system to protect the life and health of the city employees who are required to enter the sampling manhole. The fume exhaust system should extract the fumes from the bottom of the manhole and provide not less than one air change per minute. 
(b)  Discharge permit required. It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial user, as determined under this article, to discharge wastewater into the city wastewater system without a city issued discharge permit. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-61. - Discharge permits. 
(a)  General. All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the city wastewater system shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or contributing to the city system. 
(b)  Application. 
(1)  When requested to do so by the director, all significant industrial users shall complete and file with the director an application for a permit accompanied by a non-refundable fee as set by resolution of the board of commissioners, from time to time. Existing users shall apply for a discharge permit within 60 days of notification by the director that a discharge permit is required. Proposed new users shall make application not less than 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the city wastewater system. The completed wastewater pretreatment permit application described in section 94-58 will serve as application for a discharge permit. 
(2)  The director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 60 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the director will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The director may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit, in writing, stating the reasons for denial. 
(3)  Any aggrieved user, whose permit application has been denied, may petition the director to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of notice of its denial. 
a.  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of any administrative appeal. The petition shall set forth all grounds of alleged error upon which the permit denial was based. 
b.  If the director fails to act within 30 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit denial shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
c.  Aggrieved users seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a petition for writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Spalding County, Georgia. 
(c)  Modifying permit. The director may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
(d)  Conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Permits must contain, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years; 
(2)  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with subsection (e) of this section, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
(3)  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
(4)  Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and 
(5)  A statement of applicable sanctions for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. 
(6)  Wastewater discharge permits may also contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges; 
d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
e.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
g.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
h.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this ordinance, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(e)  Duration. Permits shall be issued for a period as determined by the city, not to exceed five years, and shall bear a stated expiration date. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to apply for permit renewal a minimum of 60 days prior to the expiration of the existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in subsection (c), above, are modified, conditions change, or other just cause exists. The permittee shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(f)  Transfer. Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 60 days advance notice to the director and the director approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the director must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(g)  Suspension, revocation or denial. 
(1)  Procedure. When director has reason to believe that any one of the conditions enumerated in subsection (2) below exists, he shall give written notice thereof to the permittee. Said notice shall set forth the time and place where the charges shall be heard by the director. The hearing date shall not be less than 15 days from the mailing of such notice by certified mail to the permittee at the address shown on the permit or at permittee's last known address. At the hearing, the permittee shall have an opportunity to refute the allegations set forth in the proposed permit revocation notice. If after the hearing the director finds that any one of the conditions hereinafter enumerated in subsection (2), below, exists, he shall have the right to suspend, revoke or deny the permit. 
(2)  Any of the following is reason for permit suspension, revocation or denial. 
a.  Failure to notify the superintendent of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
b.  Failure to provide prior notification to the superintendent of changed conditions pursuant to section 94-62 of this article; 
c.  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
d.  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
e.  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
f.  Refusing to allow the superintendent timely access to the facility premises and records; 
g.  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
h.  Failure to pay fines; 
i.  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
j.  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
k.  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
l.  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
m.  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-62. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Baseline monitoring reports. 
(1)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (a)(2), below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (a)(2), below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(2)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
a.  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
b.  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
c.  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
d.  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
e.  Measurement of pollutants. 
1.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
2.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 94-59 of this article. 
3.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 94-59 of this article. 
f.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
g.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 94-62(b) of this article. 
h.  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 94-58 of this article. 
(b)  Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection (a)(2)g of this section: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the director no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the director. 
(c)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the director but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 94-58 of this article. 
(2)  All other users who have been issued discharge permits are required to submit compliance reports at the intervals set forth in each user's individual permit. The compliance reports shall address the discharge parameters and all other information indicated as being necessary to report as shown in the user's permit. 
(3)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(4)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the director, using the procedures prescribed in section 94-59 of this article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(d)  Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director a report containing the information described in subsections 94-62(a)(2)d—f of this section. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 94-58 of this article. 
(e)  Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 60 days before the change. 
(1)  The director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 94-61 of this article. 
(2)  The director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 94-61 of this article or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 94-61 of this article in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(f)  Reports of potential problem, including slug loading. 
(1)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the industrial pretreatment coordinator of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(2)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this ordinance. 
(3)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (f)(1), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(g)  Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the director as the director may require, in writing. 
(h)  Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the director within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the city monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the city samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(i)  Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(1)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under section 94-62(e) of this article. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of subsections (a), (c) and (d) of this section. 
(2)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (f)(1), above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(3)  In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the director, the EPA regional waste management waste division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(4)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(5)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(j)  Sampling and testing. All sampling and testing performed under this subsection for reporting requirements shall be conducted in accordance with section 94-59. 
(k)  Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-63. - Maintenance of records. 
(a)  Sampling and testing records. Any permitted user subject to the reporting requirements established in section 94-62 shall maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring activities required by section 94-61. Such records shall include for all samples: 
(1)  The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and names of the person or persons taking the samples; 
(2)  The dates analyses were performed; 
(3)  The name of the person(s) who performed the analysis; 
(4)  The analytical techniques/methods used; and 
(5)  The results of such analyses. 
(b)  Monitoring activities and records of results. Any permitted user subject to the reporting requirements established in section 94-62 shall be required to retain for a minimum of three years any records of monitoring activities and results (whether or not such monitoring activities are required by this article) and shall make such records available for inspection and copying by the city, state, or EPA. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the permitted user, or when requested by the city, state, or EPA. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-64. - Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions. 
(a)  If another municipality, or user located within another municipality, desires to contribute wastewater to the POTW, the city may enter into an intergovernmental contract with the contributing municipality. 
(b)  Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection (a), above, the director shall request the following information from the contributing municipality: 
(1)  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality; 
(2)  An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and 
(3)  Such other information as the director may deem necessary. 
(c)  An intergovernmental contract, as required by subsection (a), above, shall contain the following conditions: 
(1)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this article and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in section 94-56 of this article. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the city's ordinance or local limits; 
(2)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis; 
(3)  A requirement for new significant industrial users discharging into sewers of a contributing municipality to obtain a wastewater discharge permit from the director; 
(4)  In the event the contributing municipality has in place an industrial pretreatment program approved by EPD, a provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the director; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the director; 
(5)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the director with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
(6)  Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW; 
(7)  Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's discharge; 
(8)  A provision ensuring the director access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the director; and 
(9)  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the intergovernmental contract. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-65. - Industrial pretreatment facilities. 
(a)  Requirement for. All users shall provide necessary wastewater pretreatment as required to comply with the limitations and provisions contained in this article and to achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be acceptable to the city prior to commencement of construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user of the responsibility for modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
(b)  Compliance schedules. The timing of construction and operation of pretreatment facilities as required hereby shall be in accordance with the compliance schedules provided by the city as described in section 94-62(b); however, the city shall also have the authority to issue compliance schedules independent of the permitting process and such compliance schedules may be enforced by the city as provided in the enforcement and penalties section of this chapter. 
(c)  Maintenance of pretreatment facilities. All wastewater pretreatment facilities shall be properly and adequately maintained by the user so as to achieve the intended purpose of the facilities. 
(d)  Restriction of discharges. Whenever deemed necessary, the director may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
(e)  Storage and flow-control facilities. The director may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(f)  Combustible gas detection meters. Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-66. - Sand and oil/grease interceptors. 
(a)  Requirement for. 
(1)  Installation requirements for new food service facilities. All proposed or newly remodeled food service facilities inside the city's wastewater service area shall be required to install an approved, properly operated and maintained grease interceptor. All interceptor units shall be installed outdoors of the food service facility building unless the user can demonstrate to the director that an outdoor interceptor would not be feasible. All interceptor units shall be of the type and capacity approved by the director. 
(2)  Requirements for existing food service facilities. All existing food service facilities inside the city's wastewater service area are expected to conduct their operations in such a manner that grease is captured on the user's premises and then properly disposed. Existing food service facilities will be handled according to conditions described in the city's grease management program. 
(3)  All users whose wastewater stream consists of grit, sand or gravel shall be required to install a sand trap. All car/truck wash systems shall be required to install a grit trap. Design and installation shall be approved by the director. 
(4)  The requirements of this article section shall not apply to private living quarters or dwelling units. 
(b)  Design criteria. 
(1)  Interceptor sizing. Outdoor grease interceptors shall not have a capacity of less than 1,500 gallons nor exceed a capacity of 3,000 gallons. No matter what the calculated capacity using the following formulas, the minimum interceptor size shall be 1,500 gallons. If the calculated capacity using one of the following formulas exceeds 3,000 gallons, then multiple units in series shall be installed. The size of a grease interceptor shall be approximated by the following methods and grease interceptor size shall be the larger of the two results. 
a.  Interceptor Capacity (gallons) = (S) × (25) × (Hr/12) 
S = Number of Seats 
Hr = Maximum hours of daily operation (include preparation & clean up) 
b.  Interceptor Capacity (gallons) = (Sum of fixture flows) × (20) 
Type of Fixture 	Flow Rate (gpm) 
Restaurant hand sink 	15 
Pre-rinse sink 	15 
Single-compartment sink 	20 
Double-compartment sink 	25 
Two double-compartment sinks 	35 
Dishwasher up to 30 gallons 	15 
Dishwasher up to 50 gallons 	25 
Dishwasher up to 100 gallons 	40 
Other fixture 	Manufacturer peak 
 
(2)  Under-sink or in-line grease interceptor requirements shall meet Plumbing and Drainage Institute Standard PDI-G101: 
Type of Fixture 	Flow Rate (gpm) 	Grease Retention 
Capacity (lbs.) 
Restaurant hand sink 	15 	30 
Pre-rinse sink 	15 	30 
Single-compartment sink 	20 	40 
Double-compartment sink 	25 	50 
Two double-compartment sinks 	35 	70 
Dishwasher up to 30 gallons 	15 	30 
Dishwasher up to 50 gallons 	25 	50 
Dishwasher up to 100 gallons 	40 	80 
Other fixture 	Manufacturer peak 	gpm × 2 
 
Grease interceptor designs represent minimum standards for normal usage. Installations with heavier usage require more stringent measures for which the user is responsible and shall pay the costs to provide additional measures if required by the director. City reserves the right to evaluate interceptor sizing on an individual basis for facilities with special conditions, such as highly variable flows, high levels of grease discharge, or other unusual situations that are not adequately addressed by the formula. 
(c)  Maintenance. 
(1)  All grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall be maintained by the user at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times and as according to the city's grease management program. 
(2)  In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material, and shall maintain records of the dates, and means of disposal, which are subject to review by the director. The frequency of removal shall be in accordance with the city's grease management program. 
(d)  Proper disposal of collected materials. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the owner's employees must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. Upon delivery of collected materials, owner shall provide city with a manifest from an approved disposal facility. Under no circumstances shall the collected materials ever be returned to the wastewater system. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-67. - Accidental discharges. 
(a)  Protection against. Each significant industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. Additionally, any person or industry which handles hazardous wastes, any priority pollutant as shown on the EPA list, or any prohibited materials shall, upon the request of the city, provide proof of protection from accidental discharge of hazardous wastes, priority pollutants, or prohibited materials. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facilities. All existing users shall complete such a plan within 90 days after the effective date of this article. Construction shall be completed within 180 days of approval of plans by the city. No significant industrial user who commences contribution to the city wastewater system after the effective date of this article shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures and facilities (if required) have been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Notification required. Notification of accidental discharge shall be in accordance with section 94-62(f) of this article. 
(c)  Accidental discharge/slug control plans. At least once every two years, the director shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The director may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the director may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the director of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 94-62 of this article; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-68. - Hauled wastewater. 
(a)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the director, and at such times as are established by the director. Such waste shall not violate any section of this article or any other requirements established by the city. The director may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. A fee for disposal of septic tank waste shall be charged according to a schedule recommended by the director and adopted by resolution of the board of commissioners, as from time to time revised. 
(b)  The director shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The director may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The director also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this article. 
(c)  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the director. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the director. The director may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The director may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(d)  Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-69. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(2)  Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(b)  Allowable bypass. A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  Notices. 
(1)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the director, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the pretreatment coordinator of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(d)  Bypass is prohibited; enforcement; exception. Bypass is prohibited, and the director may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
(1)  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
(2)  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
(3)  The user submitted notices as required under subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  Approval. The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the director determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (d) of this section. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-70. - City's right of revision. 
The city reserves the right to establish, by future amendment to this article or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-71. - Dilution. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The director may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-72. - Confidential information. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the city's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as "trade secrets" under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. To the extent allowed by law, when requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-73. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
Industrial wastewater pretreatment system operators. Operators of industrial wastewater pretreatment systems must comply with State of Georgia licensing requirements. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Sec. 94-74. - Recycle grease bins. 
The purpose of this section is to regulate the placement of recycle grease bins within the city. The procedures and requirements of this chapter are intended to promote the public health, safety, and welfare by regulating recycle grease bins, ensure that recycle grease bins do not pose a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, ensure that material does not accumulate outside of the recycle grease bins, and establish criteria that avoid attracting vermin, unsightliness, and public health hazards. 
(a)  Registration of recycle grease bins. In order to maintain recycle grease bins, all currently operational food service establishments owning and/or using a recycle grease bin shall be required to register the recycle grease bin with the planning and development services department within 90 days of the effective date of this division. Any food service establishment coming into existence after the effective date of this division or obtaining a recycle grease bin after the effective date of this division shall be required to register the recycle grease bin within 30 days of delivery of the recycle grease bin or at the time of application for a certificate of occupancy, whichever is sooner. The registration shall include the size, color, and location of the recycle grease bin, as well as any identifying marks contained on the exterior of the recycle grease bin. 
(b)  Existing recycle grease bins. Existing recycle grease bins shall be limited to one user per recycle grease bin, whose establishment name shall be delineated on the registration. The recycle grease bin shall not be located in the right-of-way, with the exception of food service establishments located in the historic downtown district. Recycle grease bins shall be locked at all times, except when the user is actively dumping grease into the recycle grease bin. 
(c)  New recycle grease bins. Any recycle grease bin first used by a food service establishment after the effective date of this division shall be located within the structure of the food service establishment and shall be limited to one user. New recycle grease bins shall be registered in accordance with subsection (a) above. 
(d)  Cleanliness of premises. Recycle grease bins shall be maintained in good condition and appearance with no structural damage, holes, or visible rust, and shall be free of graffiti. All recycle grease bin shall be free of debris, other containers or buckets used to transport recycled grease, and any other items. Recycle grease bins shall be serviced regularly so as to prevent overflow of grease. The owner of the food service establishment using the recycle grease bin shall be responsible for maintaining the area around each recycle grease bin so that it is free of litter, garbage, and any other undesirable material. 
(e)  Accidental discharge. Notification of accidental discharge shall be made to the director of planning and development services at the time of the discharge, or if the office of the director is closed, as soon thereafter as possible. 
(f)  Violations. Violations of this division shall be punishable in the municipal court of the City of Griffin as an offense against the city. Violators shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. Each and every day that any such violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense or violation. 
( Ord. No. 19-11, § 1, 5-28-2019 )  
Secs. 94-75—94-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 94-91. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Generally. The failure of any person to comply with any provision contained in this article shall be a violation which shall be enforced in accordance with the penalties and provisions as set forth in this division. 
(b)  Inspections. The director shall have the right to direct and conduct such investigations as he may reasonably deem necessary to carry out his duties as described in this article. For this purpose, the director and his authorized employees and representatives, upon presentation of proper credentials, shall have the right to enter at reasonable times on any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the conditions relating to pollution and to inspect the operating records of any sewage system, waste treatment work, or other sewage disposal method. Upon refusal of the right of entry, the director may apply to the Municipal Court for an administrative search warrant, upon showing probable cause that a violation exists. 
(c)  Significant noncompliance. The term "significant noncompliance" shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the director believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the director's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation which the director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the city's pretreatment program. 
( Ord. No. 16-02, § 1(Att.), 1-26-2016 )  
Sec. 94-92. - Notice of violation. 
When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or consent order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director shall serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within ten days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without a notice of violation first being issued. 
( Ord. No. 16-02, § 1(Att.), 1-26-2016 )  
Sec. 94-93. - Consent orders. 
The director may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified in the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as binding contracts under state law and shall be judicially enforceable by petition for specific performance. 
( Ord. No. 16-02, § 1(Att.), 1-26-2016 )  
Sec. 94-94. - Injunctive relief. 
When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued under this article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may petition the county superior court, through the city attorney, for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains the further violation and/or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, consent order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The director may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
( Ord. No. 16-02, § 1(Att.), 1-26-2016 )  
Sec. 94-95. - Termination of discharge. 
(a)  Any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in division 2 of this article. 
(b)  Such user shall be notified, in writing, of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered a reasonable opportunity to show cause before the director why the proposed action should not be taken. The decision of the director, after notice and opportunity for hearing, shall be deemed a final action by the city. Exercise of this option by the director shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. Aggrieved users may seek judicial review by petitioning the Superior Court of the county for writ of certiorari. 
( Ord. No. 16-02, § 1(Att.), 1-26-2016 )  
Sec. 94-96. - Emergency suspensions. 
(a)  The director may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after oral notice to the user, whenever, in the director's sole discretion, such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The director may also immediately suspend a user's discharge that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The director may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in section 94-95 are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the director prior to the date of a termination hearing under section 94-95. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
( Ord. No. 16-02, § 1(Att.), 1-26-2016 )  
Sec. 94-97. - Civil liability. 
(a)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of O.C.G.A. § 12-15-21, any provision of this article, or any regulations promulgated by the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources relating to the collection, transportation, and disposal of commercial wastes, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00, per day, for each violation. In the case of a monthly or other longterm average discharge limit, civil penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation, but shall not exceed $25,000.00 cumulatively. The director shall cause a complaint and summons to be served upon the violator ordering the violator to appear before the Municipal Court to show cause why such penalty shall not be imposed. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provision in O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6, any other provision of law, or municipal charter to the contrary, the Municipal Court shall have civil jurisdiction in cases of violations committed within the municipal limits of the city and shall be authorized to impose the civil penalties above stated. Violations by customers of the city sewer system outside the municipal limits of the city shall be brought in the appropriate county court of civil jurisdiction. Timely written notice of any enforcement action taken pursuant to this section shall be given the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources; provided, however, failure to give such notice shall not be a defense to the underlying violation. 
(b)  In addition to any monetary fine imposed, the director may seek restitution of reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(c)  In determining the amount of penalty to be imposed, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions voluntarily undertaken by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(d)  In lieu of the provisions of subsections (a) through (c) of this section, the director may, in his sole discretion, elect to file a complaint for civil liability in the state court of the county, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 12-5-51. In those cases where the violator has been cited to Municipal Court and refuses to waive the right to trial by jury, the Municipal Court may bind the case over to the state court under this section. 
(e)  Conviction in the Municipal Court under this section shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
( Ord. No. 16-02, § 1(Att.), 1-26-2016 )  
Sec. 94-98. - Criminal prosecution. 
(a)  A user who willfully or knowingly violates any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or consent order issued under this article, or any order of the Municipal Court issued under section 94-97, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The director shall apply for a state warrant for violation of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-53(a), returnable to the State Court of the county. 
(b)  The director shall seek the issuance of state warrants for any person violating any of the provisions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-53(b)—(d), returnable to the appropriate state courts of criminal jurisdiction. 
( Ord. No. 16-02, § 1(Att.), 1-26-2016 )  
Sec. 94-99. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the director may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the director is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
( Ord. No. 16-02, § 1(Att.), 1-26-2016 )  
Sec. 94-100. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
The director shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements as defined in section 94-91. 
( Ord. No. 16-02, § 1(Att.), 1-26-2016 )  
Sec. 94-101. - Notification delivery of enforcement actions. 
Written notice personally delivered or placed in the U.S. mail by certified mail to the person's last known address, as shown in city utility billing records, shall be deemed sufficient notice for all enforcement actions in this article. Such notice may be personally served on the user or any authorized representative of the user. With respect to article violations regarding nonpayment of amounts due under this article, only notice mailed to the person's last known address, by regular U.S. mail, of the amount owed and the date upon which payment is due shall be required. 
( Ord. No. 16-02, § 1(Att.), 1-26-2016 )  
Secs. 94-102—94-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections, payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; authority to acquire, construct, extend, operate, maintain and collect fees for water and sewerage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5. 
 
Sec. 94-131. - Determination of public need for sewer; basis for assessment of property owners. 
(a)  The board of commissioners may determine by resolution whether areas exist within the municipal boundary that are not currently accessible to the sewer system and whether public health and sanitation concerns exist that would justify the extension of the sewer system into these areas. The resolution shall identify the boundary of the proposed areas to be served and identify all properties within the proposed area that will benefit from access to sewer. The board of commissioners shall determine whether a special benefit will accrue to those property owners benefitting from access to sewer apart from that benefit derived by taxpayers of the city in general. 
(b)  In all cases where a special benefit is deemed to accrue, the board of commissioners shall determine what portion, if any, the city will pay of the total cost of installing and laying the sewer line and how the remaining cost will be fairly and equitably apportioned among the property owners who shall benefit from access to sewer. The proposed method of assessment against the property owners shall be set forth in the resolution, together with a good faith estimate of the proposed assessment against each property owner. The resolution shall specify the date, place and time for holding a public hearing before the board of commissioners at which the merits of the project and any objections thereto may be considered. 
(c)  The city manager shall cause notice to be given to every property owner identified in the resolution as potentially benefitting from access to the proposed sewer. Such notice shall be in writing and mailed to the property owners by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the address shown on the city tax digest for the mailing of tax notices. Notices shall be mailed at least 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing and shall attach a copy of the resolution. The notice shall specify the date, time and location of the hearing and advise property owners of their right to be heard. 
(d)  Notice shall also be published by the city manager once a week for two weeks in a newspaper having a general circulation in the city. The time fixed for the hearing shall be not less than five nor more than ten days from the date of the last publication of the notice. 
(e)  The board of commissioners shall hold the public hearing on the date, place and time specified for the purpose of hearing any complaints or objections that may be made by any interested person concerning the need for sewer, the basis for apportioning costs, or the amount of proposed assessment. The board of commissioners shall have the power and duty to review and correct the scope of the project, the apportionment, and assessments, to hear objections to the project, the apportionment, and assessments, and to confirm the project, either as proposed in the resolution or as corrected at the hearing. 
(f)  The board of commissioners shall, at its next regular meeting following the public hearing, place an ordinance on first reading defining the scope of the project, the method of apportionment and the exact amount of assessments imposed against the properties found to be specially benefitted from the project. Such ordinance shall not be final until enacted upon second reading. 
(g)  The city manager shall, not less than 30 days before the date on which payment of an assessment shall be due, cause written notice of the assessment to be sent each affected property owner by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall inform the property owner that the assessment is payable to the tax collector of the city in cash and if paid on or before the due date, such assessment shall be without interest. If not paid by the due date, such assessment shall be a lien against the lot or tracts of land so assessed and such lien shall continue until the assessment and the interest are fully paid. Notice of the property owner's right to pay the assessment in installments shall be contained in the notice given by the city manager. 
(h)  No action shall be sustained to set aside any assessment, to enjoin collecting the assessment or issuing execution therefor, or contesting the validity of the assessment on any grounds, unless such action is commenced within 30 days after receipt of the notice provided for in subsection (g) of this section. 
(Code 1968, § 22-55)  
Sec. 94-132. - Alternative manner of payment. 
(a)  When an assessment is imposed against a property owner for the installing and laying of sewer and such owner cannot pay the full amount of the assessment in case on or before the due date, such owner shall have the right to pay the assessment in installments, provided written notice is given the city manager on or before the due date on the following terms: 
(1)  One-fifth of the assessment paid on or before the due date and one-fifth in four annual installments, due on or before the anniversary of the due date, together with interest thereon at eight percent per annum; 
(2)  One-seventh of the assessment paid on or before the due date and one-seventh in six annual installments, due on or before the anniversary of the due date, together with interest thereon at ten percent per annum; or 
(3)  One-tenth of the assessment paid on or before the due date and one-tenth in nine annual installments, due on or before the anniversary of the due date, together with interest thereon at 12 percent per annum; provided, however, this installment option shall only be approved by the city manager if the property owner presents sufficient evidence to justify classification as a hardship case. 
(b)  Should any installment not be paid in full when due, the city manager may notify the property owner that the assessment is in default, whereupon the unpaid balance, with interest, shall be immediately due and payable. Assessments may not be assumed by transferees of the property owner and are due in full upon transfer of title to the property. 
(Code 1968, § 22-56)  
Sec. 94-133. - Enforcement and collection. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city manager, within ten days of the due date or the maturity of any installment of assessment or interest, to issue an execution against the lot or tract of land assessed and against the person or persons owning the lot or tract of land for the amount of the assessment and interest. The execution shall be recorded on the general execution docket of the county, and if the owner is a nonresident, in his county of residence. 
(b)  Liens for assessments shall be levied and enforced in the same manner as provided for the collection of taxes. 
(Code 1968, § 22-57)  
Sec. 94-134. - Use of assessments; special fund. 
The assessments levied and collected under this division shall be kept in a special fund to be used and applied for the payment of costs incurred in installing and laying sewer lines for the project identified in the assessment ordinance. No monies in such special fund shall be used for any other purpose until the project costs have been fully satisfied. 
(Code 1968, § 22-58)  
Secs. 94-135—94-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide stormwater, sewerage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6). 
 
Sec. 94-161. - Findings. 
The board of commissioners makes the following findings: 
(1)  The professional engineering and financing analysis, known as the stormwater management action plan, jointly prepared by Ogden Environment and Energy Services and Water Resources, Inc., properly assesses and defines the stormwater management problems, needs, goals, program priorities and funding opportunities of the city. 
(2)  Given the problems, needs, goals, program priorities, and funding opportunities identified in the professional engineering and financing analysis, it is appropriate to authorize the formation of an organizational and accounting entity dedicated specifically to the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater systems in the city in concert with other water resource management programs. 
(3)  Stormwater management is applicable and needed throughout the corporate limits of the city. While specific service and facility demands may differ from area to area at any given point in time, a stormwater management service area encompassing all lands and water bodies within the corporate limits of the city is consistent with the present and future needs of the community. 
(4)  The stormwater needs in the city include but are not limited to protecting the public health, safety, and welfare. Provision of stormwater management programs and facilities renders and/or results in both service and benefit to all properties, property owners, citizens, and residents of the city in a variety of ways as identified in the professional engineering and financial analysis. The service and benefit rendered or resulting from provision of stormwater management systems and facilities may differ depending on many factors and considerations, including but not limited to location, demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater systems and programs, and risk exposure. 
(5)  The city presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities which have been developed over many years. The future usefulness of the existing stormwater systems owned and operated by the city, and of additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the city to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use, and enhance stormwater systems and facilities in the city in concert with the management of other water resources in the city. In order to do so, the city must have adequate and stable funding for its stormwater management program operating and capital investment needs. 
(6)  The board of commissioners finds, concludes and determines that a utility provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering and funding stormwater management services in the city. 
(7)  An equitable approach to funding stormwater management services and facilities can be provided by adopting a schedule of service charges upon properties that is related to burden of stormwater quality control service requirements and costs posed by properties throughout the city. Such schedule of service charges can be complemented by other funding methods which address specific needs, including but not limited to allocations of special purpose local options sales taxes to stormwater drainage improvement projects. A service charge credit is an appropriate means of adjusting service charges in recognition that private stormwater systems and/or actions can effectively reduce or eliminate the burden of stormwater quantity and quality control service requirements and costs that a property or properties pose for the city. Impervious area is the most important factor influencing stormwater service requirements and costs posed by properties throughout the city, and therefore is an appropriate parameter for calculating stormwater service charges and associated credits. In addition, the value to the stormwater utility of certain actions and practices performed by property owners and other stormwater utility customers may be recognized by credits based on other factors, including but not limited to the avoided cost of public information and education realized by the utility when public information and education about stormwater management is provided by the public school system. 
(Ord. No. 99-12, § 1(22-135), 12-14-1999)  
Sec. 94-162. - Establishment of a utility and enterprise fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a stormwater management utility within the city which shall be responsible for stormwater management throughout the city's corporate limits, and shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater systems and facilities. Such utility shall be under the direction of a stormwater utility director, appointed by the city manager. 
(b)  The city manager shall establish a stormwater enterprise fund in the city budget and accounting system, separate and apart from its general fund, for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the utility, including but not limited to rentals, rates, charges, fees, and licenses as may be established by the board of commissioners. All revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be deposited promptly upon receipt into the stormwater enterprise fund, to be held and invested in trust for the purposes dedicated, and expended exclusively for purposes of the utility, including capital project construction. No other funds of the city shall be deposited in the stormwater enterprise fund or commingled with dedicated stormwater revenues, except that other revenues, receipts, and resources not accounted for in the stormwater enterprise fund, including grants, loans, and bond proceeds may be combined with and applied to stormwater management capital projects as deemed appropriate by the board of commissioners, upon recommendation of the stormwater utility director. 
(c)  The board of commissioners hereby transfers to the stormwater utility director operational control over the existing stormwater management systems and facilities owned and heretofore operated by the city and other related assets, including but not limited to properties upon which such facilities are located, easements, rights-of-entry and access, and certain equipment. 
(Ord. No. 99-12, § 1(22-136), 12-14-1999)  
Sec. 94-163. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Credit means a conditional reduction in the amount of a stormwater service charge to an individual property based on the provision and continuing presence of an effectively maintained and operational on-site stormwater system or facility or the provision of a service or activity by property owner, which system, facility, service, or activity reduces the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater services and facilities. Credits for on-site stormwater systems shall be generally proportional to the affect that such systems have on the peak rate of runoff from the site. 
Customers of the stormwater utility means all persons, properties, and entities served by and/or benefiting from the utility's acquisition, management, maintenance, extension, and improvement of the public stormwater management systems and facilities and regulation of public and private stormwater systems, facilities, and activities related thereto, and persons, properties, and entities which will ultimately be served or benefited as a result of the stormwater management program. 
Detached dwelling unit means developed land containing one structure which is not attached to another dwelling and which contains one or more bedrooms, with a bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed for occupancy by one family. Detached dwelling units may include houses, manufactured homes, and mobile homes located on one or more individual lots or parcels of land. Developed land may be classified as a detached dwelling unit despite the presence of incidental structures associated with residential uses such as garages, carports, or small storage buildings, or the presence of a commercial use within the dwelling unit so long as such use does not result in additional impervious areas such as parking spaces, playgrounds, or structures or additions to the building which are used as offices, storage facilities, meeting rooms, classrooms, houses of worship, or similar nonresidential uses. Detached dwelling unit shall not include developed land containing: structures used primarily for nonresidential purposes, manufactured homes and mobile homes located within manufactured home or mobile home parks where the land is owned by others than the owners of the manufactured homes or mobile homes, or multiple dwelling unit residential properties. 
Developed land means property altered from its natural state by construction or installation of more than 200 square feet of impervious surface as defined in this article. 
Duplex and triplex mean developed land containing two (duplex) or three (triplex) attached residential dwelling units located on one or more parcels of land. 
Equivalent residential unit (ERU) of impervious area means the median average impervious coverage of detached dwelling unit properties in the city as determined by the city, and shall be used as the basis for determining stormwater service charges to detached dwelling unit properties or classes of detached dwelling unit properties and other properties. Two thousand two hundred square feet of impervious area shall be one equivalent unit. 
Hydrologic response means the manner and means whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates, and is conveyed from a property. It is dependent on several factors including, but not limited to, the presence of impervious area, the size, shape, topographic, vegetative, and geologic conditions of a property, antecedent moisture conditions, and groundwater conditions on a property. 
Impervious surface means those areas which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it entered in natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious areas include, but are not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, compacted gravel and soil surfaces, awnings and other fabric or plastic coverings, and other surfaces which prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff which existed prior to development. 
Multiple dwelling unit residential properties means developed land whereon four or more attached residential dwelling units are located and shall include, but not limited to, apartment houses, condominiums, townhomes, attached single-family homes, boarding houses, group homes, hotels and motels, retirement centers, and other structures in which four or more family groups commonly and normally reside or could reside. In the application of stormwater service charge rates, multiple dwelling unit properties shall be treated as other developed lands. 
Other developed land means, but shall not be limited to, multiple dwelling unit residential properties, manufactured home and mobile home parks, commercial and office buildings, public buildings and structures, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas covered with impervious surfaces, parking lots, parks, recreation properties, public and private schools and universities, research stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, airports, agricultural uses covered by impervious surfaces, water reservoirs, and water and wastewater treatment plants. 
Service charges means the periodic rate, fee, or charge applicable to a parcel of developed land, which charge shall be reflective of the service provided by the city stormwater utility. Service charges are based on measurable parameters which influence the stormwater utility's cost of providing services and facilities, with the most important factor being the amount of impervious area on each parcel of developed land. The use of impervious area as a service charge rate parameter shall not preclude the use of other parameters, or the grouping of properties having similar characteristics through the use of ranges or rounding up or down to a consistent numerical interval, or the use of flat-rate charges for one or more classes of similarly-situated properties whose impact on the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities is relatively consistent. Stormwater service charges may also include special charges to the owners of particular properties for services or facilities uniquely related to stormwater management of that property, including but not limited to charges for development plant review, inspection of development projects and on-site stormwater control systems, and enhanced levels of stormwater services above those normally provided by the city. 
Stormwater management systems means those systems which address the issues of drainage management (flooding) and environmental quality (pollution, erosion and sedimentation) of receiving rivers, streams, creeks, lakes, ponds, and reservoirs through improvements, maintenance, regulation and funding of plants, works, instrumentalities and properties used or useful in the collection, retention, detention, and treatment of stormwater or surface water drainage. 
Undeveloped land means land in its unaltered natural state or which has been modified to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural state shall be deemed undeveloped. Undeveloped land shall have no pavement, asphalt, or compacted gravel surfaces or structures which create an impervious surface that would prevent infiltration of stormwater or cause stormwater to collect, concentrate, or flow in a manner materially different than that which would occur if the land was in an unaltered natural state. For purposes of this article, undeveloped land shall also include property altered from its natural state by the creation or installation of less than 200 square feet of impervious surface. 
(Ord. No. 99-12, § 1(22-137), 12-14-1999) 
Cross reference— Cross reference—Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 94-164. - Scope of responsibility for the city drainage system. 
(a)  The city drainage system consists of all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainageways, channels, ditches, swales, storm sewers, culverts, inlets, catch basins, pipes, head walls and other structures, natural or manmade, within the political boundaries of the city which control and/or convey stormwater through which the city intentionally diverts surface waters from its public streets and properties. The city owns or has legal access for purposes of operation, maintenance and improvements to those segments of this system which (i) are located within public streets, rights-of-way, and easements; (ii) are subject to easements, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use, or other permanent provisions for adequate access for operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of systems and facilities; or (iii) are located on public lands to which the city has adequate access for operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of systems and facilities. Operation and maintenance of stormwater systems and facilities which are located on private property or public property not owned by the city and for which there has been no public dedication of such systems and facilities for operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of the systems and facilities shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, or its occupant, except as that responsibility may be otherwise affected by the laws of the state and the United States of America. 
(b)  It is the intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of all properties and persons in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or without the boundaries of the city. The city expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the city, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. To the extent any permit, plan approval, inspection or similar act is required by the city as a condition precedent to any activity by or upon property not owned by the city, pursuant to this or any other regulatory ordinance, regulation or rule of the city or under federal or state law, the issuance of such permit, plan approval, or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit or negligent issuance of a permit, seeking the imposition of money damages against the city, its officers, employees or agents. 
(Ord. No. 99-12, § 1(22-138), 12-14-1999)  
Sec. 94-165. - Requirements for on-site stormwater systems; enforcement methods and inspections. 
All property owners and developers of developed real property within the city shall provide, manage, maintain, and operate on-site stormwater systems sufficient to collect, convey, detain, and discharge stormwater in a safe manner consistent with all city development regulations and the laws of the state and the United States of America. Any failure to meet this obligation shall constitute a nuisance and be subject to an abatement action filed by the city in the Municipal Court. In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the owner fails to properly abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the court, the city may enter upon the property and cause such work as is reasonably necessary to be performed, with the actual cost thereof assessed against the owner in the same manner as a tax levied against the property. From date of the filing of such action, the city shall have lien rights which may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lien on the general execution docket of the superior court of the county. The city shall have the right, pursuant to the authority of this article, for its designated officers and employees to enter upon private and public property owned by entities other than the city, upon reasonable notice to the owner thereof, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering tests thereon in order to assure compliance. 
(Ord. No. 99-12, § 1(22-139), 12-14-1999)  
Sec. 94-166. - Determination and modification of stormwater service charges. 
Stormwater service charges shall be determined and modified from time to time by resolution of the board of commissioners. In setting or modifying such rates it shall be the objective of the board of commissioners to establish rates, fees and charges that are fair and reasonable, reflect the value of stormwater management services and facilities to those properties who benefit therefrom and, which together with any other sources of revenue that may be made available to the stormwater utility, will be sufficient to meet the cost of budgeted programs, services and facilities, including but not limited to the payment of principal and interest on revenue bond obligations incurred for construction and improvements to the stormwater system. 
(Ord. No. 99-12, § 1(22-140), 12-14-1999)  
Sec. 94-167. - Effective date of stormwater service charges. 
Stormwater service charges shall accrue beginning July 1, 1998, and shall be billed periodically thereafter to customers, except as specific exemptions and credits may apply. 
(Ord. No. 99-12, § 1(22-141), 12-14-1999)  
Sec. 94-168. - Stormwater service charges. 
The following stormwater rates shall apply: 
(1)  Detached dwellings units. Two classes of detached dwelling units shall be billed, based on the amount of impervious surfaces on the individual properties. The class of larger detached dwelling units shall include all detached dwelling unit properties having 1,600 square feet of impervious area or more, which shall be charged the rate applicable to one equivalent residential unit as specified in subsection (c) of this section, or as amended by resolution in the future. The class of smaller detached dwelling units shall include all such properties having less than 1,600 square feet of impervious area, which shall be charged the rate applicable to six-tenths equivalent residential unit as specified below in subsection (c) of this section, or as amended by resolution in the future. 
(2)  Other developed lands. All developed lands not classified as detached dwelling units shall be billed for one equivalent residential unit (ERU) for each 2,200 square feet of impervious surface or increment thereof. 
(3)  Stormwater service charge rate per equivalent residential unit (ERU) or increment thereof. The stormwater service charge per equivalent residential unit shall be as set out in the schedule of fees and charges, per month. 
(Ord. No. 99-12, § 1(22-142), 12-14-1999)  
Sec. 94-169. - Exemptions and credits applicable to stormwater service charges. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, no public or private property shall be exempt from stormwater utility service charges or receive a credit or offset against such service charges. No exception, credit, offset, or other reduction in stormwater service charges shall be granted based on the age, tax, or economic status, race, or religion of the customer, or other condition unrelated to the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater services and facilities. A Stormwater Utility Service Charge Credit Technical Manual has been prepared by the city's consulting engineers specifying the design and performance standards of on-site systems, facilities, activities, and services which quality for application of a service charge credit, and how such credits shall be calculated. This manual has been separately approved by the board of commissioners and, by reference, incorporated in this section. 
(1)  Undeveloped land as defined in this article shall be exempt from stormwater service charges. 
(2)  Land located within a railroad's right-of-way and covered with ballast and rail shall be exempt from stormwater service charges; provided, however, that railroad stations, maintenance buildings, or other developed land used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater fees. 
(3)  Any real property titled in the name of the State of Georgia, under the custody and control of the State Properties Commission, which property has been determined, in whole or in part, to be useful for the present or future needs of public transportation in this state, shall be exempt from any fees imposed by the city for the management, collection, or disposal of stormwater. 
(b)  Developed land other than individual detached dwelling units, including but not limited to multiple dwelling unit residential properties, manufactured home and mobile home parks, commercial and office buildings, public buildings and structures, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas covered with impervious surfaces, parking lots, parks, recreation properties, public and private schools and universities, research stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, airports, agricultural uses covered by impervious surfaces, water reservoirs, and water and wastewater treatment plants may receive a stormwater service charge credit. The stormwater service charge credit shall be determined based on the technical requirements and standards contained in the Stormwater Utility Service Charge Credit Technical Manual. The stormwater service charge credit may be up to 100 percent of the service charge applicable to a property, and shall be proportional to the extent that on-site systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner reduce or mitigate the stormwater utility's cost of providing services and facilities. 
(c)  Groups of detached dwelling units represented by an incorporated homeowner's association providing on-site systems, facilities, services, or activities which reduce or mitigate the stormwater utility's cost of providing services and facilities may receive a stormwater service charge credit. The stormwater service charge credit shall be determined based on the technical requirements and standards contained in the Stormwater Utility Service Charge Credit Technical Manual. The stormwater service charge credit available to groups of detached dwelling units may be up to 100 percent of the service charge applicable to the individual properties, and shall be proportional to the extent that on-site systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the homeowners association reduce or mitigate the stormwater utility's cost of providing services and facilities. 
(d)  Any credit allowed against the service charge is conditioned on continuing compliance with the city's design and performance standards as stated in the Stormwater Utility Service Charge Credit Technical Manual and/or upon continuing provision of the systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner or owners upon which the credit is based. A credit may be revoked by the city at any time for noncompliance. 
(e)  In addition to the foregoing credits based upon the design and performance of on-site systems, art educational credit shall be available to all public and private schools or school systems which agree to teach the WATER WISE program, an environmental science curriculum approved by the state department of education, in grades one through 12. The educational credit may be up to 50 percent of the service charge applicable to a school property, and shall be proportional to the extent the approved curriculum is taught. Educational credits may be taken in conjunction with any other credit available under this section. The superintendent of schools shall certify annually to the stormwater utility director, before July 1, the extent to which the curriculum was taught. 
(Ord. No. 99-12, § 1(22-143), 12-14-1999; Ord. No. 18-10, § 1, 6-19-2018 )  
Sec. 94-170. - Stormwater service charge billing, delinquencies, collections. 
(a)  A stormwater service charge bill may be sent through the United States mail or by alternative means, notifying the customer of the amount of the bill, the date the payment is due, and the date when past due. Failure to receive a bill is not justification for nonpayment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each parcel of developed land, as shown from public land records of the county, shall be ultimately obligated to pay such fee. If a customer is underbilled or if no bill is sent for developed land, the city may backbill for a period of up to four years, but shall not assess penalties for any delinquency. A 1.5 percent late charge shall be billed based on the unpaid balance of any stormwater utility service charge that becomes delinquent. 
(b)  Suits for collection shall be commenced by the city in the county of the owner's residence; provided, however, if the owner is not a resident of this state, suit may be filed in the superior court of the county. No lien shall be imposed for delinquent collections unless a judgment is first obtained from a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 99-12, § 1(22-144), 12-14-1999)  
Sec. 94-171. - Stormwater utility service charges billed in common. 
The stormwater utility service charge maybe billed on a common statement and collected along with other city utility services. 
(Ord. No. 99-12, § 1(22-145), 12-14-1999)  
Sec. 94-172. - Appeals. 
Any customer who believes the provisions of this article have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner: 
(1)  An appeal must be filed in writing with the city stormwater utility director. In the case of service charge appeals, the appeal shall include a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer containing information on the total property area, the impervious surface area, and any other features or conditions which influence the hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events. 
(2)  Using the information provided by the appellant, the director shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property and respond to the appeal in writing within 30 days. 
(3)  In response to an appeal the director may adjust the stormwater service charge applicable to a property in conformance with the general purpose and intent of this article. 
(4)  A decision of the director to which is adverse to an appellant may be further appealed to the city manager within 30 days of receipt of notice of the adverse decision. Notice of the appeal shall be served on the city manager by the appellant, stating the grounds for the appeal. The city manager shall issue a written decision on the appeal within 30 days. All decisions of the city manager shall be served on the appellant personally or by registered or certified mail, sent to the billing address of the appellant. 
(5)  All decisions by the city manager shall be final . 
(6)  The appeal process contained in this section shall be a condition precedent to an aggrieved customer seeking judicial relief. Any decision of the city manager may be reviewed upon application for writ of certiorari before the superior court of the county, filed within 30 days of the date of service of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 99-12, § 1(22-146), 12-14-1999)  
Sec. 94-173—94-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - POST-DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-06, § 1, adopted Nov. 25, 2014, repealed the former Div. 2, §§ 94-191—94-197, and enacted a new Div. 2 as set out herein. The former Div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 07-09, § 1, adopted Oct. 9, 2007. 
 
Sec. 94-191. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this division is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This division seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the county's greenspace protection plan; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
(b)  Applicability. This division shall be applicable to all land development on or after October 9, 2007, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (c) below. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or greater of new impervious surface area, or that involves land development activity of 5,000 square feet or greater; 
(2)  Redevelopment that creates or adds of 5,000 square feet or greater of new impervious surface area, or that involves land disturbing activity of one acre or more, including projects less than one acre if they are part of a larger common plan of development or sale; 
(3)  Any commercial or industrial new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, with a Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code that falls under the NPDES Industrial Stormwater Permit program, or a land use that is defined by the city manager, or his designee, to be a "hotspot land use"; or 
(4)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in items (a) and (b) above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(c)  Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from this division: 
(1)  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
(3)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
(4)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the city manager. 
(d)  Responsibility for administration. The city manager is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this division. The city manager is authorized to designate, in writing, another officer or employee of the city to perform and carry out the duties under this division, provided, such designation is accepted, in writing, by the designee. 
(e)  Compatibility with other regulations. This division is not intended to modify or repeal any other article, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this division are in addition to the requirements of any other article, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this division imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other article, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(f)  Stormwater design manual. The City of Griffin will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM), consisting of Volumes 1—3, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
(Ord. No. 14-06, § 1, 11-25-2014)  
Sec. 94-192. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Conservation easement means an agreement between a landowner and the City of Griffin or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities, as required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act, O.C.G.A. Title 12, Chapter 7 and local ordinance enacted pursuant thereto. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Hotspot means a land use or activity on a site that produces higher concentrations of trace metals, hydrocarbons, or other priority pollutants than are normally found in urban stormwater runoff. Examples of "hotspots" may be found in the GSMM. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious surface area means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the 2-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the City of Griffin to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this division, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Project means a land development project. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management site plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this division. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
(Ord. No. 14-06, § 1, 11-25-2014)  
Sec. 94-193. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  Permit application requirements. No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this division prior to commencing the proposed activity. Unless specifically exempted by this division, every owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the City of Griffin a permit application on a form provided by the City of Griffin for that purpose. Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with subsection (b); 
(2)  Stormwater management site plan in accordance with subsection (c); 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with subsection (d); 
(4)  Performance bond in accordance with subsection (e), if applicable; and 
(5)  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with subsection (f). 
(b)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, the land owner or developer shall meet with the designated representative of the City of Griffin Stormwater Management Department for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting shall take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
To accomplish this goal the following information shall be included in the concept plan which shall be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(1)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. Local watershed plans, the Spalding County greenspace projection plan (if applicable), and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
(c)  Stormwater management site plan requirements. The stormwater management site plan shall address Minimum Stormwater Management Standards 1—10, found in Sec. 1.2.2.2 of the GSMM, detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed, and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this division, including the performance criteria set forth in section 94-164 below. This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and Sec. 1.5 of the GSMM, and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the State of Georgia, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the stormwater design manual. 
The stormwater management site plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this division are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
(1)  Common address and legal description of site; 
(2)  Vicinity map; 
(3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, pre-development conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(4)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 94-164; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in section 94-164 must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(5)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 94-164; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(6)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(7)  Construction-phase erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with chapter 42, environment, article III, erosion and sedimentation control, of the Code of Griffin, Georgia, and no less stringent than the State General NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(9)  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, identity [identify] the responsible parties for performing maintenance, funding mechanism, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(10)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public rights-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Easements shall be held by the entity or entities responsible for maintenance. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, access easements shall be shown on the final plat and recorded in the land records of the county. Applicant shall furnish a certificate from an attorney, licensed in the State of Georgia and competent in real estate matters, certifying that such easements exist, have been duly recorded, and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(11)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City of Griffin as provided in subsection (d) below, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance subsection (d). 
(12)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the City of Griffin that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(d)  Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the City of Griffin requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of a private site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is formally dedicated to and accepted by the City of Griffin, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent assignees of the site. A notation or legend on a plat or survey of the owner's intent to publically dedicate drainage facilities to the city shall not suffice and dedication shall require formal presentment of a correctly drawn warranty deed, with current opinion of title from a competent real estate attorney acceptable to the city. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the city attorney prior to plan approval, and recorded in the Spalding County deed records upon final plat approval. The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to, and be assumed by, any successor or assignee of the owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance, and shall require the City's prior written consent to the transfer. 
As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for periodic inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City of Griffin may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in section 94-166 of this division. 
The City of Griffin, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this division and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(e)  Maintenance bonds. No stormwater inspection and maintenance agreement shall be approved until the city manager has received a legally binding commercial surety bond, letter of credit, or other satisfactory assurance of financial security, in an amount sufficient to provide for the maintenance of all improvements required by this article. The amount of such bond or other assurance of financial security shall be based on reasonable estimate of the cost of routine maintenance, as set forth in the maintenance agreement, based upon prevailing costs of labor, materials and equipment, to perform annual maintenance requirements, as from time to time established by the consulting professional engineer for the stormwater department. The city attorney shall approve the bond or other assurance of financial security, as to form and execution, prior to its acceptance. Such evidence of financial security shall remain in force until such time as the city unconditionally accepts dedication of the improvements. 
(f)  Application procedure. 
(1)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the city manager or his designee. 
(2)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in subsection (a) above (two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
(3)  The City of Griffin shall inform the applicant, in writing, whether the application, stormwater management plan, inspection and maintenance agreement, and bond or other assurance of financial security, are approved or disapproved. 
(4)  If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subparagraph (3) above and this subparagraph shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(5)  Upon a finding by the City of Griffin that the permit application, stormwater management site plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this division, the City of Griffin may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this division and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
b.  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
c.  The City of Griffin shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
d.  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the City of Griffin; and 
e.  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by section 94-165(b). 
(g)  Application review fees. The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by resolution of the board of commissioners, as from time to time amended, and shall be established prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(h)  Modifications for off-site facilities. The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the City of Griffin which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City of Griffin that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 14-06, § 1, 11-25-2014)  
Sec. 94-194. - Post-development stormwater management performance criteria. 
The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this division: 
(a)  Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge by the stormwater management system to remove at least 80 percent of the calculated average annual post-development Total Suspended Solids (TSS) loading (as defined in the GSMM) from the site. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
(1)  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume, which is defined as the runoff volume resulting from the first 1.2 inches of rainfall from a site; 
(2)  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed, or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and, 
(3)  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the city are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices, and pollution prevention practices. 
(b)  Stream channel/aquatic resource protection. Stream channel/aquatic resource protection shall be provided by using the following approaches: (1) 24-hour extended detention storage of the 1-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; (2) erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control; and (3) preservation of the applicable stream buffer. 
(c)  Overbank flooding protection. Downstream overbank flood protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour storm event. 
(d)  Extreme flooding protection. Extreme flood protection shall be provided by controlling the 100-year, 24-hour storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(e)  Structural stormwater controls. All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the stormwater design manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from City of Griffin before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the City of Griffin may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. Applicants shall consult the manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(f)  Nonstructural stormwater controls. The City of Griffin encourages the use of Green Infrastructure/Low Impact Development practices and approaches on both new and redeveloped sites. Design information on GI/LID practices can be found on the Georgia EPD's website (www.gaepd.org) and in the Coastal Supplement to the GSSM. 
(g)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under subsection (a). The applicant may, if approved by the City of Griffin, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the stormwater design manual. 
(h)  Drainage system guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public rights-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that [than] one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
(2)  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and, 
(3)  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
(i)  Dam design guidelines. Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 14-06, § 1, 11-25-2014)  
Sec. 94-195. - Construction inspections of post-development stormwater management system. 
(a)  Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the City of Griffin or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the city manager. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(b)  Final inspection and as-built plans. Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual asbuilt plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified, under seal, by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the city stormwater management department is required before the release of any performance bonds or other security can occur. 
(Ord. No. 14-06, § 1, 11-25-2014)  
Sec. 94-196. - Long-term maintenance and inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Long-term maintenance and inspection of post-construction stormwater facilities and practices. Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the maintenance agreement, the stormwater management plan and this division. At a minimum, all this inspection shall address all publicly-owned structures and those privately-owned structures completed on or after October 9, 2007. The city may also inspect privately-owned structures completed before this date if the city has entered into an inspection and maintenance agreement with the owner/operator of the structure. Maintenance must be performed to the "maximum extent practicable" (MEP). 
A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city manager shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested or statutory overnight delivery to the person specified, at the last address given in the inspection and maintenance agreement. Responsible persons are under a continuing obligation to keep the city informed of their current mailing address or other contact information. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city may correct the violation as provided in subsection (d) hereof. 
Inspection programs by the City of Griffin may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(b)  Right-of-entry for inspection. The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the City of Griffin to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this division is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(c)  Records of maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the City of Griffin. 
(d)  Failure to maintain facilities and practices. If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city manager, after ten days' written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The city manager shall specially assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may cause the amount thereof to be placed on the next ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for collection of taxes. 
(Ord. No. 14-06, § 1, 11-25-2014)  
Sec. 94-197. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this division. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(a)  Notice of violation. If the city manager or his designee determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management site plan or the provisions of this division, he shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this division without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner of the property or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; and 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
(b)  Enforcement measures. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed: 
(1)  Stop work order. The city manager may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the owner or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the owner or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the owner or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city manager shall refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the owner or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city manager may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the owner or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated upon such conditions as the city manager may deem necessary to enable the owner or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(c)  Civil penalties. In the event the owner or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city manager shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city manager has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city manager may file a complaint for nuisance against the applicant or other responsible person in Municipal Court; upon finding a nuisance to exist by reason of the condition, the court shall order the nuisance abated within a reasonable time. In addition thereto, the court may impose a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(d)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and willful violations of this division, including engaging in a land disturbing activity without first obtaining the required permit, the city manager may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear before the Municipal Court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment for six months, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 14-06, § 1, 11-25-2014)  
Secs. 94-198—94-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ATLANTA GAS LIGHT COMPANY FRANCHISE 
 
Sec. 94-201. - Grant of franchise. 
An ordinance dated June 21, 1983, granting Atlanta Gas Light Company a franchise for the use of rights-of-way and other public property for the purpose of distributing gas within the City of Griffin, is hereby amended by inserting the following: 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-22-1998)  
Sec. 94-202. - Definitions. 
(a)  Base year means the fiscal year ending September 30, 1998. 
(b)  Base year franchise fee factor means the total franchise fees paid during the base year divided by the design day capacity as recorded by the company on the last day of the base year. 
(c)  Design day capacity means the sum of the individual capacity in dekatherms (Dt) attributable to all firm customers located within the city limits of the city, as of the last day of the previous fiscal year. 
(d)  Firm customers means all residential and business customers who purchase gas service that ordinarily is not subject to interruption or curtailment. 
(e)  Fiscal year means the 12 months ending September 30 of each year. 
(f)  Inflation index means the percentage change in the Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, or any successor index, for the period from September 30, 1997, to the beginning of the then current fiscal year. The percentage shall be reduced by any productivity factor adjustment for the same time period determined by the Georgia Public Service Commission for the company. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 1(1), 9-22-1998) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 94-203. - Franchise fee. 
The total dollar amount of franchise fees paid by the company to the city shall be calculated as follows: 
The current fiscal year total franchise fee shall equal the product of the design day capacity and the current franchise fee factor. The current franchise fee factor shall be equal to the product of the base year franchise fee factor and one plus the inflation index expressed as a decimal to three significant digits. 
The following formula quantifies this payment: 
FF c = FFF by × (1 + CPI - PFA) × DDC c 
Where FF c = total franchise fees due the city for the current fiscal year 
FFF by = the base year franchise fee factor 
CPI-PFA = the inflation index based on the cumulative changed in the Consumer Price Index less the productivity factor adjustment determined by the Georgia Public Service Commission 
DDC c = the design day capacity as of the last day of the previous fiscal year 
FFF by =FF by /DDC by where 
FF by = the total franchise fees paid in the base year 
and DDC by = the design day capacity of the base year. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 1(2), 9-22-1998)  
Sec. 94-204. - Responsibility for payment of franchise fee. 
The company as the holder of the franchise privilege hereunder is responsible for the payment of all franchise fees payable hereunder, and shall file such reports and returns as required by franchise ordinance as modified by this amendment. In addition, the company shall report annually the names of all gas marketers for which the company is transporting natural gas on the distribution system within the city. The franchise fee payments required hereunder shall be in lieu of any franchise fee license fee, occupation tax or other payment for use of the rights-of-way by the company for the provision of gas service, but shall not prohibit imposition of a license fee or an occupation tax on gas marketers. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 1(3), 9-22-1998)  
Sec. 94-205. - Quarterly payments. 
Effective for the fiscal year 1999, and for each fiscal year thereafter during the term of the franchise ordinance, the company shall remit to the city quarterly franchise fee installments. The installments shall equal to one-fourth of the total annual franchise fee calculated in accordance with this ordinance. 
The quarterly payment is due and payable on or before the 30th day following the last day of each calendar quarter. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 1(4), 9-22-1998)  
Sec. 94-206. - Annual return. 
The company shall file a return with its first quarterly installment in each fiscal year showing the details of the calculation of the annual franchise fee. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 1(5), 9-22-1998)  
Sec. 94-207. - Delay of inflation adjustment. 
Notwithstanding any other provision in this ordinance, any inflation adjustments shall be made to the franchise fee only when the company changes its rates. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 1(6), 9-22-1998)  
Sec. 94-208. - Conflicts. 
In the event of a conflict between this ordinance and the original franchise dated June 21, 1983, this ordinance shall control. All terms, conditions and stipulations contained in such franchise ordinance shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that they do not conflict with this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 1(7), 9-22-1998)  
Secs. 94-209—94-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - COMBINED PUBLIC UTILITIES SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 94-251. - Combined public utilities system; departments created. 
The city owns an electric system, water distribution system and sewer collection system which provides electric service, water service and sewer service to users within and without the territorial limits of the city. Collectively, these systems shall be operated and maintained as a combined public utilities system. The city manager shall direct and control the operation of said combined system, but may operate such system through separate utility divisions, i.e. electric, water, and sewer, or in such combination as he deems most efficient. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, § 1(1), 11-12-2002)  
Sec. 94-252. - Utilities system accounts; establishment of rates. 
The city manager shall keep separate financial books and accounts for the electric, water and sewer departments and for the combined utilities system. It shall be the duty of the manager to place into effect, with approval of the board of commissioners, schedules of rates, tolls, fees and charges for the services, facilities and commodities furnished by the combined system and, as often as it may appear necessary, to revise and adjust such schedules to the extent necessary to produce funds sufficient to: 
(1)  Pay the operating expenses of the combined system; 
(2)  Pay the principal and interest when due on any revenue bonds and debt obligations of the combined system, including funding of any debt service reserves or credit reserves required thereby; and 
(3)  Fund any minimum renewal and extension fund requirements as established by bond ordinance or other proper resolution of the board of commissioners; 
at least equal to 120 percent of the amount required for the then current fiscal year or accounting period; provided, however, for each of the systems operated, a schedule of rates, tolls, fees and charges for the services, facilities and commodities furnished by each individual system shall be imposed so as to operate each individual system on a sound businesslike basis. For purposes of this section, a system will be deemed to have operated on a sound businesslike basis if net revenues of each individual system at least equal 100 percent of that portion of estimated operating expense, plus debt service, allocable to that system during the current budget period. Such rates, fees, tolls and charges will be classified in a reasonable manner to cover users of the services and facilities furnished by the combined system so that, as nearly as practicable, such rates, fees, tolls and charges will be uniform in application to all users falling within any reasonable class. No free service will at any time be furnished, including to any political subdivision or other public body. No customer will be connected to the combined system or any individual utility thereof without first having executed a service agreement in the form prescribed by the city manager, and paid the applicable connection fees and charges. Where applicable, a proper meter shall first be installed before services or commodities are delivered. To the extent authorized by law, it shall be the duty of the city manager to require the owners of all improved properties accessible to services of the combined system to connect thereto. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, § 1(2), 11-12-2002)  
Sec. 94-253. - Employees of combined system; department managers. 
The city manager shall employ persons skilled or knowledgeable in the management of utilities and may designate one or more department managers for the combined system or its individual departments. All compensation, salaries, fees and wages paid in the operation, maintenance and repair of the combined system shall be reasonable, and no more persons shall be employed than are necessary. Employees of the combined system shall be eligible to participate in all retirement, insurance and employment benefit programs of the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, § 1(3), 11-12-2002)  
Sec. 94-254. - Operation of combined system. 
The city manager, department managers and employees of the combined system shall continuously operate and maintain the facilities of said system in good order and repair in accordance with reasonable rules and regulations governing said system as from time to time established by the city manager, upon recommendation of his department managers. All rules shall be in writing and conspicuously posted in the individual utility departments and at the city manager's office. Where subject to governmental or administrative oversight, the combined system shall be operated in strict compliance with all valid acts, rules, regulations, orders, permits and directives of regulatory bodies or agencies. The city manager, department managers and key employees of the combined system or of the city who handle funds derived from the combined system shall carry fidelity bonds, in favor of the board of commissioners, in such amounts as are at least equal to the total funds in the custody of such officer or officers at any time. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, § 1(4), 11-12-2002)  
Sec. 94-255. - Audit of combined system. 
As soon as practicable after the closing of each fiscal year, an audit will be made of all books and accounts pertaining to the combined system and each individual utility department by an independent certified public accountant or firm of suitable experience and responsibility. Copies of such audit shall be made available to the board of commissioners and to interested persons as a public record of the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, § 1(5), 11-12-2002)  
Sec. 94-256. - Right to shut off utilities for repair; emergencies. 
The city manager and his department managers shall have the right to shut off utilities for necessary repairs and work upon the system; provided, however, shut-offs shall be planned to the extent possible and reasonable notice given to users by the best available means; in any emergency situation, notice of a shut-off is not required. The city will exercise its best efforts to restore normal levels of service as soon as feasible, considering the nature of the situation and all circumstances. The city shall not be responsible for damages or rebate of fees, rates, tolls and charges for temporary outages or shut-offs, or for compensatory damages allegedly arising from loss of utility services. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, § 1(6), 11-12-2002)  
Sec. 94-257. - Termination of services due to non-payment or other cause. 
In the absence of a written contract with the city creating a property interest or legitimate expectation of continued service, utility users may be terminated due to violation of published rules, regulations and procedures governing service delivery and billing practices of the combined system as promulgated by the city manager. Where customers are subject to termination of services due to non-payment, it shall be the policy of the city to afford the customer a reasonable opportunity for a meeting with a responsible employee of the combined system's customer service division to resolve any dispute prior to the scheduled date of termination. Where notice cannot be given the customer, as shown on the combined system's billing records, or known users at the location where service is provided, after reasonable diligence by the city staff, the city shall retain the right to terminate service upon concluding the amount billed was justly due. Failure by a customer to receive a bill for the current period shall not constitute a defense for non-payment when services are shown to have been accepted at the service address. 
Pursuant to section 366 of the Bankruptcy Code (11 U.S.C. § 366), the combined utility may not alter, refuse, or discontinue service for 20 days after receiving notice of entry of an order for relief under the Bankruptcy Code. Within 20 days after the date of entry of such order, the debtor or trustee acting on the debtor's behalf, shall furnish adequate assurance of payment, in the form of a deposit or other security, to maintain utility service after that date. The amount of such adequate assurance may vary based upon the circumstances of each case. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, § 1(7), 11-12-2002)  
Sec. 94-258. - Damaging, injuring, or interfering with property of the combined system. 
(a)  Any person who acts: 
(1)  Intentionally and without authority to injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp, or other apparatus belonging to the combined system; 
(2)  Intentionally and without authority to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied; 
(3)  In any way to interfere with the proper action of officers and employees of the combined system; 
(4)  Intentionally to divert any services to another person who knowingly receives the benefit of such services without proper charge; or 
(5)  Otherwise intentionally and without authority uses or receives the benefit, without consent of the city, of any utility services; 
shall be guilty of a violation of this article and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment not to exceed six months. 
(b)  Any person who, with knowledge of such violation, receives the benefit of any utility service offered or provided by the combined system, without proper charge, shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(c)  Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person in lawful possession of the premises receiving the benefit of service without proper charge as a result of improper action shall be presumed to be responsible for the act of tampering or diversion. 
(d)  The first violation of this article shall be prosecuted before the Municipal Court of the city, unless the violator charged demands trial by jury; any second or subsequent violations shall be prosecuted before the state court of the county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
(e)  In addition to any fine or imprisonment authorized by this section, upon conviction, a violator shall be ordered to pay restitution to the city in the amount found by the court for rates, fees or other charges avoided by the violator's action and for equipment or property of the city or its combined system damaged or destroyed by such action. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, § 1(8), 11-12-2002)  
Secs. 94-259—94-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - WATER[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, adopted Nov. 25, 2014, repealed the former Art. VII, §§ 94-301—94-310, and enacted a new Art. VII as set out herein. The former Art. VII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 03-07, § 1, adopted March 11, 2003; Ord. No. 04-13, § 1, adopted June 22, 2004; Ord. No. 05-01, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 2005. 
 
Sec. 94-301. - Legal compliance. 
The City of Griffin Public Water System operates in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 12-5-170 et seq., "The Georgia Safe Drinking Water Act"; Rules and Regulations of the State of Georgia, § 391-3-5-.13, which pertains to safe drinking water standards; and Permit No. CS2550000, issued February 2, 2006, Permit to Operate a Public Water System. 
(Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 11-25-2014)  
Sec. 94-302. - Cross-connection control program. 
(a)  General description of backflow and backflow prevention. 
(1)  Water distribution systems are designed with the intention of the water flowing in a certain direction from the distribution system to the customer. However, hydraulic conditions within the system may deviate from the "normal" conditions, causing the water to flow in the opposite direction. Therefore, it is possible (and common) for the water to flow in the opposite direction in an unprotected system. This is called "backflow." 
(2)  Backflow occurs when the pressure in the distribution system drops, siphoning water from the customer's system into the distribution system. This would also siphon any substance which may be in contact with the water system through a cross-connection. This type of backflow is called "backsiphonage" and may occur when there is an unusually high use of water or undersized piping in an area. For example, during fire fighting, or when a main water line breaks, water is "sucked" to the point of high usage, possibly drawing non-potable substances with it, filling the water line with these substances. Backsiphonage may occur through cross-connection such as a hose from a maintenance sink in a mop bucket, or a below-the-rim water inlet to a tank containing a toxic solution. 
(3)  Some water customers have non-potable materials on the premises under pressure. When an unprotected water line is attached to the container or pipes holding the pressurized material, the material may be "pumped" back into the potable water system. This type of backflow is called "backpressure." Backpressure may occur through a cross-connection such as a make-up water line, which is connected, to a recirculating system containing soap, acid, antifreeze or any other non-potable substance. 
(4)  Because of these potential dangers to the water consumer, it is necessary to control cross-connections. There are several types of mechanical assemblies which serve as backflow preventers. Different types of backflow preventers are designed to work under backsiphonage or backpressure conditions. Some are acceptable for low-hazard (or non-health hazard) conditions. 
(5)  This article regulates the proper use of backflow prevention devices and assemblies. 
(b)  Responsibility. 
(1)  The director of the water and wastewater department has the primary responsibility for protecting the public water system against backflow and back-siphonage. This responsibility begins at the water supply source, includes all of the public water distribution system, and generally ends at the point of water delivery to the customer's premises or system. The city water and wastewater department is not responsible for abatement of cross-connections within a customer's premises but rather undertakes reasonable precautions to protect the public water system from backflow through illegal cross-connections. Taking reasonable precautions includes ensuring that proper backflow preventers are installed and maintained by the customer, at its sole expense, at the point of service connection. 
(2)  The installation of a backflow preventer at a service connection in accordance with this section may not negate the need for additional backflow preventers at points of water use within the customer's potable water system. 
(3)  Authority is hereby delegated to the director to promulgate and adopt a manual setting forth a Cross-Connection Control Program for the elimination and prevention of all cross-connections, in accordance with this article. Such program shall conform to the standards of the American Water Works Association, Manual 14, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Cross-Connection Manual. Said Manual shall be submitted to the Georgia Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources upon completion. 
(Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 11-25-2014)  
Sec. 94-303. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the terms defined below shall have the specific meaning ascribed in this section. 
Approved: Accepted, after review, by the city water and wastewater department. 
Assembly: A mechanical backflow preventer (e.g., PVB, DC, RP, etc.), used to prevent the backward flow of contaminants or pollutants into a potable water distribution system. An assembly has a resilient seated, full-flow shut-off valve before and after the backflow preventer making it testable in-line. (The assembly is shipped with the shut-off valves attached to the backflow preventer). An assembly is labeled with the manufacturer's symbol, the size and model number, the working pressure and the direction of flow. Parts for the approved assembly are provided for a minimum of seven years after sale of the assembly. The Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research at the University of Southern California approves backflow prevention assemblies. 
Auxiliary water supply: Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the city public water system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public potable water or any natural source(s) such as well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or "used waters" or "industrial fluids". These waters may be polluted or contaminated or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the city does not have sanitary control. 
Backflow: The undesirable reversal of flow of water or other substances through a cross-connection and into the piping of a public water system or customer's potable water system. This includes backflow from backsiphonage or backpressure. 
Backflow preventer: A device assembly, or means designed to prevent backflow, including: 
(1)  Air-gap (AG): The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between: the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device; and the flood level rim of such vessel. An approved AG shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically, above the top of the rim of the vessel; and, in no case less than one inch. When an AG is used at the service connection to prevent the contamination or pollution of the public potable water system, an emergency by-pass shall be installed around the AG system and an approved reduced pressure principle device shall be installed on the by-pass system. 
(2)  Reduced pressure principle assembly (RP): An assembly of two independently operating approved check valves with an automatically operating differential relief valve between the two check valves, tightly closing shut-off valves on either side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of the check and relief valves. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications and approval of a recognized and city approved testing agency for backflow prevention assemblies. The device shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two check valves at a level less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. At cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the two check valves shall be less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. In case of leakage of either of the check valves, the differential relief valve shall operate to maintain the reduced pressure in the zone between the check valves by discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is two pound per square inch or less, the relief valve shall open to the atmosphere. To be approved, these devices must be readily accessible for in-line maintenance and testing and be installed in a location where no part of the device will be submerged. 
(3)  Double check valve assembly (DC): An assembly of two independently operating approved check valves with tightly shut off valves on each side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications and approval of a recognized and city approved testing agency for backflow prevention devices. To be approved, these devices must be readily accessible for in-line maintenance and testing. 
(4)  Pressure vacuum breaker assembly (PVB): An assembly consisting of one independently operating spring loaded check valve, an independently operating, spring loaded air-inlet valve, two test cocks and two shut off valves. This assembly is designed to prevent backsiphonage. It cannot be used where it may be subjected to back pressure. It can be operated under continuous pressure. 
(5)  Spill-resistant pressure vacuum breaker assembly (SVB): An assembly containing an independently operating internally loaded check valve and independently operating loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly is to be equipped with a properly located resilient seated test cock, a properly located bleed/vent valve, and tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly. This assembly is designed to protect against a non-health hazard (i.e., pollutant) or a health hazard (i.e., contaminant) under a backsiphonage condition only. 
(6)  Atmospheric vacuum breaker (AVB): A mechanical backflow prevention device consisting of a float check valve and an air inlet port designed to prevent backsiphonage by allowing air to enter the downstream water line. This unit does not provide protection against backpressure or continuous pressure. (A shut-off valve is not allowed down stream from the device to prevent the device from being subjected to continuous pressure). 
(7)  Residential dual check (RDC): A compact unit manufactured with two independent spring actuated check valves. The residential dual check is acceptable only: as on a residential system that has no irrigation or anything that may be close to anything in Table 1 Appendix A. 
Backflow prevention inspector: The employee tasked by the director to inspect and test back flow preventers, who possesses the qualifications of and certification by the Georgia Statewide Backflow Prevention Assembly Certification Program. 
City: The City of Griffin, Georgia, its officers, employees, and authorized agents. 
Contamination: An impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual or potential hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. 
Cross-connection: Any physical arrangement whereby a public water supply is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, or other device which contains or may contain contaminated water, sewage or other waste, or liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply as the result of backflow. By-pass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeable devices, and other temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which backflow could occur are considered to be cross-connections. 
Cross-connections—Controlled: A connection between a potable water system and a non-potable water system with an approved backflow prevention assembly properly installed that will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
Department: The Water and Wastewater Department of the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
Device: A mechanical backflow preventer without the shut-off valves. An atmospheric vacuum breaker is a device. It does not have shut-off valves on either side of the backflow prevention mechanism. In addition, any backflow prevention assembly without the shut off valves is called a device. The American Water Works Association (AWWA) and the American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE) approve backflow prevention devices. 
Director: The director of the city's water and wastewater department. 
Pollution: Means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, or biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use. 
Water, potable: Any water that, according to recognized standards is safe for human consumption. 
Water, nonpotable: Water that is not safe for human consumption or which is of questionable potability. 
Water service connection: The terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system; i.e., where the city loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer's water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There should be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow prevention device located at the point of delivery to the customer's water system. Service connections shall also include water service connections from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water systems. 
(Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 11-25-2014)  
Sec. 94-304. - Cross-connections prohibited; contamination prevention. 
(a)  Prohibitions. No person shall construct, maintain or operate a physical arrangement whereby the City of Griffin Public Water System is or may be connected directly or indirectly with a non-potable water system or non-permitted water system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, or other device which contains or may contain contaminated water, liquid, gasses, sewage or other waste of unknown or unsafe quality, which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water system as the results of backflow, bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, or other temporary, permanent or potential connections through which or because of which back-flow or back-siphonage could or would occur. 
(1)  All new structures desiring water service from the public water system, or additions to or expansion of existing residential service, will be required to install an approved backflow prevention device, at the customer's sole expense, at the point of customer service connection. New non-residential customers shall complete a cross-connection control questionnaire provided by the city. 
(2)  Site plans for new construction, additions, or renovations shall be reviewed by the Director and recommendations for change or installation of an approved device shall be attached and submitted to the city's project review committee for recommendation. 
(3)  Based on the risk assessment, the department shall require appropriate backflow prevention devices be installed at the customer's sole expense as a condition for water service. The devices shall be installed by a state licensed plumber retained by the person requesting service from the city before making a water service connection to the city public water system. 
(4)  Upon receipt of service order for non-residential water meter installation, the director shall make inquiries as to the type of facilities and equipment to be attached to the water service. 
(b)  Contamination prevention. A supplier of water or any person having possession or control of facilities which may cause the contamination of a public water system has the responsibility to prevent water from unapproved sources or any contaminants from entering the public water supply or public water system by physical arrangement prohibited by subsection (a) above. For purposes of this section, any person connecting to or purchasing water from a public water system and reselling it to others is considered a supplier of water so purchased as well as a consumer, and is also responsible for the quality of such water. 
(c)  Procedure to review existing service connections. The department shall evaluate every existing water service connection by December 31, 2015, and shall re-evaluate each non-residential water service connection at least once every three years thereafter and whenever there is a change in the customer of record; residential water service connections shall be re-evaluated every five years and whenever there is a change in the customer of record. Properties where cross-connections are reasonably suspected may be inspected at any time to determine if a cross-connection exists. 
(1)  The customers receiving service at the suspected properties shall be contacted in advance to secure an appointment for inspection of the premises and will be requested to accompany the backflow prevention inspector during the tour of the premises. 
(2)  An inspection form will be completed by the inspector. The customer shall be made aware of any corrective measures that may be required. 
(3)  All official letters of notification shall be sent to the customer indicating what corrective measures must be taken. 
(4)  Upon completion of the requirements in the notification letter, the customer shall immediately notify the inspector to schedule a date for re-inspection. 
(d)  Cross-connection records. 
(1)  The department shall maintain a written inventory of all backflow preventers that are in place on its system. This inventory shall include the location, type, manufacturer, model, size, and installation date of each backflow preventer. 
(2)  The department shall maintain backflow prevention records for a minimum of three years. These records shall include the most current hazard assessment; location and types of backflow protection and associated hazards; results of all backflow prevention assembly field testing and air gap inspections; and repairs made to, or replacement or relocation of, backflow protection. 
(e)  Procedures for dealing with backflow complaints and backflow incidents. 
(1)  The department shall keep backflow incident reports, and records of testing, repairs, inspections, or water quality relating to cross-connections/backflow incidents. 
(2)  Upon discovery of contamination of the public water supply from a cross-connection the Inspector shall immediately notify the following: 
a.  Director of the department; 
b.  Spalding County Health Department; 
c.  Georgia Environmental Protection Division. 
(3)  The responding individuals shall determine the extent of contamination, by taking samples for testing, and shall take appropriate measures to clear the contamination from the public water supply. After clearing the contaminate from the public water supply, the department shall perform a survey of the customer's lines to determine and eliminate the cause. A boiled water notice will be issued, if necessary, based upon identified contaminates from sample test results, if any, or lack of chlorine residual. The city shall have the right to disconnect the customer from the public water system and to require a backflow preventer to be installed, at the customer's cost, as a condition for continued service. 
(f)  Procedures for educating the public about cross-connection controls. At least once every three years the department shall conduct a public education activity aimed at improving general customer awareness about cross-connection control through methods such as: bill inserts, pamphlets or booklets, posters or billboards, public service announcements, articles or stories in the news media, seminars or workshops, or school lectures or presentations. Whenever a new service connection is made, or there is a switch in the customer of record, the department shall deliver to the new customer of record an educational pamphlet addressing the importance of the customer installing and/or maintaining anti-siphon toilet tank valves and hose bib vacuum breakers that conform to the Georgia State Minimum Standard Plumbing Code. 
(Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 11-25-2014)  
Sec. 94-305. - Notice to disconnect from public water system. 
Any person who now has cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes, or inter-connections in violation of this article shall be required, upon written notice from the director, to disconnect such prohibited connections from the city public water system. Depending on the nature of the connection found and risk hazard imposed, the director shall state in his notice the time within which the disconnection shall be completed. If the customer or person in control of the premises where a prohibited connection is found fails or refuses to disconnect such connection within the time specified, the director may cause disconnection to occur at the customer's service connection, including removal of the meter. No reconnection to the public water system shall be permitted or occur until the director is satisfied that corrective work has been performed that conforms to the Georgia State Minimum Standard Plumbing Code and certification from the customer that the work was performed by a state licensed plumber. 
(Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 11-25-2014)  
Sec. 94-306. - Notice on secondary sources. 
The drinking water supply provided by the city public water system shall be further protected from possible contamination as specified herein. Any water outlet which could be used for human consumption or for drinking water purposes and which is not supplied by the city public water system shall be labeled conspicuously in the following manner: 
————————————————————————————————— 
CAUTION: WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING 
————————————————————————————————— 
Said warning shall be on a sign or decal at or near the water outlet. The minimum sign or decal shall have black letters one inch high on a red background. 
(Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 11-25-2014)  
Sec. 94-307. - Enforcement. 
Any person who willfully fails or refuses to comply with the requirements of this article, after written notice of violation from the director, shall be cited to appear before the Municipal Court and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00; each day of continued violation, after citation, shall constitute a separate offense. 
Enforcement by citation before the Municipal Court is supplemental of and in addition to any action deemed necessary by the director to protect the city public water system, including disconnection of the customer at the point of service connection until a cross-connection, auxiliary, by-pass, or other prohibited interconnection is discontinued and the system conforms to the Georgia State Minimum Plumbing Code. If necessary, the director shall have the authority to seek injunctive relief in the Superior Court of Spalding County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 11-25-2014)  
Secs. 94-308—94-351. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - WATER CONSERVATION AND DROUGHT MANAGEMENT[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-05, § 1, adopted Nov. 23, 2010, repealed the former Art. VII, §§ 94-350—94-357, and enacted a new Art. VII as set out herein. The former Art. VII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 04-12, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 22, 2004. 
 
Sec. 94-352. - Goals and objectives. 
In furtherance of the state's policy to conserve water resources and demand management goals, the city, as a permitted water system operator, adopts the following goals and objectives: 
(a)  To assure that first priority is given to providing water for human consumption and sanitation; all other purposes shall be secondary; 
(b)  To control the rate of growth in overall water use so as to maximize the use of existing and planned water supply sources available to the city and its customers; 
(c)  To implement best management standards for controlling water loss in order to achieve the state's recommended standards; 
(d)  To reduce the upward trend of seasonal peak day demands that drive the costly expansion of water treatment, storage, and transmission facilities; and 
(e)  To provide an orderly process for reducing system-wide demands during periods of drought or other emergency water shortages. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
Sec. 94-353. - Year-round water conservation practices. 
(a)  All city water system (the "system") users are encouraged to exercise voluntary water conservation practices at all times of the year, regardless of drought conditions, water shortage or emergency condition. The city may periodically provide informational guidance and conservation tips to its users. 
(b)  All newly installed or substantially improved irrigation systems which use city water system water shall be equipped with automatic timers with rain or soil moisture sensors that activate to prevent operation of those systems while rain is falling and/or when soil moisture is adequate. 
(c)  Persons may irrigate outdoors daily for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, there shall be no limitations placed on the following outdoor water use activities: 
(1)  Commercial agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations adopted pursuant thereto; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division to reclaim waste water; 
(5)  Irrigation of personal food gardens; 
(6)  Irrigation of new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Handwatering with a hose with automatic cutoff or from a handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface waters by an owner or occupant of property on which such well or surface water is located; 
(10)  Irrigation of horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Irrigation of athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(d)  All other outdoor water use activities, other than landscape uses addressed in subsection (c) above, from connections to the city water system for all homes and businesses shall follow restrictions imposed by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, as from time to time amended, consistent with the level of drought (if any); Rules and Regulations of the State of Georgia, Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, Chapter 391-3-30, by express reference, is incorporated herein, together with the exemptions set forth therein. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
Sec. 94-354. - Drought or other water use restrictions. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-102, the director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources may, from time to time, impose by permit, administrative, or emergency order, additional use restrictions on the city water system. Persons are prohibited from using or consuming water from the city water system in violation of such restrictions or limitations. 
(b)  In addition thereto and supplemental thereof, water use restrictions may be imposed whenever the city water system cannot supply its customers with sufficient water to protect the public health and safety without substantial reductions in water demand. Whenever it is determined, in writing, by the system's consulting engineer that the system is unable or unlikely to continue meeting its customer demand without a substantial reduction in consumption, the city manager, upon application to and approval of the director of the environmental protection division, shall issue an administrative order imposing additional water use restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
Sec. 94-355. - Water use emergency. 
Any other circumstances, including service losses caused by failure of equipment or facilities, human error, weather, or natural disaster, which constrain the system's water production capacity to less than the current level of customer demand may constitute a water use emergency. In the event the city manager or his designee determines reasonable cause exists to declare a water use emergency, authority is hereby delegated to the city manager, under the criteria set forth above, to issue an administrative order imposing immediate use restrictions on all users of the city water system. Orders issued by the city manager under this section shall only restrict such nonessential uses as necessary to achieve system objectives, and may be modified, as needed, during a water use emergency to achieve the system's highest priority of providing water for human consumption and sanitation over all other water uses. An emergency order issued under this section shall only be good for a duration of seven days unless a variance is granted by the director of the environmental protection division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-7. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
Sec. 94-356. - Notice of mandatory water conservation practices, water use restrictions, and/or water use emergency. 
Customers and users of the city water system shall be given notice of water use restrictions by the best means available, including without limitation, inclusion of a notice in monthly utility bills and/or publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the system's service area. Public service announcements through television, radio and posting on the city's website, may be utilized. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
Sec. 94-357. - Enforcement of mandatory water conservation practices, water use restrictions, and water supply emergency orders. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person, firm, or corporation to use or permit the use of potable water from the city water system for any purpose or use restricted or prohibited by mandatory water conservation practices established hereunder, or by an administrative order imposing water use restrictions or a water use emergency as provided by this article. 
(b)  Violators shall be cited to appear before the Municipal Court of the city, or other court of appropriate jurisdiction within the system's customer service area, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine as set forth in section 1-12 of this Code, or, if applicable, charged upon state warrant with committing a misdemeanor as defined by general law. 
(c)  In addition thereto, in the sole discretion of the director of public utilities, a water use surcharge, in an amount double the customer's most recent monthly water bill, may be imposed on any customer for a first violation of this article; and a water use surcharge, in an amount triple the customer's most recent monthly water bill, may be imposed for a second violation of this article. For any subsequent violations within any 12-month period, water service shall be discontinued to any customer of the city water system that willfully or systematically violates restrictions or prohibitions on water usage after written notice from the director of the facts establishing such violation. When service has been discontinued under this section, service shall not be reinstated unless the customer posts a surety bond in the amount of $5,000.00, payable to the city, conditioned on faithful adherence to all water use policies and restrictions of the system. 
(d)  The city manager is hereby authorized, as necessary, to seek from any court of appropriate equitable jurisdiction, injunctive relief against any user of the city water system for summary abatement or remedying of appropriate conditions dangerous or prejudicial to the public health and safety, together with recovery of the costs and legal expenses thereof. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, § 1, 11-23-2010)  
Secs. 94-358—94-374. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - EASEMENT ACQUISITION POLICY 
 
Sec. 94-375. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to prescribe a procedure, pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A. § 22-1-9 (2), to waive the requirement that affected real property be appraised prior to the initiation of negotiations for acquisition, when the interest to be acquired is less than fee simple (i.e. an easement or lesser interest) and the just compensation for the acquisition is significantly likely to be of low fair market value. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 1, 2-24-2009)  
Sec. 94-376. - Procedure for easement acquisition; determination of minimum initial offer. 
(a)  The city shall identify the easement area required, together with any additional land area needed for temporary construction of the project, on final plans and specifications, prepared by a design professional in accordance with the general policies of the city for acquisition of real properties for public works projects and related purposes. A preliminary title examination shall be conducted for each parcel to identify its owner(s) of record and the parties interested therein, including lienholders and mortgagees. 
(b)  Using the current Spalding County tax assessment for the affected parcel, the city shall use the appraised value of the land only (exclusive of any improvements), as its basis to calculate a unit value (for example, dollars per square foot) for the parcel as a whole. 
(c)  For a permanent easement, the city shall multiply the unit value (i.e. dollar per square foot) by the approximate number of units (i.e. square footage) in the easement; 40 percent of the resulting amount shall constitute the minimum initial offer for the permanent easement (Note: 40 percent represents the value of the easement in relation to the fair market value of the land in fee simple). 
(d)  Where additional land area is needed during the project construction period, a temporary construction easement shall be obtained, using the method set forth in subpart (c) above, provided, however, the percentage multiplier shall be ten percent (representing annual fair rental return of land area affected). The resulting amount shall constitute the minimum initial offer for the temporary construction easement. 
(e)  In establishing the minimum initial offer to be made to the property owner, by resolution, the commission may take into consideration any factors unique to the particular parcel from which the easement is taken. The amount established by this method shall be the minimum just compensation offered and shall form the basis for negotiations with property owners and interested parties. 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 1, 2-24-2009; Ord. No. 13-06, § 1, 5-14-2013)  
Sec. 94-377. - Procedure for easement acquisition; presentation of options to property owner(s) and interested parties. 
(a)  It is the intention of the board of commissioners that the acquisition of an easement or less than fee simple interest in real property generally follow the policies and practices set forth in "The Landowner's Bill of Rights and Private Property Protection Act", Ga. Laws 2006, Act 444, as codified in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A., except for the waiver of appraisal when the resulting fair market value of a lesser land interest is likely to be low; provided, however, such policies shall not be applicable to condemnations brought pursuant to Title 32, O.C.G.A. 
(b)  The process to acquire a required easement shall be initiated by letter from the city manager to the land owner(s), with copies to other interested parties as shown upon the title certificate, setting forth the following options: 
(1)  The right of the owner(s) to request the city obtain an independent fee appraisal, which shall become the minimum offer for just compensation (NOTE: this could be lower than the minimum initial offer established in the foregoing section of this article); 
(2)  The election of the owner(s) to negotiate based upon the minimum initial offer as established by resolution of the commission in accordance with the foregoing section of this article; or 
(3)  The opportunity for the owner(s) to donate the required easement and receive a letter from the city acknowledging receipt of the donation, based either on the established initial offer or actual appraised value. 
(c)  The letter shall include a copy of the "Landowners Notice of Rights", as published by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, in its most current version. 
(d)  When easements and interests in land less than fee simple are acquired in accordance with this article, the city attorney shall cause the easement or legal instrument to be recorded in the land records of the county and a final title certification to issue, reflecting the interests sought by the city were properly obtained. Upon recommendation of the city attorney, the city manager may procure a policy of title insurance for such easement(s). 
(Ord. No. 09-01, § 1, 2-24-2009)  
Chapter 98 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; environment, ch. 42; parks and recreation, ch. 62; planning, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; municipal street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 98-1—98-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TREES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-04, § 1, adopted March 12, 2002, revised art. II of this chapter in its entirety. Prior to revision, art. II, §§ 98-31—98-45, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1968 Code, App. 7, §§ 1—15. Diagrams and illustrations within Ord. No. 02-04 and the administrative guidelines for tree conservation and planting have not been included herein, but may be found attached to Ord. No. 02-04, on file in the office of the city clerk. 
 
Sec. 98-31. - Findings. 
The city is blessed with a diversity and abundance of trees and shrubs on public and private lands. Such trees and shrubs are of economic value to the city and make it a desirable place for both residents and visitors. The appearance of the city to passersby along city streets contributes to the economic prosperity of the city. Trees are proven producers of oxygen, a necessary element to the survival of man, and appreciably reduce carbon dioxide content in the air. Trees collect dust and other particulate airborne pollutants. They transpire considerable amounts of water each day. Their root systems stabilize the ground water. Trees play an important part in community-wide soil conservation and erosion control, and reduce stormwater runoff. They contribute food and shelter for wildlife in urban and suburban environments. They provide shade and reduce the ground temperature in wooded areas, plus provide windbreaks, visual and sound barriers. Trees have an economic and aesthetic value to the city. Trees increase property values, can positively affect an area economically, and beautify the landscape. Furthermore, certain streets have historically constituted significant and attractive tree-lined corridors, which have contributed to a realization of increased property values and general improvement of corresponding neighborhoods. 
The age of the city's urban forest, coupled with new growth and development in the city, often necessitates the removal of trees, shrubs, and soils, thereby contributing to urban forest depletion. It is necessary to protect and manage trees and their habitat in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, § 1(1), 3-12-2002)  
Sec. 98-32. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, through proper care and policy, the existing urban forest in the city, by regulating and controlling the planting, conservation, and replacement of trees and shrubbery on public lands within the city, thereby maintaining and enhancing the quality of life for which the city is noted; to reconfirm that the public lands of this city and all trees and other woody vegetation thereon are and shall remain the sole and exclusive property of all of the citizens of this community for their use and enjoyment; to conserve and protect said public lands and vegetation from destruction, damage, conversion or abuse for the benefit of ourselves and future generations; to encourage the citizens of the community to conserve and respect our urban forests; to protect and enhance the city's tree lined corridors, and to encourage the replacement of trees on public and private lands in order to maintain this valuable resource as an integral part of this community's environment. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, § 1(2), 3-12-2002)  
Sec. 98-33. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a)  As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings as defined in this article. Terms not defined herein shall have the same meanings as found in most dictionaries, where consistent with the context. The terms must, will, and shall are mandatory in nature, indicating that an action has to be done. The term may is permissive and allows discretion regarding an action. When consistent with the context, words used in the singular number include the plural, and those used in the plural number include singular. Words used in the present tense include the future. The word developer includes a firm, corporation, partnership, association, institution, or person. The word lot includes the words plot and parcel. The word building includes the word structure. The words used or occupied as applied to any land or building include the words intended, arranged, or designed, to be used or occupied. 
(b)  For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
Administrative guidelines means a written guideline incorporated into this article by reference, as may be adopted, amended, altered or revised hereafter which constitutes detailed standards and rules for implementation of this article. 
Buffer means an area reserved from development or other use to achieve a visual barrier between the use on the lot and adjacent lots and uses. This area may consist of trees, shrubs, grass, fences, or some combination thereof, and may be combined with stream buffers. 
Caliper means a standard trunk diameter measurement for trees taken six inches above the ground for up to and including four-inch caliper measurements, and 12 inches above the ground for larger size trees. 
City arborist means professional tree expert retained, contracted for or employed by the city. No provision hereof shall be deemed unenforceable due to the absence of a city arborist. 
Clump means A cluster of trees, generally with stems or trunks located not more than five feet apart, which is to remain undisturbed by a proposed development, and may be so designated on plans submitted for approval. 
Critical root zone (CRZ) means a circular region measured outward from a tree trunk representing the essential area of the roots that must be maintained for the tree's survival. The critical root zone is one foot of the radial distance for every inch of the tree's DBH. 
Diameter breast height (DBH) means the diameter of the tree at 4½ feet above average grade. 
Drip line means a vertical line extending from the outermost edge of the tree canopy or shrub branch to the ground. 
Drop crotch pruning means the substantial reduction of a tree's crown volume by the selective removal of heavier branches. 
Fine pruning means the removal of dead, dying, diseased, interfering, obstructing and weak branches, as well as selective thinning. 
Ground cover means a prostrate plant growing less than two feet in height at maturity that is grown for ornamental purposes. Ground covers are used as an alternative to grasses. On slopes, ground covers control erosion while eliminating the maintenance of mowing on hillsides. Many ground covers survive in poor soils, shade, and other adverse conditions. 
Island means a raised planting area (in road and parking area designs), usually curbed, and placed to guide traffic, separate lanes, limit paving (impervious surface), conserve existing vegetation and/or increase aesthetic quality. 
Permit means a written authorization or certificate approved/issued by the department of public works administration to allow an applicant to plant, cut, prune, or remove trees on public property (not to be confused with an occupation tax certificate or contractor's license). 
Person means any person, partnership, firm, corporation or other legal entity including public entities other than the city or any department or agent thereof. 
Planting plan means a site plan with drawings by the applicant or his/her agent with details of tree locations, tree removals, tree replanting, with each tree designated as to species or common name on each parcel for which work is proposed under this article. Plans shall comply with this tree ordinance and administrative guidelines. 
Private lands means all real property lying within the city limits, less and except lands hereinafter designated and defined as "public lands." 
Public lands means all real property owned by the city, including but not limited to, land lying between private property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or ways within the city. "Public lands" further includes all real property leased by the city or under the city's direct control, exclusive of utility easements on private property. 
Pruning standards means generally accepted standards for pruning as defined in the current edition of pruning standards by the American Society of Consulting Arborists. 
Regulated tree means a regulated tree shall be any self-supporting woody perennial plant, which has a DBH of two inches or more, and usually has one main stem or trunk. It may appear to have several stems or trunks as in some species of trees, but must have one defined main stem (trunk) of a DBH of two inches. 
Replacement trees means trees which are planted pursuant to this article to replace trees which are removed for any reason. A replacement tree shall be the largest commonly available transplantable tree of the same species as the tree it replaces unless approval of a change of species is approved by the tree board. 
Right-of-way means that property located within and adjoining the streets, roads and highways within the city, which rights-of-way are owned by the city, county or the state or are otherwise maintained by the city, county or the state. 
Remove (including removing and removal ) means the cutting down of any regulated tree and all other acts which cause the actual removal or the effective removal through damaging, poisoning or other direct or indirect actions resulting in the death of a tree. 
Shrub means a woody perennial plant differing from a perennial herb by its persistent and woody stem. 
(1)  Large shrub means an upright plant growing ten to 20 feet in height at maturity that is planted for ornamental or screening purposes. 
(2)  Medium shrub means a plant growing five to ten feet in height at maturity. 
(3)  Small shrub means a plant growing less than five feet at maturity. 
Street tree/park tree means a tree planted or naturally grown on public right-of-way or in a park owned by the city. 
Topping means the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. 
Tree means a highly compartmented, perennial, woody, shedding plant that is usually tall, single-stemmed, and long-lived. 
(1)  Deciduous means those trees that annually lose their leaves. 
(2)  Evergreen means those trees that retain foliage throughout the year. 
(3)  Ornamental tree means a small to medium tree, growing 15 to 40 in height at maturity, that is planted for aesthetic purposes such as colorful flowers, interesting bark, or fall foliage. 
(4)  Shade tree means a large tree growing to over 40 feet in height at maturity, usually deciduous, that is planted to provide shade. 
Tree board means the body established by this article for the purpose of oversight of the administration and enforcement of this article and providing recommendations to the city commission. 
Tree protection means a barrier constructed around trees at construction sites sufficient to prevent damage or injury to tree trunks, limbs, and roots. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, § 1(3), 3-12-2002) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 98-34. - City arborist. 
(a)  Creation of position. The position of city arborist is hereby created. The city arborist may be employed by the city on a full-time, part-time or contract basis or the city may designate by contract with another jurisdiction or private entity a person to serve as city arborist. The arborist shall operate under the department of public works administration and shall be provided the proper support and equipment necessary for the performance of the arborist's required duties by the department of public works administration. 
(b)  Responsibilities. The city arborist is responsible for the proper planting, removal, care and maintenance of trees and shrubs growing on city-owned property or city controlled right-of-way in accordance with this article and the administrative guidelines. The city arborist shall perform such other and additional duties as prescribed from time to time by the board of commissioners, tree board, and director of public works. 
(c)  Qualifications. The arborist shall possess a bachelor's degree in biology, botany, horticulture, or forestry or a minimum of three year's experience in arboriculture. Experience must be accompanied by certification through the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA), or if employed without certification, it must be obtained within two years of employment. Familiarity with proper pruning procedures, fertilization practices, soil properties, diagnosis and treatment for insect pests and diseases, cabling and general tree biology is essential. A current pesticide applicator's license is required and must be maintained. Knowledge of modern instrumentation and computer generated programs for the management of urban forests is desirable. 
(d)  Reports. The arborist shall make written reports to the tree board as necessary for the deliberations and decisions of the board. Reports will be incorporated as part of the official minutes of the board. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, § 1(4), 3-12-2002)  
Sec. 98-35. - Tree board. 
Whenever reference is made in this article to the tree board, such term shall refer to the environmental council, established under section 42-1 of this Code, who shall for all purposes be the successor to the tree board heretofore existing. Any appointment of members to a tree board created under the predecessor of this Code provision is hereby rescinded. All duties of a tree board found in this article shall be duly performed by the environmental council. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, § 1(5), 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 06-02, § 1, 6-13-2006; Ord. No. 13-07, § 2(a), 5-28-2013)  
Sec. 98-36. - Administrative guidelines. 
(a)  The tree board shall draft or recommend administrative guidelines for tree conservation and planting within the city. Additional changes to the administrative guidelines may be drafted and recommended as needed. The guidelines shall be submitted to the board of commissioners for its approval. These guidelines, when approved as provided for herein, shall continue in force and effect until modified or repealed, and shall be considered as a part of this article and are enforceable as such. 
(b)  The administrative guidelines shall provide for the conservation and planting of trees on public lands within the city and all matters relating thereto including, but not limited to, the requirements for planting and maintaining trees within the city, limitations on paving public lands for driveways or parking, use of pesticides, applications for grading, building and change of use, permitting, development, and similar matters affecting the city's urban forest. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, § 1(6), 3-12-2002) 
Editor's note— New administrative guidelines for tree conservation and planting, recommended by the tree board, were adopted pursuant to Ordinance Number 02-04, adopted March 12, 2002. A copy of the guidelines is on file in the office of the city clerk.  
Sec. 98-37. - Applicability. 
The terms and provisions of this article shall apply to all public lands. The provisions of this article shall not limit the applicability of the buffering provisions of the city zoning ordinance. The terms and provisions of this article shall be supplemental to any requirements imposed by state law. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, § 1(7), 3-12-2002)  
Sec. 98-38. - Permits. 
(a)  Before any person removes, destroys, cuts, sprays, prunes or plants any tree or shrub on public lands or performs any work or function which results in disturbing, digging into, compacting or displacing property, or contracts with another person or corporation to perform such acts on public lands, a written permit shall be obtained from the director of public works or his designee. Such permit shall be in addition to all other permits, authorizations and procedures required by law for work within or along public rights-of-way, including the state highway system or on other public property. 
(b)  Application for a permit shall be made to the director of public works on such forms as have been approved for such purpose. All applications shall be accompanied by a full set of plans indicating the scope of the work to be performed and showing such detail as is necessary to determine compliance with this article and the administrative guidelines. All applications for permit shall be submitted at least 14 days prior to the date of the proposed activity. The director of public works may designate the city arborist or other staff to review such applications and make a recommendation on issuance. 
(c)  All applications meeting the standards of this article, city plans and the administrative guidelines shall be approved. In the event that the application or plans submitted in support thereof fail to comply with the provisions of this article, city plans or the administrative guidelines, then the director of public works shall deny the permit in writing, notifying the applicant of the reasons for denial. In the event that the application for permit covers activity differing from approved guidelines and plans but appearing in the sole discretion of the director of public works to be beneficial to the city, the director of public works may, in lieu of denial, refer the application to the tree board for consideration. 
(d)  The board of commissioners hereby establishes a permit fee in accordance with the schedule attached to Ordinance Number 02-04 as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference for issuance of tree permits; provided, however, no permit fee shall be charged for permits issued to not-for-profit conservation organizations. 
(e)  The director of public works shall make a monthly report to the tree board of all permit applications and permits issued or denied under this article. Once trees have been planted, removed, cut, sprayed or pruned, pursuant to a permit, such action shall also be reported to the tree board at its next meeting. 
(f)  Permits shall not be required for the city, other licensed public and private utilities or the state department of transportation as long as such entities adopt and adhere to the conservation and protection requirements contained in this article and the administrative guidelines. Public and private utilities including CATV, water, sewer, etc. shall be responsible for proper pruning and cutting of trees, including roots, according to this article and the administrative guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, § 1(8), 3-12-2002) 
Editor's note— Exhibit A, referred to in subsection 98-38(d) above has not been included within this Code, but may be found attached to Ord. No. 02-04, adopted March 12, 2002, on file in the office of the city clerk.  
Sec. 98-39. - Standards for protection of trees on public lands. 
(a)  Public tree care. 
(1)  The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, shrubs, and other plants within the right-of-way of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, on all public lands, and on all city utility easements, as may be necessary to insure public safety, to conserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of the city, or to further the intent of this article. 
(2)  The tree board may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree, shrub or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which, by reason of its nature, is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is infected with any injurious fungus, insect, or other pest. 
(3)  The planting of shade trees by adjacent property owners on public rights-of-way is allowable provided that the selection and location of trees is in accordance with the provisions of this article and the administrative guidelines, is otherwise in conformity with city plans, and poses no risk to existing utility facilities. Planting of trees and/or shrubs on public lands other than rights-of-way adjacent to a property owner's property, may be permitted by the director of public works where such planting conforms to specific planting plans previously adopted by the city or on a case by case basis in the discretion of the tree board, upon proper application, and upon a finding by the tree board that such planting would be in accordance with the city's overall plans for development and use of the property at issue, would not pose a hazard to any existing trees, shrubbery, utility infrastructure or buildings and that the proposed planting is in the best interest of the city and is consistent with the aims of this article. 
(b)  Tree topping/cutting/tree attachments. It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public lands. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions, where other pruning practices are impractical, may be exempted from this article at the determination of the tree board and topped or cut by city employees or city designated contractors. Likewise, it shall be a violation of this article for any person to attach to any tree on public lands any rope, wire, chain, sign, or other devices whatsoever, other than devices approved by the city arborist for the protection of newly planted trees. 
(c)  Tree pruning. 
(1)  Pruning of trees on public lands shall be limited to city employees and city engaged contractors and shall be done in accordance with the administrative guidelines. 
(2)  Pruning specifications are as follows: 
a.  Fine pruning. Fine pruning is appropriate for trees with minor root damage (less than or equal to 20 percent of the critical root zone disturbed), and/or for the maintenance of health, appearance, and safety of non-disturbed trees. 
b.  Drop crotch pruning. This practice is to be undertaken only where moderate to severe root damage has occurred, when necessary. 
(d)  Trimming responsibility for trees and other vegetation. 
(1)  The owner or occupant of property adjacent to public rights-of-way or other public lands, upon whose property trees, shrubs, flowers, or vines are located that have branches, limbs, trunks, or other parts projecting into the public rights-of-way or onto other public lands, shall be responsible for pruning such branches, limbs, trunks or other projecting parts so they do not interfere with the free and safe passage along the public rights-of-way by pedestrians and vehicular traffic. 
(2)  If the owner of private property does not keep the tree growth, limbs and shrubbery from projecting into or on public lands, then the city arborist shall have the authority to order removal of such projecting growth. The order shall be acted upon by the owner within 15 days from the time of the receipt of the notice, which shall be hand delivered or sent by registered mail, return receipt requested. If, after 15 days, the owner has not responded or acted to remove the projecting growth, then the public works director or his designee shall have the authority to enter upon the owner's property to perform the work and the cost of such work shall constitute a lien on the owner's property. Provided that where dead, injured or diseased trees or projections therefrom pose an imminent threat to the public safety, the city may enter onto private property and trim or remove such trees or portions thereof as to secure the public from harm, providing such notice to the owner as practicable. 
(e)  Removal of stumps. All stumps of trees on public lands shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. The site shall be immediately filled and the surface cover replaced with hay and seed to dress up the right-of-way or other land. All persons performing stump removal on public lands shall be responsible for compliance with the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-9-1 et seq. 
(f)  Tree conservation and care during construction. Existing public trees and shrubs shall be conserved. A tree conservation plan shall be submitted for review and approval prior to any development of public lands to show that there will be no disturbance in the critical root zone (CRZ) of existing trees protected by this article. A disturbance is considered to include but not be limited to, trenching, placing, backfill in the CRZ, driving or parking equipment in the CRZ, and dumping of trash, oil, paint or other materials detrimental to plant health in the close proximity of the tree(s). Standards for identification of trees during development shall be as prescribed in the city development ordinance. Should any tree or shrub designated for conservation in the tree conservation plan die within two years of planting, the permit holder shall replace sufficient landscaping to meet the tree conservation plan. Replacement trees shall be a minimum of 2.5 inches in caliper for a shade tree and a minimum of eight feet in height for an ornamental tree (eight feet from the top of root ball to top of tree) at the time of planting. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, § 1(9), 3-12-2002)  
Sec. 98-40. - Hazardous trees. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner of the property wherein or whereupon a public hazard exists due to dead or diseased trees or limbs thereof, obstruction of vision from vegetation at street intersections or driveways, or interference of vegetation with city utility structures, to abate the hazard by removing or trimming the offending vegetation. Should said owner, after due notice by the city using the best means of notice available, fail or refuse to remove or trim the offending tree or vegetation, the condition shall be deemed a public nuisance and abated by order of the municipal court pursuant to Chapter 42, Article II of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
(b)  Trees on private property whose roots may damage sidewalks, curbs or public streets by causing them to buckle or crack, or whose roots may enter into public sewers or water mains, shall also be public hazards, which shall be deemed a public nuisance and abated by order of the municipal court pursuant to Chapter 42, Article II of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, § 1(10), 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 13-07, § 2(b), 5-28-2013)  
Sec. 98-41. - Appeals. 
In the event any person is dissatisfied with a decision of the tree board or any order of the director of public works or city arborist involving the application or interpretation of this article, such person may make a written request through the director of public works to the tree board for review by the city manager. Such application for review shall be filed in writing within ten calendar days of the determination from which review is sought. The matter shall be set for hearing within 30 days of request. The city manager shall hear evidence and shall render a decision on the appeal within ten business days of completion of the hearing. The decision of the city manager shall be a final decision of the city, reviewable only by writ of certiorari to superior court. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, § 1(11), 3-12-2002)  
Sec. 98-42. - Emergencies. 
In the event of a public emergency resulting from tornado, wind storm, flood or other extreme environmental conditions or civil disorder, the public works director may request the emergency suspension of one or more provisions of this article. Such request shall be submitted to the board of commissioners which may pass an emergency ordinance modifying the provisions of this article with respect to specific requirements and for a designated period of time. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, § 1(12), 3-12-2002)  
Sec. 98-43. - Penalties and violations. 
(a)  The director of public works shall be charged with enforcement of the provisions of this article and may cite any person for violation of this article, requiring such person to appear in the municipal court and answer such charge of violation. Each tree or shrub affected by any person purported to have violated this article shall constitute a separate violation for purposes of enforcing this article, and a separate citation or notice shall be prepared for each such tree or shrub. Upon conviction or acceptance of a plea of guilty or nolo contendre, the judge of the municipal court may impose penalties to the maximum extent allowable under the City Charter and, in addition, may order restitution to the city for violations involving loss of or damage to trees on public lands. 
(b)  In addition to penalties provided by the municipal court for criminal violation of this article, the director of public works, upon approval by the city commission, may seek civil damages in any court of competent jurisdiction for loss of or damage to trees on public lands and may further bring actions for injunction or other equitable relief to prevent further violation. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, § 1(13), 3-12-2002)  
Chapter 102 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; traffic and vehicles, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Wrecker driver required to remove glass and parts of vehicle being towed, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-276; application of state traffic laws to persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-4; reciprocal agreements as to operation of vehicles registered in other states inapplicable to motor vehicles for hire, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-95. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 102-1—102-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TOWING AND STORAGE FIRMS 
 
Sec. 102-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Public highway means every public street, road, highway, or thoroughfare of any kind within the territorial jurisdiction of the city. 
Secure impoundment lot means a fenced enclosure within which impounded vehicles shall be stored pending recovery by the legal owner, or other disposition in the manner provided by law. All requirements of the zoning ordinance of the city shall apply to impoundment lots; provided, fencing shall be designed so as to prevent unauthorized entry and removal of vehicles without the operator's consent. 
Towing and storage firm means any person holding a permit issued by the state public service commission, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-2-1 et seq., to engage in the business of towing abandoned, disabled, and wrecked vehicles or otherwise rendering assistance to disabled or wrecker vehicles, including the impoundment and storage thereof, for profit. 
(Code 1968, § 23-14) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 102-32. - Conduct of business. 
No person shall conduct business as a towing and storage firm within the city without holding a license issued by the city and paying the requisite licensing fees for the current calendar year. Such license shall be in addition to registration of the business with the state public service commission. It shall be the duty of any person licensed under this article to remove a motor vehicle from public property at the request of a law enforcement officer, or from private property at the request of the property owner, to comply strictly with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 40-11-2. 
(Code 1968, § 23-15)  
Sec. 102-33. - Licensing of businesses. 
Each applicant for a license to operate a towing and storage firm within the city shall make application to the licensing division of the city finance department and receive a license before engaging in such business. Applications shall be made on forms provided by the licensing division and shall be accompanied by tender of an annual licensing fee in the amount as set out in the schedule of fees and charges; provided, however, for licenses issued after July 1 of any year, the fee shall be one-half the annual fee. Licenses shall not be assignable, transferable or prorated. All licenses shall expire at midnight on December 31 of each year; renewal applications by existing licensees shall be filed on or before December 1 of the current year. License fees paid under this section are regulatory and shall be assessed in addition to the payment of occupation taxes of the business. 
(Code 1968, § 23-16) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26.  
Sec. 102-34. - Qualifications for license. 
(a)  Every applicant for a license under this article shall present to the licensing division a current certificate of registration with the state public service commission, together with a certificate of insurance showing that the commission's liability insurance requirements have been satisfied. In addition, the applicant shall designate on the application form the complete name, address and telephone number(s) of the owner of the business, indicating therein its form of business organization. Where the business is to be conducted by other than a sole proprietor, the applicant shall register with the city an agent for service (individual), a street address (no post office box), and a telephone number or numbers where the agent can be contacted on a 24-hour basis. It shall be the continuing duty of the licensee to keep current address and telephone numbers on file with the city. Any applicant denied a license shall be given written notice by the city manager of the reason for denial and shall be entitled to an opportunity to be heard before the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Every applicant for a license under this article shall have a place of business within the city at which location vehicles will be impounded. Prior to the issuance of any license, the location shall be inspected by the city's designated representatives to ensure all requirements for a secure impoundment lot have been met. Such inspection, and a written report thereof, shall be filed with the licensing division within five business days of the acceptance of an application. All applicants shall be of good character as evidenced by having no conviction of a felony involving moral turpitude within the past five years. For purposes of ascertaining the applicant's criminal history, if any, all applicants shall submit to fingerprinting at the city police department at the time of applying for the license. For purposes of this section, each owner of ten percent or more interest in the business shall be investigated. 
(c)  Upon issuance, the license shall be prominently posted within the licensee's place of business and the licensee's name and license number shall be painted or displayed on each wrecker or tow truck used within the city. 
(Code 1968, § 23-17)  
Sec. 102-35. - Revocation of license. 
It shall be the duty of all licensees to report promptly to the city any loss of qualification for a license or any change of condition which renders the licensee ineligible to engage in the operation of a towing and storage lot within the city. Any violation of the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 40-11-2 shall be grounds for revocation. Upon written notice by the city manager, mailed to the licensee or its registered agent for service at such address as furnished to the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, stating the grounds for revocation, the board of commissioners shall conduct an informal hearing, affording the licensee fair opportunity to be heard. Upon finding substantial evidence that cause exists, the board of commissioners may revoke the license for the remainder of its stated term. Upon revocation, a licensee shall immediately cease operation of its towing and storage business within the city. 
(Code 1968, § 23-18)  
Sec. 102-36. - Fees for licensees. 
(a)  The maximum reasonable costs of removal, relocation, and storage pursuant to this article shall be compensatory, as such term is used in the public utility rate-making procedures, and shall be established annually by the board of commissioners, by resolution, on or before January 1. No person licensed under this article to operate a towing and storage firm within the city shall impose, assess or collect rates, fees and charges prohibited by this section. No storage fees shall be charged for the first 24-hour period running from the time the vehicle is removed from the public or private property and no fees shall be allowed for the removal and storage of any motor vehicle towed or stored in violation of O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13 or O.C.G.A. § 40-11-2. 
(b)  On or before November 1 of each year, any person holding a license issued under this article may file with the city manager a proposed schedule of revised rates and charges allowed by this article. Notice of the filing shall be published once a week for two weeks in The Griffin Daily News, advertising the date, time, and location of a public hearing to be held before the board of commissioners. At the hearing, any affected citizen may be heard as to the proposed rate revisions. After concluding the hearing, the board shall act upon the rate request. Copies of the current rate schedule shall be posted conspicuously in each licensee's place of business and at the city manager's office. 
(c)  Where a proposed rate increase is contested, the city shall have the right to require licensees to submit financial statements, tax returns, and such other information as is needed to justify or deny the rate proposal. To the extent allowed by law, the board of commissioners and city staff shall treat such data as confidential and proprietary information. 
(Code 1968, § 23-19)  
Sec. 102-37. - Private trespass towing; signs in commercial areas. 
Within the city any person entitled to the possession of any parcel or space of private real property shall have the right to cause to be removed from the property any motor vehicle or trespassing personal property found thereon; provided, however, a person entitled to the possession of an off-street parking area or vacant lot within a commercially zoned classification under the city's zoning ordinance shall have the right to remove a vehicle or trespassing personal property parked thereon after the regular activity on such property is concluded for the day only if there is conspicuously posted in the area of each driveway or other ways providing access to the off-street parking area, the location of which must be approved by the city's police department, that any vehicle or trespassing personal property parked thereon which is not authorized to be in such area may be removed at the expense of the owner along with information as to where the vehicle or trespassing personal property may be recovered, the cost of such recovery, and information regarding the form of payment. 
(Code 1968, § 23-20)  
Sec. 102-38. - City rotation list. 
Every licensee under this article shall be eligible to serve on a rotation list maintained by the police department to provide towing and storage of motor vehicles from public property. There is hereby delegated to the chief of the police the duty to promulgate reasonable rules governing licensees serving on the rotation list. Any licensee may opt out of serving on the rotation list by giving written notice to the police chief. 
(Code 1968, § 23-21)  
Secs. 102-39—102-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-12, § 1, adopted August 11, 2015, retroactive to July 1, 2015 , repealed Art. III, §§ 102-61—102-102, which pertained to taxicabs and derived from Code 1968, §§ 23-38—23-79. 
 
Secs. 102-61—102-102. - Reserved.  
APPENDIX B - RETIREMENT BENEFITS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the retirement benefits plan for city employees, as adopted by the board of commissioners on June 13, 1995 as ordinance number 95-8, and published in the 1968 City Code of Griffin, Georgia, as chapter 19A. The section number designations utilized in the 1968 Code have been retained. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; planning, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Authority to establish retirement systems for municipal employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(4); authority of municipality to provide insurance, retirement and pension benefits, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4; social security coverage for employees of the state and political subdivisions of the state, O.C.G.A. § 47-18-1 et seq.; Public Retirement Systems Standards Law, O.C.G.A. § 47-20-1 et seq.; Georgia municipal employees benefit system, O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq.; authority to maintain and modify retirement or pension systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(14). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 19A-1. - Definitions. 
The following definitions and the definitions contained in section 19A-3.1 apply for purposes of this plan: 
Actuarial equivalent. A benefit or amount that replaces another and has the same value as the benefit or amount it replaces, based on actuarial assumptions as adopted by the board of trustees and set forth below: 
Mortality: 1965 Projected Annuity Mortality Table, as developed and named by The Wyatt Company from published table TSA IV with Scale C projections. 
Interest: Eight percent per annum, compounded annually. 
Actuary. The firm employing an "enrolled actuary" as defined in section 7701(a)(35) of the Internal Revenue Code appointed by the board of trustees under section 19A-7.6. 
Aid fund. The city fund established, maintained and raised in order to provide benefits as described in article VIII. 
Annuity starting date. The first date as of which distribution of retirement benefits (other than total disability benefits) to a participant is to begin under section 19A-4.2 or the first date as of which distribution of preretirement death benefits to a beneficiary is to begin under section 19A-5.3. 
Average annual compensation. A participant's average compensation during the five consecutive calendar years of employment in which the participant received the greatest aggregate amount of compensation. 
Basic compensation. An amount dependent on the participant's year of birth which is set forth in the table below. 
BASIC COMPENSATION TABLE 
Year of Birth 	Annual Basic 
Compensation 	Year of Birth 	Annual Basic 
Compensation 
1903 	$4,944.00 	1928 	$ 6,864.00 
1904 	5,160.00 	1929 	6,900.00 
1905 	5,352.00 	1930 	6,984.00 
1906 	5,520.00 	1931 	7,080.00 
1907 	5,652.00 	1932 	7,176.00 
1908 	5,784.00 	1933 	7,260.00 
1909 	5,892.00 	1934 	7,332.00 
1910 	6,000.00 	1935 	7,416.00 
1911 	6,084.00 	1936 	7,500.00 
1912 	6,168.00 	1937 	7,572.00 
1913 	6,240.00 	1938 	7,656.00 
1914 	6,312.00 	1939 	7,728.00 
1915 	6,372.00 	1940 	7,764.00 
1916 	6,432.00 	1941—1961 	7,800.00 
1917 	6,480.00 	1962 	11,450.00 
1918 	6,528.00 	1963 	15,100.00 
1919 	6,576.00 	1964 	18,750.00 
1920 	6,612.00 	1965 	22,400.00 
1921 	6,660.00 	1966 	26,050.00 
1922 	6,696.00 	1967 	29,700.00 
1923 	6,720.00 	1968 	33,350.00 
1924 	6,756.00 	1969 	37,000.00 
1925 	6,792.00 	1970 	40,650.00 
1926 	6,817.00 	1971 and later 	44,300.00 
1927 	6,840.00 		
 
Beneficiary. A person who is entitled to receive distributions under this plan upon or after the death of a participant. The participant shall name a designated beneficiary upon becoming vested in a plan benefit. If no such beneficiary is named upon the participant's death and benefits are payable, the plan benefits shall be paid to the deceased participant's estate. 
Board of trustees. The committee established under article VII whose members are to serve without pay and whose duties are enumerated in article VII. 
City. The City of Griffin, Georgia, as governed by the elected city commissioners. 
Compensation. Annual cash earnings based on the city pay scale, including longevity pay but excluding overtime pay. Perquisites or allowances for use of car or house rent are not included for pension purposes. 
For purposes of article III, compensation shall mean compensation as that term is used in section 415(b)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
An employee's compensation shall not exceed the larger of (a) $235,840.00, or (b) the limitation on compensation described in section 401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue Code, which for 1994 is $150,000.00, and after that date is adjusted by the U.S. Department of Treasury for increases in the cost of living in accordance with section 401(a)(17)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
For purposes of applying the section 401(A)(17) limitations of the prior sentences, the family aggregation rules of section 414(q)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code shall apply, except that the term "family" shall include only the participant's spouse and his or her lineal descendants who have not attained age 19 before the last day of the plan year. 
If as a result of the family aggregation rules, compensation exceeds the 401(a)(17) limitation, then the limitation shall be prorated among the affected individuals in proportion to each such individual's compensation (prior to application of the limit). 
Defined benefit plan. An employee benefit plan that (a) is maintained by the city, (b) is qualified under section 401 of the Internal Revenue Code and (c) is not a defined contribution plan. 
Defined contribution plan. An employee benefit plan that (a) is maintained by the city, (b) is qualified under section 401 of the Internal Revenue Code and (c) provides for an individual account for each participant and for benefits based solely on the amounts credited to those accounts. 
Effective date. Originally March 27, 1941; restated as of July 1, 1995. 
Employee. An employee who is employed by the city on a regular full-time basis. 
Employer. The City of Griffin, Georgia, as governed by the elected city commissioners. 
Internal Revenue Code. The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as it may from time to time be amended or supplemented. References to any section of the Internal Revenue Code shall be to that section as it may be renumbered, amended, supplemented or reenacted. 
Investment manager. Anyone designated by resolution of the board of trustees (article VII) who (a) is granted the power to manage, acquire, or dispose of any asset of the plan, (b) acknowledges in writing that it is a fiduciary with respect to the plan and (c) is (1) an investment adviser registered under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940, (2) a bank (as defined in the Investment Advisers Act of 1940) or (3) an insurance company qualified under the laws of more than one state to manage the assets of employee benefit plans. 
Investment policy. The board of trustees shall be authorized to invest and reinvest the funds in their hands in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 47-1-12, which powers by reference are expressly incorporated as if fully set out herein, and is further authorized to participate in the joint municipal employees benefit system, pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 47, ch. 5. 
Limitation year. The calendar year. 
Normal form of payment. An annuity payable monthly for five years certain and for life thereafter. 
Normal retirement date. The date that an employee completes the requirements of either [subsection] (a) or (b) below: 
(a)  Completion of a 25-year period of service and attainment of age 55; 
(b)  Completion of a five-year period of service and attainment of age 65. 
In addition, employees who were participants during the period of time that the plan required employee contributions must complete those previously required terms before his or her normal retirement date or the normal retirement benefit will be reduced as described in [sub]section 19A-2.2(c). 
Participant. Any employee who is employed by the city is eligible to participate in the plan. In addition, any former employee or beneficiary who has a deferred vested interest in this plan or who is receiving benefits from the aid fund is also a participant in this plan. 
Furthermore, a participant who has a severance from service, and who is later rehired as an employee for the city, shall be eligible to participate in this plan upon reemployment. 
In addition, by resolution of the board of city commissioners, any contracted employee may, at the discretion of such board, be excluded from eligibility to participate in the aid fund. 
Period of service. A period beginning on a participant's first date of employment as an employee and ending on the participant's severance from service date. The period is the number of years of service with fractional credit for completed months. 
If an employee is rehired by the city following a severance from service but prior to receiving any distributions from the aid fund, then the period of service includes the following: 
(a)  If the participant's prior employment included making mandatory employee contributions and the contributions remain in the aid fund at reemployment, then the previous period of service is restored and added to the current period of service. 
(b)  If the participant's prior employment included making mandatory employee contributions but the participant withdrew those contributions from the aid fund upon his prior severance from service, then the participant can receive credit for the previous period of service at the rate of one year's prior service for each year of current employment for the first five years of reemployment, and at the rate of two years' prior service for each year of current employment after the first five years of reemployment. 
(c)  If the participant's prior employment did not include any periods of time during which employee contributions were required, then the participant can receive credit for the previous period of service at the rate of one year's prior service for each year of current employment for the first five years of reemployment, and at the rate of two years' prior service for each year of current employment after the first five years of reemployment. 
In addition, if an employee leaves employment with the city in order to perform mandatory military service, and later returns to city employment within 90 days after leaving the military service, then the employee's period of service will include credit for the period of time that the employee served his or her mandatory military duty. 
Plan. The retirement plan set forth in this document as it may from time to time be amended or supplemented. 
Plan year. A 12-consecutive-month period beginning on July 1. 
Preretirement death benefit. The death benefit payable under article V to the beneficiary of a participant who dies before his or her annuity starting date. 
Retirement. A participant's termination of employment with the city on or after his or her normal retirement date. 
Retirement benefit. The annual benefit that accrues to a participant under article II. 
Severance from service date. The earliest of the day of an employee's retirement, termination of employment, or incurrence of a total disability or death. 
Termination of employment. A participant's termination of employment with the city, whether voluntary or involuntary, for any reason, including but not limited to quit or discharge, retirement, death or incurrence of a total disability. 
Total disability. For a participant who was hired before July 1, 1995, his or her permanent or temporary termination of active employment following a five-year period of service with the city as the result of his or her total disability such that the participant is incapacitated of self-support. Such disability must be certified by the employee's attending physician; however, the board reserves the right to have the employee examined by a physician of its own choosing. A participant or former employee who becomes disabled after terminating employment with the city is not eligible for a total disability benefit. 
Total disability benefit. The monthly benefit a participant who incurs a total disability is entitled to receive under section 19A-2.4, if the participant was hired by the city prior to July 1, 1995. A participant who has terminated active employment prior to incurring a total disability shall not be eligible for a total disability benefit from this plan, regardless of whether or not the participant had completed a five-year period of service during his or her employment with the city. In addition, any participant who becomes an employee on or after July 1, 1995, is not eligible for any total disability benefits, regardless of the participant's period of service and/or incurrence of a total disability. 
Vested interest. A participant's right to receive his or her retirement benefit shall become nonforfeitable upon the earliest of (a) the participant's being credited with a ten-year period of service or (b) the participant's normal retirement date. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
ARTICLE II. - RETIREMENT BENEFITS 
 
Sec. 19A-2.1. - Generally. 
Participants' retirement benefits shall be determined under this article (subject to the limitations set forth in article III). Each participant shall be entitled to the nonforfeitable portion, as determined under section 19A-13.3 of his or her retirement benefit and shall have no right to any portion of his or her retirement benefit which is not nonforfeitable under section 19A-13.3 (nor shall any such portion increase the retirement benefit of any other participant). The form and timing of distribution of the nonforfeitable portion of a participant's retirement benefit shall be made in accordance with article IV. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-2.2. - Retirement benefit at or after normal retirement. 
For retirements occurring on or after January 1, 1973, an annual amount (although paid in monthly installments) equal to the greater of [subsection] (a) or (b) below, adjusted as described in (c), if necessary: 
(a)  One percent of average annual compensation not in excess of basic compensation, plus two percent of average annual compensation in excess of basic compensation, with the sum multiplied by the period of service. 
(b)  Five dollars and fifty cents multiplied by 12 and again multiplied by the period of service. 
(c)  If a participant attains his or her normal retirement date except that he or she has not made all of the employee contributions formerly required by this plan, such participant may nevertheless retire and receive his or her normal retirement benefit, but the amount is reduced in order to refund the deficient employee contributions as follows. the deficient contributions together with compound interest over a period of 60 equal monthly installments. However, if the form of payment of the normal retirement benefit is an optional form not including at least five certain years of payment, and the participant and beneficiary die before the 60 months of contributions are repaid, then neither the participant or the beneficiary is required to complete the refund. 
The benefits of employees who retired prior to January 1, 1973, shall be calculated and paid as if such retired employees had retired on January 1, 1973, with the same period of service and the same compensation which such formerly retired employees actually earned. Should benefits under this plan be increased in the future, such increase shall also inure to the benefit of then formerly retired employees. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-2.3. - Retirement benefit upon termination of employment before his or her normal retirement date. 
If a participant has a vested interest upon his or her termination of employment before his or her normal retirement date, the participant's retirement benefit shall be an amount equal to his or her retirement benefit under section 19A-2.2 as of the date of his or her termination of employment. 
For purposes of determining a participant's retirement benefit under this section 19A-2.3, it shall be assumed that payment of the retirement benefit under section 19A-2.2 will be made in the normal form of payment commencing on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the participant's 65th birthday. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-2.4. - Retirement benefit upon total disability. 
For a participant who became an employee before July 1, 1995, if such participant incurs a total disability following a five-year period of service, the participant's total disability benefit shall be an amount equal to the retirement benefit determined under section 19A-2.2 determined as of the date of his or her total disability. For a participant who becomes an employee on or after July 1, 1995, the participant's total disability benefit shall be zero. 
Payment of the participant's total disability benefit shall commence upon the first day of the month following the day the board of trustees determines the participant has incurred a total disability and shall cease upon the first day of the month following the earliest of (a) the determination of the board of trustees that the participant has recovered from total disability, or (b) the participant's death, subject to the form of payment chosen by the participant. Upon recovery from total disability, and provided the participant does not return to employment with the city, he or she shall be entitled to receive distribution of his or her retirement benefit as if the participant had a termination of employment on the day distribution of his or her total disability benefit commenced. 
As stated above, the board of trustees shall have discretion to grant disability benefits upon permanent total disability, in which case the monthly benefit is payable for the participant's remaining life, subject to elected form of payment. In addition, the board shall have discretion to grant, provide and suspend monthly disability benefits to participants upon temporary total disability. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-2.5. - Cost-of-living increases. 
On each January 1 and July 1, in addition to the monthly benefits calculated according to sections 19A-2.2, 19A-2.3, 19A-2.4 and 19A-5.2, each participant or beneficiary may also be entitled to receive a cost-of-living benefit adjustment. A participant's or beneficiary's entitlement to a cost of living benefit adjustment shall be determined by comparing a six-month average of the Consumer Price Index—U.S. All Cities (published by the United States Department of Labor) with the base index as that term is hereinafter defined. If the applicable consumer price index average is greater than the base index, the amount of difference up to a maximum of two percent of the participant's or beneficiary's gross retirement benefit shall be paid to him or her during the ensuing six months. A participant's or beneficiary's entitlement to receive benefits under this section 19A-2.5 shall be determined by the board of trustees as follows: 
(a)  The term "consumer priced index" shall mean (1) for calculations to be made as of January 1 of each year, the average of the monthly indices from May to October of the immediately preceding year of the Consumer Price Index—U.S. All Cities (published by the United States Department of Labor), and (2) for calculations required to be made as of July 1 of each year, the average of the monthly indices of the immediately preceding months of November through April of the Consumer Price Index—U.S. All Cities (published by the United States Department of Labor). 
(b)  The base index shall be the six-month average for the period immediately preceding the consumer price index period. 
(c)  The board shall determine the applicable average consumer price index and shall compare the same to the base index of each participant or beneficiary in pay status to form the individual C.P.I. ratio; provided, nevertheless, that the C.P.I. ratio may never be less than 1.00 nor more than 1.02. 
(d)  Each participant's or beneficiary's monthly benefit currently in pay status (whether retirement benefit, disability benefit, or death benefit) shall then be multiplied by the C.P.I. ratio determined according to paragraph [subsection] (c) above, and the product shall be the adjusted gross benefit for the ensuing six-month period. 
(e)  At each subsequent January 1 and July 1, a new adjusted gross benefit shall be determined for each participant or beneficiary receiving benefits by comparing the then most recent average consumer price index with the adjusted base index. A participant's or beneficiary's adjusted base index shall consist of his or her initial base index together with all increments, expressed as a percentage of increase, which have been previously added to his or her initial base index under this cost of living benefit adjustment. 
(f)  As to any participant or beneficiary who has not been receiving benefits for six months on a given adjustment date, the C.P.I. ratio will be adjusted pro rata for the period of payments received, giving credit for the month of initial payment if the benefits began on or before the 15th day of the month and not giving credit for the month of initial payment if the benefits began on or after the 16th day of the month. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-2.6. - Bonus adjustments. 
A bonus adjustment shall be paid from the surplus income of the aid fund, if any, as follows: 
(a)  As of January 1 of each year, the annual rate of earnings of all active participants shall be determined. 
(b)  The required new contribution shall be determined by multiplying this earnings amount by the contribution rate determined by the last actuarial valuation of the plan. 
(c)  As of January 1 of each year, the aid fund balance shall be determined. 
(d)  The required investment income shall then be determined by multiplying the aid fund balance by the actuarially assumed rate of income. 
(e)  As of the subsequent June 30, the total income to the aid fund for the previous year shall be determined. Total income includes contributions from all sources and all investment income less expenses incurred in collection or investment. 
(f)  Next, the board shall determine the available surplus by subtracting the sum of items [subsections] (b) and (d) from item [subsection] (e). 
(g)  Also, as of June 30, the pension reserve shall be determined for all participants in payment status. 
(h)  There shall then be allocated and paid, beginning on the next subsequent January 1, to each participant or beneficiary in payment status a bonus adjustment which shall be the lesser of (a) the benefit which one-half of the available surplus will fund, or (b) five percent of the participant's or beneficiary's benefit. 
(i)  For any participant or beneficiary who has not been receiving benefits for 12 months at the time the bonus adjustment is made, such individual's benefit shall be adjusted pro rata for the period giving credit for the month of initial payment if the benefits began on or before the 15th day of the month and not giving credit for the month of initial payment if the benefits began on or after the 16th day of the month. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
ARTICLE III. - LIMITATIONS ON BENEFITS 
 
Sec. 19A-3.1. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply for purposes of section 19A-3.2: 
Annual benefit. A benefit which is payable annually in the form of a straight life annuity with no ancillary benefits and determined without regard to any contributions made by an employee. 
Defined benefit plan fraction. A fraction for any plan year. The numerator of the fraction is the participant's projected annual benefit. The denominator of the fraction is the lesser of (1) the product of 1.25 and $90,000.00 (or such higher amount as may be permitted under section 415(d) of the Internal Revenue Code to reflect increases in the cost of living) and (2) the product of 1.4 and 100 percent of the participant's average compensation during the three consecutive limitation years in which the participant received the greatest amount of compensation. 
Defined contribution plan fraction. A fraction for any plan year. The numerator of the fraction is the aggregate amount of annual additions, as defined in section 415(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code, to a participant's accounts as of the close of that plan year in all defined contribution plans (whether or not terminated). The denominator of the fraction is the aggregate amount described in the following sentence for all limitation years the participant was an employee (regardless of whether a defined contribution plan was in existence during those years). The amount for each such limitation year is equal to the lesser of (1) the product of 1.25 and the dollar amount under section 415(c)(1)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code for that plan year and (2) the product of 1.4 and the amount determined under section 415(c)(1)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code for that plan year. In the case of a participant with respect to whom the sum of his or her defined benefit plan fraction and defined contribution plan fraction exceeds 1.0 as of either (or both) December 31, 1982 or December 31, 1986 (computed as if the provisions of section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended by the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982 or the Tax Reform Act of 1986, respectively, were in effect on the applicable of those dates and disregarding any changes to the plans made after May 5, 1986, but using the section 415 limitation applicable to the first limitation year beginning on or after January 1, 1987) the numerator of the participant's defined contribution plan fraction shall be reduced so that the sum of those fractions as of the applicable date does not exceed 1.0. 
Projected annual benefit. The projected retirement benefit payable in the form of an annual benefit to which a participant would be entitled under all defined benefit plans assuming (a) that all relevant factors used to determine benefits under each of those plans remained constant from the last day of the most recent plan year in which the participant was credited with a year in his or her period of service until the participant's normal retirement date and (b) that distribution of those benefits commences on the participant's attainment of his or her normal retirement date (or current age if later). 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-3.2. - Maximum retirement benefit. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this plan. 
(a)  Subject to subsections 19A-3.2(b), (c) and (d), the retirement benefit of a participant shall be reduced to the extent that it (plus, if applicable, the aggregate retirement benefit to which the participant is entitled under all other defined benefit plans in which he or she was a participant) exceeds the lesser of (1) $90,000.00 (or such higher amount as may be permitted under section 415(d) of the Internal Revenue Code to reflect increases in the cost of living that occur on or after the participant's retirement, termination of employment, death or total disability) and (2) 100 percent of the participant's average compensation during the three consecutive limitation years in which the participant received the greatest amount of compensation. No reduction shall be required under this subsection 19A-3.2(a) in the case of a participant who never participated in a defined contribution plan if the participant's retirement benefit (plus, if applicable, the participant's retirement benefit under all other defined benefit plans) does not exceed $10,000.00. 
(b)  The following adjustments shall be made in applying the limitations of subsection 19A-3.2(a) and section 19A-3.3. 
(1)  If a participant's retirement benefit (or a retirement benefit to which the participant is entitled under any other defined benefit plan) is payable in a form other than an annual benefit, the retirement benefit shall be adjusted so that it is the actuarial equivalent of an annual benefit, except that any ancillary benefit that is not related to retirement income benefits shall not be taken into account. 
(2)  The dollar limitation set forth in subsection 19A-3.2(a)(1) shall be adjusted as set forth below: 
(i)  If distribution of a participant's retirement benefit begins before the participant's attainment of age 62, then the limitation shall be reduced in accordance with regulations promulgated by the U.S. Department of Treasury consistent with reduction for old age benefits commencing before social security retirement age under the Social Security Act so that it equals the amount of an annual benefit beginning at the time distribution of the participant's retirement benefit begins, which is the actuarial equivalent of an annual benefit equal to the dollar limitation set forth in subsection 19A-3.2(a)(1) beginning at the participant's attainment of age 62, except that the limitation shall not be reduced to less than an annual benefit which is the actuarial equivalent of an annual benefit of $75,000.00 beginning at age 55. 
(ii)  If distribution of a participant's retirement benefit begins after the participant's social security retirement age, the limitation shall be increased (in accordance with regulations promulgated by the U.S. Department of Treasury) so that it equals the amount of an annual benefit beginning at the time distribution of the participant's retirement benefit begins, which is the actuarial equivalent of an annual benefit equal to the dollar limitation set forth in subsection 19A-3.2(a)(1) beginning at the participant's social security retirement age. 
(3)  In the case of a participant with less than ten years of participation in the plan or less than ten years in the period of service. (A) the dollar limitation set forth in [sub]section [19A-]3.2(a)(1) shall be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the aggregate number of the participant's years of participation in the plan at the time the determination is made and the denominator of which is ten, and (B) the percentage limitation set forth in subsection 19A-3.2(a)(2) and the $10,000.00 minimum benefit referred to in the last sentence of subsection 19A-3.2(a) shall be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the aggregate number of years in the participant's period of service at the time the determination is made and the denominator of which is ten. 
(4)  For purposes of adjusting the participant's retirement benefit under subsection 19A-3.2(b)(1) or the dollar limitation under subsection 19A-3.2(b)(2), the interest rate assumption shall be the rate set forth in section 19A-1.1 of this plan, subject to the limitations on interest rates of section 415(b)(2)(E) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-3.3. - Restrictions on highly compensated employees. 
(a)  With respect to distributions commencing after July 1, 1994, the retirement benefit of a participant who is among the 25 highly compensated employees or former highly compensated employees (as defined in section 414(q) of the Internal Revenue Code) who have the greatest compensation from the city in any current or prior plan year shall be subject to the restrictions set forth in subsection 19A-3.3(b) unless at least one of the conditions in the following sentence is met. The conditions are: 
(1)  The aggregate value of the retirement benefit payable to participant does not exceed one percent of the plan's current liabilities (as that term is defined in section 412(l)(7) of the Internal Revenue Code), 
(2)  The plan assets remaining after the distribution of all benefits payable to the participant under the plan equals or exceeds 110 percent of the plan's current liabilities, 
(3)  The actuarial equivalent present value of the benefits payable to or on behalf of the participant does not exceed $3,500.00, or 
(4)  The plan is terminated and the benefit received by the participant is nondiscriminatory under section 401(a)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(b)  Subject to subsection 19A-3.3(f), the annual payments to a participant described in subsection 19A-3.3(a) shall not exceed the annual payment to which such participant is entitled if his or her retirement benefit is distributed in the form of a single life annuity. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection 19A-3.3(a), the term retirement benefit shall include all loans in excess of the amount under section 72(p)(2)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code, any periodic income, any withdrawal values payable to a employee or former employee and any death benefits on the employee's of former employee's life which are not provided for by insurance. 
(d)  With respect to distributions to a participant which began before July 1, 1994, which are restricted in accordance with section 1.401-4(c) of the Income Tax Regulation, the restrictions shall be removed upon certification of the plan administrator that the distribution would not be restricted under subsection 19A-3.3(a). 
(e)  In the event of the plan's termination, the benefit of any highly compensated active or former employee (as defined in section 414(q) of the Internal Revenue Code) is limited to a benefit that is nondiscriminatory under section 401(a)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(f)  A participant to whom the restrictions of subsection 19A-3.3(a) apply may receive payouts in excess of the amount described in subsection 19A-3.3(a), provided that an agreement in accordance with revenue rulings and other guidance of the Internal Revenue Service has been established to secure repayment to the plan of any such excess payment.  
ARTICLE IV. - DISTRIBUTION 
 
Sec. 19A-4.1. - Election of form of distribution. 
A participant shall be entitled to elect to receive distribution of his or her retirement benefit or total disability benefit by one of the following methods. If any option is chosen other than the normal form of payment, then the monthly benefit shall be adjusted to the actuarial equivalent amount under the chosen option. 
(a)  Life annuity with a period certain feature. An annuity for the life of the participant, but if the participant dies within a predetermined number of years of his or her annuity starting date, (e.g., 5, 10 or 15 years, etc.) the annuity is payable to the participant's beneficiary for the remainder of that certain period. 
(b)  Joint and survivor annuity. An annuity for the life of the participant with a survivor annuity for the life of the participant's beneficiary, where the survivor annuity is a predetermined percentage (e.g., 50 percent, 75 percent, 100 percent, etc.) of the amount payable during the joint lives of the participant and the participant's beneficiary. 
(c)  Social Security option. An increased plan benefit payable to the participant during his or her lifetime until his or her retirement benefits commence under the Federal Social Security Act, and a reduced plan benefit payable thereafter for life, in order to provide a more level retirement income when such reduced plan benefit is added to the participant's primary benefits under the Federal Social Security Act. The exact amount of the plan benefit shall be based upon estimated primary benefits under the Federal Social Security Act determined as of the participant's early retirement date. 
A participant's election under this section 19A-4.1 (which includes the designation of a contingent beneficiary) must be made in such form and manner as set forth by the board of trustees. This election may not be changed after the participant's annuity starting date. 
In the absence of an effective election under this section 19A-4.1, a participant shall be deemed to have elected a distribution in the normal form of payment. Notwithstanding any provision of subsection 19A-3.1 to the contrary, any option which provides a joint and survivor form of retirement benefit or disability benefit which includes a joint pensioner who is not the spouse of the participant will not be available hereunder unless the actuarial value of the benefits expected to be paid under such option to the participant during the remainder of his or her lifetime is at least equal to 50 percent of the actuarial value of the benefits which would be payable under the plan in the absence of such option; and further provided that if any option is a monthly benefit other than a joint and survivor form of retirement or disability benefit, such option will not be available to a participant if the monthly benefit payable to the participant under such option is less than the monthly benefit payable under a payments certain and life thereafter option for the earlier of 20 years or to age 85. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-4.2. - Timing of distribution; annuity starting date. 
Distribution of a participant's full monthly retirement benefit (other than a total disability benefit) shall commence as of his or her annuity starting date. A participant's annuity starting date shall be the earliest of: 
(a)  The first day of the month coincident with or next following the day of the participant's retirement; or 
(b)  The first day of the month coincident with or next following the participant's 65th birthday if the participant has a termination of employment prior to that time. 
In addition, a participant shall receive a pro-rata portion of his or her full monthly retirement benefit during the month immediately preceding his or her annuity starting date if. (a) the participant's retirement is effective on a day other than the first day of the month, or (b) the participant's 65th birthday is on a day other than the first day of the month (if the participant has a termination of employment prior to this time). 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, distribution of a participant's retirement benefit shall not commence before he or she files a claim for benefits with the board of trustees, but in no event later than the calendar year in which the participant attains age 70½. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-4.3. - Annuities. 
Any distribution of benefits in the form of an annuity may be made directly from the aid fund or by the purchase of a nontransferable immediate or deferred payment annuity contract from an insurance company selected by the board of trustees. Any annuity contract so purchased shall be delivered to the participant or beneficiary and distribution of benefits shall be considered to have been completed when the annuity contract is delivered. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-4.4. - Incapacity. 
If, in the judgment of the board of trustees, any person is legally, physically or mentally incapable of personally receiving and executing a receipt for any distribution or payment due him or her under this plan, the distribution or payment may be made to the person's guardian or other legal representative (or if none is known to the city or the board of trustees, to any other person or institution who has custody of the person) and that distribution or payment shall constitute a full discharge of any obligation with respect to the amount paid or distributed. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-4.5. - Lost participant. 
Neither the board of trustees nor the city shall be obligated to search for or ascertain the whereabouts of any participant or beneficiary (other than to write to the participant at his or her last mailing address shown in the city's records). If a participant or beneficiary cannot be located, the participant's retirement benefit or preretirement death benefit shall be forfeited, but shall be reinstated (without interest) upon the participant's or beneficiary's claim for the benefit before that benefit escheat under applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
ARTICLE V. - PRERETIREMENT DEATH BENEFITS 
 
Sec. 19A-5.1. - Preretirement death benefit. 
Upon the death of a participant who (a) has a vested interest, and (b) has not yet had an annuity starting date, the participant's designated beneficiary shall be entitled to receive a preretirement death benefit as described below. 
Upon the death of a participant who (a) does not have a vested interest, and (b) has not yet had an annuity starting date, the participant's designated beneficiary shall only be entitled to receive a refund of the participant's past employee contributions, if any. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-5.2. - Form of preretirement death benefit. 
If the participant's designated beneficiary is: 
a.  His or her spouse or dependent minor child at the time of his or her death, then the preretirement death benefit is the survivor's portion of the actuarial equivalent 50 percent joint and survivor annuity (as described in section 19A-4.1). 
b.  His or her dependent minor child at the time of his or her death, then the preretirement death benefit is as described in (i) or (ii) below, whichever has the largest actuarial value at the time of the participant's death: 
i.  The survivor's portion of the actuarial equivalent 50 percent joint and survivor annuity (as described in section 19A-4.1, but modified to pay the survivor's portion to the dependent minor child until the earlier of the child's death or attainment of age 18), or 
ii.  The beneficiary's portion of the normal form of payment (i.e., five years of benefits). 
c.  Not his or her spouse dependent minor child at the time of his or her death, then the preretirement death benefit is the beneficiary's portion of the normal form of payment (i.e. five years of benefits). 
d.  Alternatively, the designated beneficiary (or the guardian in the case of a dependent minor child) may choose to have the preretirement death benefit paid to him or her in an actuarial equivalent single-sum payment. 
e.  If the actuarial present value of the pretreatment death benefit is less than $5,000.00 as of the participant's date of death, the board of trustees may direct that the benefit be paid to the designated beneficiary in an actuarial equivalent single-sum payment as soon as administratively practicable following the participant's death. 
(Ord. No. 99-11, § 1, 10-26-1999)  
Sec. 19A-5.3. - Timing of distribution; annuity starting date. 
Distribution of a participant's preretirement death benefit shall commence as of the annuity starting date of the participant's beneficiary. If the preretirement death benefit is the actuarial equivalent survivor annuity, then the participant's beneficiary may choose the annuity starting date to be the first day of any month coincident with or next following the participant's death. However, the preretirement death benefit shall be actuarially reduced to reflect payments made prior to the earlier of (a) the date that would have been the participant's normal retirement date, or (b) the date that would have been the participant's 65th birthday, had the participant survived. 
If the preretirement death benefit is the five years of payment, then the beneficiary's annuity starting date shall be the first day of the month coincident with or next following the participant's death. 
If the beneficiary chooses the lump sum form of payment in lieu of the annuities, then the preretirement death benefit single-sum equivalent will be paid to the beneficiary on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the participant's death. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
ARTICLE VI. - FUNDING 
 
Sec. 19A-6.1. - Funding policy. 
The plan's funding policy is to make contributions at least sufficient to satisfy the minimum funding requirements of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-6.2. - Timing of employer contributions. 
Contributions by the employer for each plan year shall be paid to the aid fund in monthly installments. These contributions are to be appropriated and paid out of the city's general and/or utility funds. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-6.3. - Irrevocability of employer contributions. 
Any contribution made by the employer shall be irrevocable and shall be held and disposed of by the aid fund solely in accordance with the provisions of the plan. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
ARTICLE VII. - ADMINISTRATION OF PLAN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 19A-7.1. - The city. 
The city hereby establishes a board of trustees, whose members are to serve without pay, whose duties shall be to effect, collect, disburse, manage and control the aid fund, and to adopt and enforce all necessary rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-7.2. - The board of trustees. 
This plan shall be administered by the board of trustees, which shall have the responsibilities and duties delegated to it in this plan and any responsibilities and duties of fiduciaries under a public retirement plan which are not expressly delegated to anyone else. The board of trustees may appoint an investment manager to manage and invest assets of the trust. 
The board shall consist of one member of the city commission, who shall be appointed annually by the commission, the city manager, the city attorney, a citizen at-large, who shall be appointed annually by the city commission, two employees, who have been employed by the city for at least five years, and one retired participant, elected annually by the plan's retired participants. 
The two employee members are to be elected by a plurality vote of the employee participants voting in an election, conducted under the direction and supervision of the city manager, or his designee, on the first Monday in March of each year. The employee receiving the largest number of votes shall be elected for a two-year term, and the employee getting the second highest number of votes shall be elected for a one-year term; thereafter one employee member shall be elected each year for a two-year term, or until his successor is elected and duly qualified. 
The one retired participant shall be elected by a plurality vote of retired participants voting in an election, conducted under the direction and supervision of the city manager, or his designee, and held in conjunction with the employee participant election. The retired participant shall serve a one-year term, or until his successor is elected and duly qualified. 
(Ord. No. 99-11, § 2, 10-26-1999) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.  
Sec. 19A-7.3. - The officers of the board of trustees. 
The board shall elect a chairman and secretary. The city manager shall act as treasurer of said board and shall secure and keep all funds and pay the same out under the direction of the trustees upon vouchers by the chairman and the secretary. Also, the treasurer may designate specific authority to the city finance director and/or the fund's investment manager to act on behalf of the board. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-7.4. - Decision and action of the board of trustees. 
The board of trustees from time to time may establish rules for the administration of this plan. The board of trustees shall have the sole discretion to make decisions and take any action with respect to questions arising in connection with the plan, including, but not limited to, the construction and interpretation of the plan and the aid fund and the determination of benefits. Any such decision or action shall be final and binding upon all participants and beneficiaries. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-7.5. - Procedures of the board of trustees. 
The board of trustees shall hold an open annual meeting on the second Monday of every April. The board shall hold additional meetings at a time and place as the board may fix. All meetings will be open and held in accordance with the Georgia Open Meetings Law. A majority of said board shall constitute a quorum and a majority vote of those present shall control on all questions. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-7.6. - Actuary. 
The city shall appoint an actuary to perform actuarial services with respect to this plan. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-7.7. - Benefit claims. 
The board of trustees shall administer the benefit claims according to established procedures. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-7.8. - Subcommittees advisors and agents of board of trustees. 
The board of trustees may (a) appoint subcommittees with such powers as the board of trustees shall determine advisable, (b) authorize one or more of its members or an agent to execute any instrument and (c) utilize the services of employees and engage accountants, actuaries, agents, clerks, legal counsel, medical advisers and professional consultants to assist in the administration of this plan or to render advice with regard to any responsibility under the plan. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-7.9. - Liability of the board of trustees. 
The members of the board of trustees shall have no liability with respect to any action or omission by them in good faith in reliance upon (a) the advice or opinion of any accountant, actuary, legal counsel, medical adviser or other professional consultant or (b) any resolutions of the city. Moreover, the board is granted authority to purchase errors and omissions insurance, as they deem necessary. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
ARTICLE VIII. - MANAGEMENT OF AID FUND 
 
Sec. 19A-8.1. - The aid fund. 
The aid fund shall be held in trust by the city. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-8.2. - Exclusive benefit. 
The aid fund shall be used in accordance with the provisions of this plan and for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits for participants and their beneficiaries and defraying reasonable expenses of the plan and of the fund. No portion of this fund shall be used to defray the general obligations of the City of Griffin nor shall the fund be executed or levied upon in satisfaction of judgments against the City of Griffin, its officers and employees. 
Obligations of the employees aid fund shall not be payable from or charged upon any other funds of the City of Griffin, nor shall the City of Griffin be subject to any pecuniary liability thereon. Obligation of the aid fund shall not constitute a charge, lien or encumbrance, legal or equitable, on any property, real or personal, of the City of Griffin, nor shall constitute a pledge of the taxing authority of said city. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
ARTICLE IX. - NONALIENATION OF BENEFITS 
 
Sec. 19A-9.1. - Benefits not assignable, etc. 
Any benefits under or interests in this plan shall not be assignable or subject to alienation, hypothecation, garnishment, attachment, execution or levy of any kind whether voluntary or involuntary. Any action in violation of this provision shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
ARTICLE X. - DESIGNATION OF BENEFICIARY 
 
Sec. 19A-10.1. - Designation of beneficiary. 
Subject to article VII, participants may designate a beneficiary on the form and in the manner prescribed by the board of trustees. The board, in its discretion, may specify conditions or other provisions with respect to the designation of a beneficiary. Subject to article VII, any designation of a beneficiary may be revoked by filing a later designation or revocation. In the absence of an effective designation of a beneficiary by a participant or upon the death of all beneficiaries, a participant's retirement or disability benefit shall be paid to the participant's estate. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-10.2. - Effective date of designation. 
Any designation or revocation of a designation of a beneficiary shall become effective when actually received by the board of trustees but shall not affect any distribution previously made pursuant to a prior designation. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
ARTICLE XI. - AMENDMENT 
 
Sec. 19A-11.1. - Amendment. 
The city commissioners may amend this plan at any time, but no amendment shall have the effect of decreasing the described retirement benefit of anyone who is a vested participant on the date the amendment is adopted or becomes effective, whichever is later. Notice of proposed amendments to this plan shall be given to employees of the city, plan participants and their designated beneficiaries who are receiving a benefit at least 45 days prior to final action thereto by the board of city commissioners. Such notice shall be deemed effective if given in writing, addressed to the employee, participant or beneficiary at the address last shown in the plan records, or if included with any paycheck or benefit distribution. Said notice shall state the date of the meeting at which jurisdiction will be taken. 
Employees, participants and beneficiaries may appear and comment to the board of city commissioners prior to any final action on a proposed amendment. Written comments, filed with the city manager prior to the meeting at which final action is scheduled, will also be considered by the commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-11.2. - Amendment to maintain qualified status. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in section 19A-11.1, the city commissioners, in their discretion, may make any modifications or amendments to the plan, retroactively or prospectively, which it deems appropriate to establish or maintain the plan as a qualified employees' plan and trust under section 401 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
ARTICLE XII. - PLAN TERMINATION 
 
Sec. 19A-12.1. - Nonforfeitable. 
Upon the termination (including a partial termination) of this plan, the retirement benefits as of the date of termination of the participants to whom the termination relates shall be nonforfeitable (to the extent funded) without any formal action. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
ARTICLE XIII. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 19A-13.1. - No employment rights. 
Nothing in this plan shall be construed as a guarantee of any employee to be continued in the employment of the company, nor as a limitation on the right of the city to discharge any of its employees with or without cause or with or without notice at any time at the option of the city. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-13.2. - Discretion. 
Any discretionary acts under this plan by an employer or by the board of trustees shall be uniform and applicable to all persons similarly situated. No discretionary act shall be taken which constitutes prohibited discrimination under the provisions of section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-13.3. - No interest in aid fund. 
Irrespective of the amount of a participant's vested interest, neither the participant nor the participant's beneficiary or any other person shall have any interest or right to any of the assets of the aid fund except as and to the extent expressly provided in this plan. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-13.4. - Governing law. 
The provisions of this plan shall be governed by and construed and administered in accordance with applicable sections of the Internal Revenue Code, and, where not inconsistent, the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 19A-13.5. - Participant information. 
Each participant shall notify the board of trustees in writing of (a) his or her current mailing address and each change of mailing address, (b) the participant's, the participant's beneficiary's date of birth, (c) the participant's marital status and any change of his or her marital status, (d) the participant's Social Security number, and (e) any other information required by the board. The information provided by the participant under this section shall be binding upon the participant and the participant's beneficiary for all purposes of the plan. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
[Sec. 19A-13.6. - Deleted.]  
Sec. 19A-13.7. - Notices. 
Any notice, request, election, designation, revocation or other communication under this plan shall be in writing and shall be considered given when delivered personally or mailed by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
[Sec. 19A-13.8. - Deleted.] 


UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE CITY OF GRIFFIN, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2013 by Order of the City Board of Commissioners 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
THE CITY OF 
GRIFFIN, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS PUBLICATION 
____________ 
Cynthia Reid Ward, District 1 
Chairperson of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Cora Flowers, District 2 
Ryan McLemore, District 3 
Joanne Todd, District 4 
Richard "Dick" Morrow, District 5 
Shaheer A. Beyah, District 6 
City Commission 
____________ 
Kenny Smith 
City Manager 
____________ 
Andrew J. Whalen, III 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Judy Flournoy 
Executive Secretary to City Manager 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete publication of the Unified Development Code of the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
    Source material used in the preparation of this Code was Ordinance No. 12-12, adopted March 13, 2012 . By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the Unified Development Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of a Unified Development Code, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE SH:1 ARTICLE 1 1:1 APPENDIX A A:1 UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES UDCCT:1 UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE INDEX UDCI:1  
(Index or Indices) 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the (index itself or indexes themselves) which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Kelly Heaton-Moniz, Editor, and Janet Cramer, Proofreader, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Judy Flournoy, Executive Secretary to the City Manager for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Unified Development Code which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Griffin, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Griffin, Georgia. 2013. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Unified Development Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date
Adopted Include/
Omit Supp. No. Supp. No. 1 13-05  5-14-2013 Include 1 13-11  8-27-2013 Include 1 Supp. No. 2 14-2  5-27-2014 Include 2 14-3  5-27-2014 Include 2 Supp. No. 3 14-04  7- 8-2014 Include 3 14-07 12- 9-2014 Include 3 Supp. No. 4 15-01  1-27-2015 Include 4 15-04  4-28-2015 Include 4 15-08  6-23-2015 Include 4 15-09  7-13-2015 Include 4 15-10  7-28-2015 Include 4 15-11  7-28-2015 Include 4 Supp. No. 5 15-14 10-27-2015 Omit 5 15-15 10-27-2015 Include 5 16-01  1-12-2016 Include 5 16-03  2- 9-2016 Include 5 Supp. No. 6 16-08  7-26-2016 Omit 6 16-09  7-26-2016 Include 6 16-10  7-26-2016 Include 6 Supp. No. 7 18-05  3-27-2018 Include 7 18-06  3-27-2018 Include 7 18-07  5- 8-2018 Include 7 18-08  5- 8-2018 Include 7 18-09  5- 8-2018 Include 7 Supp. No. 8 18-12  6-19-2018 Omit 8 19-05  1-22-2019 Include 8 19-07  2-26-2019 Include 8  
ARTICLE 1. - INTRODUCTION AND AUTHORITY 

101. - TITLE. 
101 A. - Title. 
This ordinance shall be known and cited as "The City of Griffin Unified Development Code." 
101 B. - Purpose and scope. 
These regulations seek to encourage development of land within the City of Griffin in accordance with the policies and goals of the City of Griffin Comprehensive Plan. Providing reasonable land uses and development controls helps reduce or eliminate the occurrence of conditions that may threaten the general health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City of Griffin. This ordinance shall serve the following purposes: 
1.  Promote proper use and location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures; sizes of yards and other open spaces; density and distribution of population; use of buildings, structures and land for commercial trade, professional offices, industry, residential, recreational, sanitation, conservation, transportation and public activities and the percentage of land which may be occupied by structures; 
2.  Mitigate congestion, prevent overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to prevent urban sprawl; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, drainage, sanitary sewer, parks and other public infrastructure; To assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to new land developments; 
3.  To promote desirable living conditions and the sustained stability and integrity of existing neighborhoods; 
4.  To foster city economic development; protect property against blight and depreciation; to conserve the value of existing buildings; to encourage the most appropriate use of land, buildings and structures throughout the City of Griffin. 
5.  To adequately provide for designs that protect the natural environment and retain the character of the City of Griffin by supporting a landscape and tree protection plan, recreation plan, green space and a higher level of order, prosperity and aesthetics; 
6.  To assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for environmental, recreational, and other public purposes; 
7.  To secure economy in governmental expenditures. 
8.  To encourage the orderly subdivision of land and maintain clear city land records, and that certain basic requirements are met for development of building lots, and to provide for the construction of required public improvements. The recordation of an approved subdivision plan permits the landowner to affect a simple transfer of land created by the subdivision by reference to the recorded plan. 
9.  The purpose for the review and approval of site development plans is to provide enforcement of the requirements of the zoning ordinance, state laws, and other regulations are met, and that public improvements, lawfully required by these laws and ordinances or proposed by the applicant, are constructed to appropriate standards. The city may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards to further express the intent of this ordinance. 
10.  The city shall consider the expeditious, fair and quality review and approval of site plans and subdivision plans and plans as part of the plan for the orderly, efficient, and economical growth and development of the city. 
11.  Land to be developed shall be of such a character that it can be used for building purposes without danger to health, peril from fire or flood, and to improve the health, safety, convenience, and general welfare. 
12.  The proposed streets and overall traffic pattern shall provide a convenient and safe system conforming to the comprehensive plan and shall be of such width, grade, and location so they accommodate the prospective vehicular, non-vehicular and pedestrian traffic and to facilitate fire protection and emergency services. 
101 C. - Additional purposes. 
The City of Griffin Unified Development Code further provides for the following: 
1.  Defines certain terms used in this ordinance; 
2.  Establishes certain land use zoning districts, the intent of each zoning district, and specifies the boundaries of those districts on the official zoning map; 
3.  Establishes procedures for administering, enforcing, appealing and amending the ordinance; 
4.  Regulates site design and use of buildings and structures located within the corporate limits of the City of Griffin; 
5.  Provides penalties for violation of this ordinance; 
6.  Defines the power and duties, as they relate to this ordinance, of the board of commissioners, as well as such administrative officers, bodies and agencies that the board of commissioners may establish for the efficient exercise of the zoning powers of the City of Griffin including but not limited to the zoning administrator and the planning and zoning board. 
7.  Repeals all conflicting ordinances, rules and regulations enacted by the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
101 D. - Authority. 
Authority for establishment of development regulations in the City of Griffin is contained in Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia; the Georgia Planning Act, as amended; and in the Zoning Procedures Law, as amended, which includes within its definition of "zoning ordinance" any ordinance which establishes the uses and development standards of property. The public health, safety, morals and general welfare require the harmonious, orderly, and progressive development of land within the cities and counties of the state. In furtherance of this purpose, the Unified Development Code is authorized to carry out the orderly development of communities. 
    This Unified Development Code is the instrument through which the board of commissioners, planning and zoning board, and staff is empowered to carry out future development in the City of Griffin. 
101 E. - Interpretation and application. 
In interpreting and applying these regulations, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purpose of these regulations. These regulations shall not be deemed to interfere with, abolish, override or affect in any manner whatsoever any deeds, easements, covenants or other agreements between parties respecting interest in real property, entered prior to the effective date of this ordinance. Whenever the provisions of these regulations impose greater restrictions upon the use of land, buildings or structures or upon the height of buildings, structures or require a larger percentage of lot to be left unoccupied than the provisions of any deeds, easements, covenants or other agreements between parties respecting interest in real property, entered on or after the effective date of this ordinance, the provisions of this ordinance shall govern. 
101 F. - Zoning affects all land and buildings. 
No building, structure or land shall be used or occupied; and no building, structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged or structurally altered unless in conformity with the regulations of this ordinance. 
101 G. - Severability and conflicts. 
1.  These regulations shall have the force and effect of law. In the event any part or provision of this ordinance is held to be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal any of the other parts or provisions of this ordinance, which shall remain effective. 
2.  Any previously adopted rules and regulations pertaining to developments that are in conflict with these regulations are hereby made null and void. 
3.  Whenever the provisions of this ordinance and those of some other ordinance apply to the same subject matter, the ordinance last enacted in time shall govern, and the earlier ordinance shall be deemed repealed by preemption; provided, however, the City of Griffin Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance is hereby expressly saved from repeal and any conflict between that ordinance and this ordinance shall be resolved based upon the general law found in O.C.G.A. title 12, chapter 7, governing local erosion and sedimentation control ordinances. 
101 H. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall become effective upon its adoption on second and final reading; provided, however, this ordinance shall apply only to development and zoning applications filed after its effective date. All pending applications shall continue to be processed under the regulations in effect on the date such application, in complete form and with all requisite fees paid, was accepted. 
101 I. - Amendments. 
Whenever the board of commissioners amends this ordinance, such amendments shall have no effect on previously accepted applications in the development process; provided, however, an applicant may elect to have an on-going development project comply with the newly amended standards. 
101 J. - Jurisdiction. 
These regulations shall govern all developments of land within the incorporated areas of the City of Griffin, Georgia as now or hereafter established, and shall govern all undeveloped properties and projects. 
101 K. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation or any agent, servant, employee, officer or contractor for any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision, requirement, term or condition of this ordinance shall be cited for trial before the municipal court, and if found guilty, may be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per day or $2,500.00 for erosion and sedimentation control, and each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
1.  The director of development services, director of public works, director of stormwater, or director of water/wastewater or their designated representative are hereby authorized and directed to issue "stop work" orders in writing on any project when the person or persons responsible therefore shall fail or refuse to comply with any ordinance or regulation, including these standards, pertaining to any matter contained herein or in any ordinance or resolution relating to zoning or land development. Such "stop work" orders may be lifted at such time as the city is satisfied that a good faith effort to comply is being made. A written order is not required from the responsible department director where an emergency exists. 
2.  Whenever the either the director of development services, director of public works, director of stormwater, or director of water/wastewater finds that any existing grading, drainage or other condition involving the application of these regulations constitutes or creates a public hazard and/or emergency condition, the owner of the property on which such condition is identified shall, upon receipt of notice in writing from the appropriate director, perform or cause to be performed such remedial work, repairs, or maintenance, as the director deems necessary to abate the hazard. Any such work shall be done in conformance with the requirements of this ordinance, and any orders issued by the director in question. Failure to comply with an emergency order hereunder shall constitute a violation of this ordinance. 
3.  Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance and any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, or any permit, condition or limitation established pursuant to these regulations, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any order of the city issued under authority hereof shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 per day or $2,500.00 for erosion and sedimentation control. Each day during which the violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
101 L. - Limits to director's authority: Variances. 
The minimum development standards set forth in this ordinance are intended to control all development within the city and be strictly adhered to. City staff has no authority to waive any requirement or to grant variances, except under special circumstances for zoning criteria related to infill development, as provided by Article 6. When compliance with a particular requirement contained in this ordinance unduly burdens the applicant, or is reasonably likely to create harm to an adjacent property, applicant may seek a variance, as provided by Article 4, Procedures. 
101 M. - Platting authority. 
From and after the effective date of this ordinance, the director of development services shall be the official subdivision platting authority, and no plan of a land subdivision as defined in these regulations shall be entitled to be recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Spalding County unless it shall have the approval of the director of development services inscribed thereon. The transfer, sale, agreement to sell, or negotiation to sell land by reference to, exhibition of, or other use of a plan of subdivision not bearing the approval of the City of Griffin as provided by this ordinance, or based on a legal description by metes, bounds, courses and distances in an instrument of title, shall not bind the city to recognize the real property so transferred or conveyed as a lot of record for purposes of future development. 
101 N. - Erection of buildings. 
No building permit shall issue and no building or structure shall be erected on any lot in the city unless the street giving access thereto has been approved and accepted for dedication in accordance with this ordinance. 
ARTICLE 2. - INTERPRETATIONS AND DEFINITIONS 

201. - INTERPRETATION OF CERTAIN TERMS AND WORDS. 
    When used in this ordinance, the following words and phrases have the meaning as defined in this article. Words not defined here have the same meaning as found in most dictionaries, where consistent with the context. 
    The words "must" "will" and "shall" are mandatory in nature, indicating that an action has to be done. 
    The word "may" is permissive and allows discretion regarding an action. 
    When consistent with the context, words used in the singular number include the plural and those used in the plural number include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future. 
    The word "district" shall mean "Zoning District" for the purposes of this ordinance. 
    The word "map" or "zoning map" shall mean "Official Zoning Map of the City of Griffin" for the purposes of this ordinance. 
    The word "person" includes a firm, company, partnership, association, public or private authority or corporation. 
    The word "building" includes the term "structure" (all buildings are structures, but not all structures are buildings). 
    The word "lot" includes the words "lot", "plot" or "parcel". 
    The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be considered to also include "designated, arranged, occupied, intended or designed to be used or occupied." 
202. - DEFINITIONS. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein shall be defined as follows: 
A 
    AASHTO: The American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
    Abutting: Having property boundaries or lot lines in common with no separating by a street, alley or other right-of-way. 
    Accessory dwelling unit: A dwelling unit, but not a mobile home, located on the same lot as a one-family detached dwelling unit, usually in the form of a garage apartment or basement apartment. Each unit has a separate, complete housekeeping unit with a separate entrance, and full bathroom facilities. 
    Accessory: A structure customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure and located on the same zoning lot as such a principal use or structure. The combined square footage of all accessory structures shall not exceed 50 percent of the square footage of a residential dwelling or 25 percent square footage of a commercial structure nor shall an accessory structure exceed the height of the principal dwelling or structure. 
    Acre: For the purpose of this ordinance, a measure of land consisting of 43,560 square feet. 
    Acre-foot: Quantity of water that would cover one acre, one foot deep. An acre-foot contains 43,560 cubic feet. 
    Acreage: Acres collectively in a tract of land. 
    Acreage, gross: The collective number of acres in an undeveloped, unimproved tract of land. 
    Acreage, net: The collective number of acres in a tract of land less the amount of area improved by streets, sidewalks, Stormwater management areas, floodplain, wetlands, required open or common space, greenspace and other public lands. 
    Adequate channel: A natural or man-made channel or pipe that is capable of conveying the runoff from the applicable storm design without overtopping its banks or eroding, after development of the site in question. 
    Adjacent/adjoining: Abutting or being directly across a street, alley, other rights-of-way or waterways. 
    Administrator, zoning: The person designated by the city manager of the City of Griffin to administer the enforcement of this ordinance. 
    Adult daycare: A facility that provides support for elderly individuals (and their families, if present), who do not function fully independently, but who do not need 24-hour nursing care. 
    Adult entertainment establishments: Any commercial establishment which has as its primary purpose or business the offer for sale of any book, publication or film-video which depicts nudity or sexual conduct or engages in services such as bath houses, massage parlors, wrestling parlors or like activity including a nightclub, cabaret, lounge or other establishment which features adult entertainment. 
    Aeronautical related use: A use that involves the operation, storage and/or repair of aviation related parts, products or services; such as, but not limited to, sale of fuel and oil, tie downs, hangars, ramp services, aircraft and avionics repair, aircraft sales, etc. 
    Agriculture: The raising of soil crops and livestock in a customary manner on tracts of land at least three acres in size and shall include all associated activities. Retail sale of products raised on the premises shall be considered a permissible activity provided that space necessary for the parking of customer's vehicles shall be provided off public right-of-way. 
    Airport related accessory uses: A use that is clearly incidental to the operation of the facility as an airport, is normally conducted in an airport terminal building, is designed to provide airplane passengers and crews with products and services and is directly related to the ability of the facility to operate as an airport; such as, but not limited to, snack bar, delicatessen, automobile rental agency, newsstand, sundry sales, etc. 
    Alley: A minor street which is used primarily as a service way providing a secondary means of public access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. A public or private way within a block, generally giving access to the rear of lots or buildings and not used for general traffic circulation. 
    Alteration: Any change in the supporting members of a building; any addition to or reduction of a building; any change in use; or any relocation of a building. 
    Ambulance service or rescue squad: A privately owned facility for the dispatch, storage, and maintenance of emergency medical care vehicles. 
    Amenity: Aesthetic or other characteristics of a development that increase the desirability to a community or its marketability to the public. Amenities may differ from development to development but may include such things as a unified building design, recreational facilities, site design, neighborhood clubhouse, pool, or tennis courts. 
    ANSI: The American National Standards Institute, Inc. 
    Applicant: A person seeking any determination or approval under, or permits required by these regulations. 
    Application: An application for development approval that contains the supporting documentation required by these regulations. 
    Architect: A person who, by reason of his knowledge of the mathematical and physical sciences and the principles of architecture and architectural design, acquired by professional education, practical experience or both, is qualified to engage in the practice of architecture as attested by the issuance to said person of a license as an architect by the State of Georgia. 
    Area: The area of a property shown to the nearest whole square foot or to the nearest one hundred thousandth of an acre. 
    Art, music or other studio: A space which can be used as an artist's workroom, a photographer's establishment, an establishment where an art is taught or studied including but not limited to dance, music, painting, drawing, TV, film, or other art endeavors. 
    Arterial street: A major highway with full or partial control of access. 
    ASCE: The American Society of Civil Engineers. 
    Assisted living: A residential complex which may be in any form including detached and attached dwelling units and residences offering private and semi-private settings designed for and principally occupied by senior citizens. Such facilities may include a congregate meals program in common dining areas, but exclude institutional care such as medical or nursing care. 
    ASTM: The American Society of Testing and Materials. 
    Automotive body, paint and interior repair and maintenance: A wide range of mechanical and electrical repair and maintenance services for automotive vehicles, such as passenger cars, trucks, and vans, and all trailers; or, engine repair and replacement. See NAICS Code 811111 for further explanation. 
    Automotive engine repair and replacement shops: A wide range of mechanical and electrical repair and maintenance services for automotive vehicles, such as passenger cars, trucks, and vans, and all trailers; or, engine repair and replacement. See NAICS Code 811111 for further explanation. 
    Automotive tire dealers: A wide range of mechanical and electrical repair and maintenance services for automotive vehicles, such as passenger cars, trucks, and vans, and all trailers; or, engine repair and replacement. See NAICS Code 811111 for further explanation. 
    Awning: A rooflike cover extending over or before a place as a shelter and which may be used in lieu of a sign. Such signs must be entirely supported from the building and must not exceed four feet in height. 
    AWWA: The American Water Works Association. 
B 
    Base flow: The portion of stream flow originating from ground water. 
    Basement: An area below the first floor having not more than one-half of its height above the grade used for storage, garages for use of occupants of the principal dwelling or other utilities common to the rest of the building. A basement used for the above purposes shall not be counted as a story. 
    Bed and breakfast inn: A residence in which the owner may reside as a private residence and where guest rooms are made available for visitors. Breakfast is the only real meal served and is included in the charge for the room. 
    Belt course: Also called stringcourse or band course. A molding or projecting course running horizontally along the face of a building. 

2.1: Belt Course
    Berm: The space left between the upper edge of a cut and toe of an embankment to break the continuity of an otherwise long slope. 

2.2: Berm
    Block: A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets other than alleys. In cases where the plotting is incomplete or disconnected, the subdivider may determine the outline of the block. 
    BMP or Best Management Practice: An effective practicable means of reducing the amount of pollution generated by nonpoint sources, which may be structural or nonstructural practices or a combination of practices. 
    Board of commissioners or board of commissioners: The governing body of the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
    Board of commissioners: The term "board of commissioners" means the Board of Commissioners of the City of Griffin, Georgia. The board of commissioner is also known as the city commission. 
    Boarding home: A dwelling other than a hotel where, for compensation and by prearrangement for a definite period, where meals and/or lodging are provided for four or more persons. 
    Bond: When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they shall be bound thereby. 
    Breezeway: A covered passage one story in height connecting a main structure and an accessory structure. 
    Buffer: A natural or landscaped area along the property line between different and possibly incompatible types of zoning districts or land uses. Fencing may be erected in buffers but shall not substitute plant materials. Unless otherwise indicated, buffers may be established within the building setback and shall not be enforced in addition to such setback. A buffer shall not be occupied with structures and facilities except as permitted by this ordinance. 
    Building: Any structure having a roof and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
    Building height: The vertical distance of a building measured from the average elevation of the finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the building. 
    Building setback line: The minimum horizontal distance between the property line or the street right-of-way where appropriate and the building or any projection thereof, except as noted in the zoning regulations. 
2.3: Building Setback 2.4: Building Height  
    Building, accessory: A detached structure, the use of which is clearly incidental to, customarily associated with and related to the principal structure or use of the land and which is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use. 
    Building, principal: The building in which is considered the principal use of the zoning lot on which said building is situated. 
C 
    Car wash: A primary, main or accessory use, which provides space or bays for cleaning vehicles. 
    Care home: A rest home, nursing home, convalescent home, home for the aged, or similar use established and operated on a profit or non-profit basis to provide lodging and/or meals and/or domiciliary care for aged, informed, chronically ill or convalescent persons. 
    Catchment area or basin: See Watershed. 
    Cellar: A space with less than one-half of its floor-to-ceiling height above the average finished grade of the adjoining ground or with a floor-to-ceiling height of less than 6.5 feet. 

2.5: Cellar
    Cemetery: The use of property as a burial place for human remains. Such a property may contain a mausoleum. 
    Center line: The line surveyed and monumented by the governing authority as the center line of the street or highway. If such center line has not been surveyed, it shall be that the (sic) line running midway between the outside curb and ditches of the street or highway or the middle of the traveled roadway or the street. 
    Channel: An elongated depression, either naturally or artificially created and of appreciable size, which periodically or continuously contains moving water, or which forms a connecting link between two bodies of water. It must have a definite bed and bank that serve to confine the water. 
    Charter: The term "Charter" means the Charter of Griffin, Georgia. 
    Check cashing facility: A person or business that for compensation engages in whole or part in the business of cashing checks, money orders or other commercial paper services the same purpose as check cashing. This does not include a state or federally chartered bank, saving and loan or credit union. 
    City engineer: The City Engineer of the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
    City manager: The City Manager of the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
    City: The term "city" means the City of Griffin, Georgia. 
    Civic building, facility, land: A building or site for functions accessed by the general public. 
    Clearing: The removal of trees or other vegetation, but not including grubbing activities. 
    Clinic: An establishment where medical or dental patients are admitted for examination and treatment, but overnight stay is prohibited. 
    Club or lodge, non-commercial: An incorporated or unincorporated association for civic, social, cultural, religious, fraternal, literary, political, recreational or like activities operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the general public. 
    Cluster development: A development, under a single ownership, consisting of a design technique that concentrates a series of attached and/or detached dwelling units on a part of the site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space and preservation of environmentally sensitive features. 
    Code: The terms "Code" and "this Code" mean the Unified Development Code of Griffin, Georgia, as designated in Section 101. 
    Colleges/universities: An institution other than a trade school that provides full-time or part-time education beyond high-school. 
    Commercial recreation, indoor: An establishment providing completely enclosed recreation activities. Accessory uses may include the preparation and serving of food or sale of equipment related to the enclosed uses. Commercial recreation, indoor includes but is not limited to bowling, roller skating, ice-skating, billiards, motion picture theatre, pool, rock climbing wall. 
    Commercial trade or vocational school: A secondary or higher education facility primarily teaching usable skills that prepare students for jobs in a trade and meeting the state requirements as a vocational facility. 
    Commercial recreation, outdoor: Land or premises designed to be used by members of the public, for a fee, that contain outdoor amusement facilities such as miniature golf course, merry go round, car race tracks, and outdoor motion picture theatres, golf course. 
    Communication tower: A structure that is intended to send and/or receive radio, television or cellular communications. 
    Community garden: A single piece of land gardened collectively by a group of people. 
    Comprehensive plan: The comprehensive plan adopted by the board of commissioners pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-70-3, as said plan may be amended from time to time. 
    Computation of time: Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
    Condominium: An individually owned dwelling unit in an attached, detached or multi-family structure, combined, with joint ownership of common areas of the buildings and grounds as defined by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
    Conduit: A general term for any channel intended for the conveyance of water, whether open or closed; any container for flowing water. 
    Construction costs: The total value of the construction of, or reconstruction work on structures, as determined by the director of development services, or their designee, in issuing a building, or other type, permit for construction or reconstruction. 
    Construction plans: A set of engineering drawings of the proposed streets, drainage and utilities, which meets the minimum standards of these regulations. 
    Construction vehicle: Any vehicle (other than passenger vehicle, pick-up or panel truck) having a primary purpose of land clearing or grading, hauling and use in building construction, including but not limited to earth moving equipment such as bulldozers, loaders, backhoes, bobcats, trenching machines and dump trucks. 
    Construction, continual: Construction performed by a full complement of workers and equipment mobilized at the project site, actively engaged in incorporating materials and equipment into the building or structure each normal working day. 
    Consumer fireworks: The term "consumer fireworks" means any small fireworks devices containing restricted amounts of pyrotechnic composition, designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, that comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission as provided for in Parts 1500 and 1507 of Title 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations, the U.S. Department of Transportation as provided for in Part 172 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and the American Pyrotechnics Association as provided for in the 2001 American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1, and additionally shall mean "Roman Candles". 
    Consumer fireworks retail sales facility or store: The term "consumer fireworks retail sales facility or store" shall have the same meaning as provided for by NFPA 1124; provided, however, that such term shall not include a tent, canopy, or membrane structure; provided, further, that such term shall only include such buildings with at least 4,000 square feet of retail display space and wherefrom no more than 25 percent of such retail display space is used for consumer fireworks. Only the holder of a consumer fireworks distributor's license, issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.1 may lawfully own or operate a consumer fireworks retail sales facility or store to sell consumer fireworks. 
    Consumer fireworks retail sales stand: The term "consumer fireworks retail sales stand" shall have the same meaning as provided for by NFPA 1124; provided, however, no temporary sales shall be made from any motor vehicle, from a trailer towed by a motor vehicle, or from a tent, canopy, or membrane structure. All stands shall be located within 1,000 feet of a fire hydrant, or a fire department connection of a building affiliated with such stand, unless the fire chief or fire marshal approves a location in excess of 1,000 feet of a fire hydrant or building connection. A distributor may operate no more than two stands per every permanent store or location within the jurisdiction. 
    Contractor: A person, firm or corporation who the owner of a property has employed, or contracted to perform, construction activity associated with a development. For purpose of this regulation the term contractor shall include all subcontractors who are under separate contract or agreement with the contractor for performance of a part of the work at the site. 
    Convenience store with gas: A use offering a limited variety of groceries, household goods, freshly prepared food, beer, wine and personal care items, in association with the dispensing of motor fuels as an accessory use, but in all cases excluding vehicle service, maintenance and repair. 
    Convenience store without gas: A use offering limited variety of groceries, household goods, freshly prepared food, beer, wine and personal care items. 
    Cornice: Any horizontal member, structural or nonstructural, projecting outward from the exterior walls at the roofline, including eaves and other roof overhang. 

2.6: Cornice
    Corporate limits: The term "corporate limits" means the corporate limits of the City of Griffin. 
    County: The terms "county," "the county" and "this county" mean the County of Spalding, Georgia. 
    Court: The term "court" means the municipal court provided by law for the punishment of offenders against the laws or ordinances of the city, whether it shall be the court now constituted or a court hereafter established pursuant to law. 
    Crematorium: A location containing properly installed, certified apparatus intended for the use in the act of cremation. 
    Cul-de-sac: A street having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated within the development by a vehicular turnaround. For the purpose of designation, a cul-de-sac street shall be interpreted to begin at the intersection of two or more streets nearest to the vehicular turnaround. 
    Cultural facility: A library, museum, or similar public or quasi public use displaying, preserving and exhibiting objects of community and cultural interest in one or more of the arts or sciences. 
    Culvert: A closed conduit of waterway carrying water through a highway or railroad embankment. Although there are borderline cases a culvert is distinguished from a bridge by certain characteristics, such as (a) a culvert generally has the same material all around its perimeter, and has a regular, symmetrical shape, where a bridge opening has not - in other words, a culvert is a large pipe; (b) a culvert usually has a large ratio of length to width. 
    Curb cut: The point at which vehicular access is provided to a lot from an adjoining street. 
D 
    Day care facility: A use in which shelter, care and supervision for seven or more persons on a regular basis away from their primary residence for less than 24 hours per day. A day care facility may provide basic educational instruction. The term includes, but is not limited to, nursery school, kindergarten, early learning center, playschool, pre-school, adult day care and group day care home. A day care facility must meet State of Georgia regulations. 
    DCA: The Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
    Dead-end street: Streets that do not have permanent vehicular turnarounds at its termini. 
    Debris: Any material, including wood, floating trash, suspended sediment or bed load moved by a flowing stream; detritus. This term also includes those materials that may be disposed of in a debris landfill. 
    Decorative pole: GranVille prismatic glass acorn luminaire, north Yorkshire cast aluminum fluted pole, cast iron base with steel shaft. 
    Delegation of authority: Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or an official of the city to do some act or perform some function, it shall be construed to authorize the head of such department or the official to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required function, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
    Demolition: The razing of any structure above the existing grade or demolition of any structure below the existing grade. 
    Density: The number of dwelling units per acre of land used for residential purposes. Density figures are to be in terms of net acres, total developable acres or the land devoted to residential use exclusive of streets, sidewalks, stormwater management areas, floodplain, wetlands, required open or common space, greenspace and other public lands. 
    Design professional: An individual who meets state licensure requirements applicable to the profession or practice he is engaged in. 
    Developer: Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust or any other group or combination acting as a unit who directs the undertaking or proposes to undertake development as herein defined, whether the development involves the subdivision of the land for sale to individual users, the construction of buildings or other improvements on a single land ownership, or both. 
    Development: The construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or land disturbance of a commercial use or residential subdivision which may involve the following activities: 
a.  The subdivision, consolidation or boundary adjustment of a lot or lots; 
b.  The construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, enlargement or demolition of a structure; 
c.  The mining, excavation, landfill, drilling, grading, deposition of refuse, solid or liquid waste, or fill on a zoning lot; 
d.  The alteration of the shore or bank of a pond, lake, river or other waterway; or 
e.  Any use or change in the use or intensity of use of any structure or any change in the intensity of use of land. 
    Dike: An embankment to confine or control water, especially one built along the banks of a river to prevent overflow of lowlands; a levee. 
    Director of development services: The Director of the Development Services Department of the City of Griffin or their designee. 
    Director of public works: The Director of the Public Works Department and Division of the City of Griffin or their designee. 
    Director of solid waste: The Director of the Solid Waste Division of the City of Griffin or their designee. 
    Director of stormwater: The Director of the Stormwater Department of the City of Griffin or their designee. 
    Discharge: (a) The quantity of water, silt, or other mobile substances passing along a conduit per unit of time; rate of flow; cubic feet per second; liters per second, millions of gallons per date, etc.; (b) The act involved in water or other liquid passing through an opening or along a conduit or channel; (c) The water or other liquid which emerges from an opening or passes along a conduit of channel. 
    Ditch: An artificial channel, usually distinguished from a canal by its smaller size. 
    Dog day care: Any premises containing four or more dogs which are five months old or older which provide such services as canine day care for all or part of the day, training, grooming, behavioral counseling and accessory retail sales. 
    Dog grooming: Any place or establishment, public or private, where animals are bathed, clipped or combed for the purpose of enhancing aesthetic value or health for a fee. 
    Drainage area: The area of a stream at a specified location, measured in a horizontal plane, which is enclosed by a topographic divide such that direct surface runoff from precipitation normally would drain by gravity into the river basin above the specified point. 
    Dwelling: A building used for residential occupancy. 
    Dwelling, duplex (two family): A building containing two single-family dwelling units totally separated from each other by a common wall extending from ground to roof. 
    Dwelling, multi-family: A building containing three or more dwelling units, with each dwelling unit having a common wall or common floor connecting it to at least one other dwelling unit in the building or a single family type building not connected to any other unit which is not located on a single zoning lot surrounded by open space or yard. 
    Dwelling, patio: A one-family dwelling in which all or a portion of the area required for side and rear yards is consolidated into one or more garden court spaces attached to the dwelling unit. 
    Dwelling, single-family attached: A building containing two or more single-family attached dwelling units joined at one or more party walls or other common facilities (not including the walls of an enclosed courtyard or similar area) and with property lines separating each dwelling unit, thus permitting zero lot lines. 
    Dwelling, single-family detached: A building designed or constructed as a unit for residential occupancy for one family that is not attached to another dwelling by any means, is located on a single zoning lot surrounded by open space or yard. 
    Dwelling, townhouse: One of a group of three or more single-family attached dwelling units under fee simple or condominium or cooperative ownership, as defined by the laws of the State of Georgia, in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more vertical common fire-resistant walls. For the purposes of this ordinance the term "townhouse dwelling" shall not include a single-story attached dwelling unit. 
E 
    Easement: The right, grant or privilege of using another's property for purposes such as constructing and maintaining sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines, storm sewers, gas lines, bicycle paths or other purposes requiring encroachment onto another's property. 
    Easement: Recorded authorization for a specified purpose by a property owner for the use of any designated part of the real property by another entity. 
    Eating establishment, fast food: Eating establishments where customers order and are served their food at a counter or in a motor vehicle in packed prepared to leave the premises. Consumption may be on or off-premise. 
    Eating establishment: A structure in which the use is preparation and sale of food and beverage. This does not include eating establishment, fast food. Drive through windows are not permitted. This use includes, but is not limited to, restaurants, cafes, coffee shops and bakeries. 
    Ecodevelopment: A proactive development approach, whereby actions such as incorporating natural topography, landscaping with native plant species, creating natural stormwater management systems and decreasing impervious cover are implemented in order to improve water quality, reduce infrastructure needs and to minimize the negative secondary effects on ecology caused by land development. 
    Elevation, front: The view of a building or group of buildings as seen from directly in front of the structure. 
    Equipment, heavy: Includes but is not limited to bulldozers, loaders, backhoes, bobcats, framing equipment or other similar machinery. 
    Erosion control regulations: The City of Griffin, Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance. 
    Extended stay hotel/motel: Any building containing six or more guest rooms intended or designated to be used or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied or which are occupied for sleeping purposes for guests and contain kitchen facilities for food preparation including but not limited to a refrigerator, stove or oven. Extended stay facilities may include lobbies, conference rooms, meeting rooms and child play areas. 
F 
    Family day care: A home occupation in which shelter, care and supervision are provided for six or fewer children under the age of 18 on a regular basis for less than 24 hours per day. A family day care may provide basic educational instruction. 
    Family: Two or more individuals, related by blood, marriage or legal relationship, living together in a dwelling unit intended for single-family occupancy; two or more non-related individuals without disabilities as recognized by the Americans with Disabilities Act 42, U.S.C. section 12101, et seq., living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit intended for single-family occupancy; or a combination of two or more related and non-related persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling intended for single-family occupancy. 
    Farm goods: Goods produced on site including but not limited to crops, plants, trees, maintaining livestock, poultry or bees. 
    Farm operations: Commercial agricultural uses including crop production, dairy, stock, poultry, commercial greenhouse, livestock raising and other related uses with the necessary uses for treating or storing the products created on site, however this use should be secondary. This also includes related structures related to farming operations. 
    Farmer's market: The offering for sale of fresh agricultural products directly to the consumer at an open air market occurring at a pre-determined area where the vendors are generally individuals who raised the vegetables or produce. This does not include second hand goods or meats. 
    Farmstand: A building or structure used for retail sales of fresh fruit, vegetable, flowers, herbs or plants not to exceed 500 gross square feet. May also include the sale of other unprocessed foodstuffs such as jams, jellies, pickles, baked goods or handi-crafts. No commercially processed or packed items shall be sold at a farmstand. 
    Feather banner: A banner made from lightweight material and attached to a pole and is designed to wave in the wind. 
    Feed store: An establishment engaged in retail sale of supplies and agricultural products including the bulk storage of fertilizers and related agrichemicals. 
    Final plan or plan: A detailed engineering drawing(s) showing the proposed improvements required in the development of a given parcel and demonstrating compliance with the requirements of these regulations and other law, prepared by a qualified design professional who is licensed to prepare such in accordance with state law. 
    Financial institution: A bank, savings and loan, credit union, mortgage office or automated teller machine (ATM). Financial institutions shall not include stand alone currency exchange, check cashing establishment or pawn shop. 
    Finish floor elevation (FFE): The elevation at which the building foundation meets the prevailing ground surface 
    Flood boundary, 100-year: Those areas of the City of Griffin having a one percent chance or greater of being partially or completely inundated by flood waters, either from a defined river, creek or stream or from the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff or surface water from any sources. For purposes of this ordinance, the 100-year flood plan shall be as shown on flood hazard boundary maps, published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or as determined from formal flood hazard studies prepared by the City of Griffin Public Works and Utilities Department. 
    Flood hazard area: Any normally dry area that is susceptible to being inundated by water. The flood hazard areas include, but are not limited to, land subject to the 100-year flood. 
    Flood peak: The maximum discharge of a particular flood at a given point along a stream. 
    Floodplain: Any plain which borders a stream channel and is covered by its water in time of flood; stream bed areas subject to recurrent overflow, or inundation. 
    Floodway: The channel of a river, stream or other watercourse and the adjacent land area that must be reserved to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot at any point. 
    Floor area: The heated space of a dwelling, which is exclusive of attic, unfinished basement, garage, carport, patio and open porches measured from the exterior face of the exterior walls or a dwelling. Also, the gross leasable floor area for any business or industry based on interior dimensions. 
    Fps: Feet per second. 
    Frontage: Distance of lot as measured along the right-of-way. 
    Funeral home: A building or part of a building used for human funeral services. Such facility may contain space and facilities for embalming and the performance of other services used in the preparation of the dead for burial, the performance of autopsies and other surgical procedures, the storage of caskets and other related funeral supplies, the storage of funeral vehicles not including cremation services. 
G 
    Gender: The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
    General automotive repair: A wide range of mechanical and electrical repair and maintenance services for automotive vehicles, such as passenger cars, trucks, and vans, and all trailers; or, engine repair and replacement. See NAICS Code 811111 for further explanation. 
    Georgia DOT or GDOT: The (State of) Georgia Department of Transportation. 
    Gph: Gallons per hour. 
    Gpm: Gallons per minute. 
    Grading: The movement, removal or addition of earth on a site by the use of mechanical equipment. 
    Greenhouse: Retail business whose primary activity is the selling of plants grown on the site and having enclosed and open space for growing or display. 
    Group home for disabled persons: A residential use or facility, located in a single-family dwelling, where non-related persons with a disability recognized by The Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. section 12101, et seq., may live together in a residential setting, free from discrimination in local governmental rules, policies, practices or services, except as would constitute a direct threat to the health and safety of the occupants or other individuals. 
    Grubbing: The removal of vegetation by methods such as digging, raking, dragging or otherwise disturbing the roots of vegetation. 
    Guest house: A detached accessory dwelling unit located on the same lot with a single-family dwelling. The square foot area of a guess house may not exceed 1,000 square feet in floor area and may only be used by non-paying guests or relatives of the owners or occupants of the principal building. The guest house shall not be rented or otherwise occupied as a separate dwelling. 
H 
    Halfway house: A halfway house provides a structured living environment for persons learning to adjust to society after being imprisoned. 
    Headwater: (A) The water upstream from a structure; (B) the source of a stream. 
    Health department: The Spalding County Health Department. 
    Heated floor area: The finished area within a building or structure that is heated by the main central heating system installed to serve said building or structure. For example, the floor area of an unfinished basement or garage is not included in determining the amount of heated floor area of a residential dwelling. 
    Home occupation: An occupation or activity for gain or support conducted by a member of the family residing on the premises with which there is: 
a.  No group instruction, assembly or activity, and no signage is used to indicate from the exterior that the building is being utilized in any part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling; 
b.  There is no commodity sold upon the premises; 
c.  No person is employed other than a member of the immediate family residing on the premises; 
d.  No mechanical equipment is used except that which is normally used for purely domestic purposes. 
    Homeless shelter: Charitable, non-profit, short-term housing and/or room and board accommodations for the homeless for which there is no charge, monetary or other to the person being provided such temporary housing. 
    Hospice: A home-like facility for the care of terminally ill patients in which food, shelter and nursing care is provided. 
    Hospital: Any institution receiving in-patients or a public institution receiving out-patients and authorized under Georgia Law to render medical, surgical and/or obstetrical care. Cremation services can be provided as an accessory use. 
    Hotel: A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public and providing additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment and recreational facilities. 
    HUD: The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
    Hydrology: The science of dealing with the waters of the earth in their various forms, precipitation, evaporation, runoff and storage. 
I 
    Impervious surface: Any material or surface that prevents absorption or infiltration of stormwater into the ground. Includes, but is not limited to, buildings, accessory structures, driveways of asphalt or concrete surface, parking lots and sidewalks. 
    Imperviousness: The quality or condition of a material that minimizes percolation. 
    Industrialized building: A factory-fabricated dwelling or commercial unit built in one or more sections designed to fit together on a permanent foundation but which usually does not originally have wheels for movement and which is constructed in accordance with the Georgia Industrialized Building Act which bears the seal of approval issued by DCA. 
    Institutional use: A building, facility or land owned by a government, non-profit corporation, association or entity, intended for public or semi-public use, such as courthouses, schools, churches, parks and recreation areas. 
    Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    Interstate: A divided major highway with full control of access and with no crossings at grade. These roads are designated interstate by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
    Invert: The floor, bottom or lowest part of the internal cross-section of conduit. 
J 
    Jack arch: Architectural term for a flat arch. 

2.7: Jack Arch
    Joint authority: A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
    Junk yard: Any use on private property involving the parking, storage or disassembly of junked vehicles or wrecked or non-operable automobiles, trucks or other vehicles; storage, bailing or otherwise dealing in junk, animal hides, scrap iron or other metals, used paper, used cloth, used plumbing fixtures, old stoves, old refrigerators and other old household appliances, used brick, wood or other building materials. These uses shall be considered junk yards whether or not all or parts of these operations are conducted inside a building or in conjunction with, in addition to or accessory to, other use of the premises. 
    Junked or inoperable motor vehicle: Any motor vehicle that is wrecked, wholly or partially dismantled, majorly disassembled, or missing a key component, such as a motor, transmission or body parts, so as to be incapable of normal operation in the manner intended, including disassembled parts, pieces, or components thereof; failure to display a current license tag, tag decal, or (if required) current vehicle safety or emission sticker, shall create a presumption the motor vehicle is junked or inoperable. 
K 
    Keeper and proprietor: The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and co-partnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
    Kennel: A commercial facility where boarding, caring for and keeping of dogs or cats or other animals or combination thereof is carried on for the purpose of providing an income or revenue. 
L 
    Land area per dwelling unit: The amount of land in square feet required for each dwelling unit permitted on a zoning lot. 
    Land disturbance: Any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
    Laundromat: A facility where patrons wash, dry, or dry clean clothing or other fabrics in machines operated by the patron. 
    Licensed land surveyor: A person who, by reason of his knowledge of the several sciences and of the principles of land surveying acquired by practical experience and formal education, is qualified to engage in the practice of land surveying, as attested by the issuance to said person of a license as a land surveyor by the State of Georgia. 
    Licensed landscape architect: A person who, by reason of his special knowledge of natural, physical and mathematical sciences and the principles and methodology of landscape architectural design acquired by practical experience and formal education or both, is qualified to engage in the practice of landscape architecture, as attested by the issuance to said person of a license as a landscape architect by the State of Georgia. 
    Light industrial use: Any use which involves manufacturing, processing, assembly or storage operations where all operations are conducted entirely within a building and no noise, vibration, smoke, gas, fume, odor, dust, fire hazard, radiation or other injurious or obnoxious condition related to the operation creates a nuisance beyond the premises. 
    Lintel: A horizontal architectural member spanning and usually carrying the load above an opening. 

2.8: Lintel
    Liner building: A liner building is a specialized building, parallel to the street, which is designed to conceal an area such as a parking lot or loading dock. 
    Loading space or area: Space logically and conveniently located for pickup and delivery service, scaled to the vehicles expected to be used and accessible to such vehicles at all times. Also defined as an area to provide safe loading and unloading of passengers such as a day care facility or church. 
    Loading, off-street: An unobstructed area provided and maintained for the temporary parking of trucks and other motor vehicles for the purpose of loading and unloading goods, wares, materials and merchandise. 
    Local street: Streets that represent the lowest category of the functional classification system. Local streets are used primarily for direct access to residential, commercial, industrial or other abutting property. They do not include streets carrying through traffic. 
    Loft apartment: An apartment(s) customarily located on the second story of a retail business or professional office located in the commercial business district (CBD) or in some instances the planned commercial development (PCD) zoning districts. 
    Lot: A recorded area of land under one ownership of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are required by the zoning ordinance, as well as certain nonconforming lots of record exempted by the zoning ordinance. Such lots shall have frontage on a public street or on an approved private street as set out in the zoning ordinance and may consist of: 
a.  A single lot of record; 
b.  A portion of a lot of record; 
c.  A combination of complete lots of record or complete lots of record and portions of lots of record or of portions of lots of record; 
d.  A parcel of land described by metes and bounds. 
e.  In the case of divisions, boundary adjustment, or consolidation shall no residential area of land be created which does not meet the requirements of the zoning ordinance. The grant of an interest, for security or other purpose, in real property for less than an entire lot, or the foreclosure or sale of such interest, shall not be deemed to create a legal lot unless property approved, by variance, granted by the board of commissioners, in accordance with these regulations and the zoning ordinance. 
    Lot, corner: A lot having frontage at the intersection of two or more public streets. 

2.9: Corner Lot
    Lot, corner (double-frontage): A lot located at the junction of two or more intersection streets, having an interior angle of less than 135 degrees, with a boundary line thereof bordering on two of the streets. 

2.10: Double Frontage
    Lot, flag: A lot whose access is provided to the bulk of the lot by means of a narrow corridor or panhandle and does not meet the normally required minimum lot width. 

2.11: Flag Lot
    Lot, interior: A lot, other than a corner lot, with frontage on only one lot. 
    Lot, nonconforming: A lot that has less than the minimum area or minimum dimensions required in the zone in which the lot is located. 
    Lot, through: A lot that fronts upon two parallel streets or that fronts upon two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. 
    Lot coverage: That portion of the lot that is covered by principal structures, accessory buildings and impervious surface, including, but not limited to, driveways of asphalt or concrete, parking areas, walkways and sidewalks. 
    Lot depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the general direction of the side lot lines. 
    Lot line: A boundary of record that divides one lot from another or from a public or private street or any other space. 
    Lot line: A line defining the ownership boundary of a lot. 
    Lot of record: A lot that exists as shown or described on a plat or deed in the records of the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Spalding County. 
    Lot width: The distance between side lot lines measured at the front building line. 
    Lot width: Distance between the side lot lines measured as a tangent to the front building line as described by the zoning ordinance. 
M 
    Major collector street: The part of the road classification system that serves as the principal network for through traffic flow. Major collectors have a primary function of providing neighborhood linkages and aggregating traffic, then carrying it to the arterial street system. They may also penetrate a neighborhood, distributing trips to ultimate destinations and in a few instances providing direct access to individual abutting property. 
    Manufactured home: A structure transportable in one or more sections and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems, contained therein. Such dwelling is regulated by the manufactured home construction and safety standards established under the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act adopted in 1976, bearing an insignia issued by U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
    Manufacturing: The mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products, including the assembling of component parts, the manufacturing of products, the blending of materials, such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins, or liquors. This includes processing, assembly and storage operations. 
    Master plan: A comprehensive plan, which may consist of several maps, data and other descriptive matter for the physical development of the city or any portion thereof. This includes any amendments, extensions or additions thereof recommended by the city manager and adopted by the board of commissioners indicating the general location for major roads, parks or other public open spaces, public building sites, routes for public, utilities, zoning districts or other similar information. 
    Mean sea level: The average height of the sea for all states of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of these regulations, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
    Minor collector street: The part of the road classification system designed primarily to serve the collection function for a group of local streets. Additionally, it provides direct access to individual abutting property. Minor collectors are not meant to handle long through trips. 
    Mixed use: A building or development containing more than one permitted use. Multiple uses are allowed to be stacked vertically and contained in the same building. 
    Month, year: The terms "month" and "year" mean calendar month and calendar year unless otherwise provided. 
    Motel: An establishment providing temporary or overnight sleeping accommodations for the traveling public with a majority of all rooms having direct access to the outside without the necessity of passing through the main lobby of the building. 
    Motor vehicle parts (used) merchant wholesalers: A wide range of mechanical and electrical repair and maintenance services for automotive vehicles, such as passenger cars, trucks, and vans, and all trailers; or, engine repair and replacement. See NAICS Code 811111 for further explanation. 
    Motor vehicle towing: A wide range of mechanical and electrical repair and maintenance services for automotive vehicles, such as passenger cars, trucks, and vans, and all trailers; or, engine repair and replacement. See NAICS Code 811111 for further explanation. 
    Municipal court: The term "municipal court" means the Municipal Court of the City of Griffin. 
N 
    Names of officers, departments: The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Griffin" were added. 
    National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards: The national building code for all manufactured homes built since June 15, 1976, written and administered by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (also known as the "HUD" Code"). 
    Neighborhood retail, service or office uses: Intended to serve or accommodate the needs of a specific segment of the community or area. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of frequently or recurrently needed goods for household consumption, such as prepackaged food and beverage and limited household supplies and hardware. These establishments shall not exceed 5,000 square feet. These services are primarily for the residents of the HDR-A district provided that they are conducted entirely within a wholly and permanently enclosed building or buildings which shall be of architectural design compatible to the dwellings within the HDR-A development. 
    Newspaper publishing facility: A commercial printing operation involving a process that is considered printing, imprinting, reproducing or duplicating images and using printing methods including but not limited to offset printing, lithography, web offset, flexographic, and screen process printing. 
    Non-conforming building or structure: An existing building or structure erected or constructed prior to adoption of this ordinance, or the adoption of any amendment hereto, on a lot now zoned so that such building or structure could not be built or constructed. 
    Non-conforming use: A use of land existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance, or the adoption of any amendment hereto that was lawful at the time the use of land was initiated, but which has been rendered unlawful by the adoption or amendment of this ordinance. 
    Nontechnical and technical words: The ordinary significance shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case they shall have the significance attached to them by experts in such trade, or with reference to the subject matter. 
    Number: The singular or plural number shall each include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
    Nursery: See Greenhouse. 
    Nursing home facility: Housing for elderly, chronically or terminally ill persons in which food, shelter and nursing care if provided for compensation. 
    Nursing Home: A home licensed by the state for the aged or chronically or incurably ill persons in which five or more such persons not of the immediate family are provided with food, shelter and care for compensation or a non-profit, but not including hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured. 
O 
    O.C.G.A: The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
    Oath: The term "oath" includes the term "affirmation." 
    Office, professional: Includes, but is not limited to, offices for accounting, architectural, auditing, bookkeeping, engineering, finance, insurance, law, medical and real estate professions. 
    Office, temporary: A manufactured or modular building, which is used as a sales office, no-site construction management office or related functions. 
    Official zoning map: The map officially adopted contemporaneously with and as an integral part of this zoning ordinance that conclusively shows the location and boundaries of all zoned districts existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance and the adoption of future amendments thereto which reclassifies land by districts. 
    Open space: Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space or for the preservation and protection of environmentally sensitive land areas or natural land features. 

2.12: Open Space
    Or, and: The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Ordinance: This ordinance and all future amendments thereto, together with the official zoning map adopted contemporaneous with this ordinance. 
    Outdoor display: The displaying of goods or merchandise outdoors on the property with the intent to advertise for sale. 
    Outdoor storage: The keeping, in an unenclosed area, of any goods, salvage, material, merchandise, storage trailers or vehicles outdoors on the property for more than 24 hours. The term "outdoor storage" shall not include the keeping of vehicles or manufactured housing structures on sales lots in districts which allow such sales lots. 
    Outparcel: A portion of a larger parcel of land generally designed as a site for a separate structure and business from the larger tract. An outparcel may or may not be a subdivision of a larger parcel. To be recognized as an outparcel, the portion must be identified on a site plan approved for the larger parcel. 
    Owner: The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
P 
    Parking lot: An off-street surfaced ground level area for the temporary storage of operable passenger and commercial vehicles whether for compensation or free. 
    Parking spaces: An area for off-street automobile parking. 
    Parking structure (deck): Parking spaces and adjacent access drives, aisles, and ramps that are located in a structure with two or more levels. 
    Pawnshop: Any business that loans money on deposit of personal property or deals in the purchase or possession of personal property on condition of selling the same back again to the pledger or depositor, or loans or advances money on personal property by taking chattel mortgage security thereon, and takes or receives such personal property. 
    Pediment: A pediment is a low-pitched triangular gable on the front of some buildings in the Grecian or Greek Revival style of architecture. 

2.13: Pediment
    Permitted use: Any use allowed as a matter of right in a zoning district and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district classifications. 
    Person: As used in this ordinance, the term "person" shall mean an individual, group of individuals, and all forms of legal entities recognized by Georgia Law as having the ability to own property, transact business or sue and be used. 
    Personal care home: A residential use or facility, located in a single-family dwelling, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management, for compensation, to provide personal services, protective care and oversight of ambulatory, non-related persons who need a monitored environment but who do not have injuries or disabilities which require chronic or convalescent are, including medical, nursing, or intermediate care. Personal services include, but are not limited to, individual assistance with or supervision in areas of nutrition, medication and provision of transient medical care. Personal care homes may include those facilities which monitor resident's daily functioning and location and have the capability for crisis intervention. Such term does not include: 
a.  Old age residences which are devoted to independent living units with kitchen facilities in which residents have the option of preparing and serving some or all of their own meals; 
b.  Boarding facilities which do not provide personal care; or 
c.  Group homes for disabled persons, as defined by the Fair Housing Act Amendments of 1988, 42 U.S.C. section 3601, et seq. 
    Personal service establishment: Enterprises serving individual necessities of a non-medical nature including, but not limited to, beauty and barber shops, tanning, dry cleaning pick-up(retail), shoe repair, spa, locksmith and other similar establishments. These may also include retail sales of products related to the services provided. 
    Places of public assembly: A structure, portion of a structure or area (either indoor or outdoor), including, but not limited to, movie theaters; concert halls; stadiums; amusement parks; carnivals; churches; elementary, middle, high, secondary and post graduate schools; day care centers; private commercial schools, such as martial arts or dance studios; clubs, lodges and arenas, designed primarily for people to gather to observe or participate in a single event or series of single events, including but not limited to the presentation of a motion picture, a concert, an educational presentation, a sermon, an inspirational presentation, a rally, a lecture, a drama, dance, musical or other live performance, or a sporting event. 
    Places of worship: Places where religious institutions provide assembly with a seating capacity and a sanctuary or main activity area. 
    Planned development: A tract of land developed under a single ownership or control based on a plan which allows for flexibility of design not available under normal zoning district requirements. 
    Planned shopping development: Two or more commercial establishments with a total gross floor area of at least 40,000 square feet planned and managed as a single unit with off-street parking and loading facilities provided on the property. 
    Planning and zoning board (PZB): The City of Griffin, Georgia Planning and Zoning Board appointed by the board of board of commissioners. 
    Plat: A map, plan or layout of a county, city, town section, subdivision or development certified by a registered surveyor indicating the location and boundaries of a property or properties. See also site plan. 
    Preceding, following: The terms "preceding" and "following" mean generally next before and next after unless the context requires a different significance. 
    Private or public club, lodge, social center or meeting room: Building or facility for the purpose of social, educational, or recreational purpose. 
    Professional or design professional: An individual who meets state licensure requirements applicable to the profession or practice he is engaged in. 
    Project: A principal building or structure or group of buildings or structures planned and designed as an interdependent unit together with all accessory uses or structures, utilities, drainage, access and circulation facilities, whether built in whole or phases. Examples include: a principal building on a lot, a residential subdivision, a multi-family development, a shopping center or an office park. 
    Property owner: Any person who owns fee title to a given area of land, excluding, however, any recorded easement or right-of-way. 
    Property: The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
    Psi: Pounds per square inch. 
    Public place: The term "public place" means any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
R 
    Radio and/or television and/or transmission tower: Any exterior apparatus designed for telephone, radio, or television communications or data transmission through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
    Recreational vehicle: Any type of portable structure without a permanent foundation, which can be towed, hauled or is self-propelled, and designed for temporary living accommodations for recreational, camping and travel use, including, but not limited to, travel trailers, truck campers (on or off the truck), camping trailers, buses and motor homes. 
    Recycling center, collection: Any facility utilized for the purpose of collecting materials to be recycled including, but not limited, plastics, glass, paper and aluminum materials. Such use may be principal or accessory to a non-residential use on non-residentially zoned property. 
    Religious activity: A use of land involving the exercise of religious believers [beliefs], practices or worship. It is not the intent of this ordinance to regulate religious activity or to impede any person's exercise of religious beliefs. 
    Repair garage, heavy equipment: A use which may provide a full range of repairs and services including, but not limited to, major overhauls, engine repair, rebuilding and replacement on heavy duty trucks and equipment and may include paint and body shops. The outside storage of unlicensed and unregistered vehicles is prohibited as part of this use. 
    Research or experimental laboratory: An establishment which conducts research, development or controlled production of high technology electronic, industrial or scientific products or commodities for sale or a laboratory conducting educational/medical research or testing. This term includes but is not limited to a biotechnology firm or manufacturer of non-toxic computer components. 
    Residential industrialized building: Any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof; which bears an insignia of approval issued by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs; and which is used or intended to be used as a dwelling units. 
    Residential: Pertaining to the use of land, means premises such as single-family detached and attached homes, patio homes, townhouses, manufactured or modular homes, duplexes, condominiums or apartment complexes, which contain habitable rooms for non-transient occupancy and which are designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking and eating therein. 
    Responsible party: In the context of enforcement procedures, a person who is alleged to have committed, causes, continued or created a violation of the terms, requirements, regulations, or provisions of these regulations whether as a direct act, through lack of action or neglect, or at the direction of or on behalf of others. A responsible party may be the owner of a premises where a violation has occurred; an occupant whether through ownership, lease or other tenancy; a contractor, building or developer; an agent of or person otherwise acting on behalf of the aforementioned parties; or other person acting in violation of these regulations. 
    Retail business: A business consisting primarily of buying merchandise or articles in gross and selling to general consumers in small quantities not in bulk and not for resale. These businesses include but are not limited to clothing shops, florists, home goods, drugstore. 
    Retail business, heavy equipment: The sale or rental of heavy equipment. Heavy equipment includes but is not limited to backhoe, crane, wheel loader, bulldozer, forklift and other similar equipment. 
    Retail, large-scale: All retail sales and service uses on sites that include more than 74,999 square feet of gross floor area (in aggregate). 
    Retirement center: A residential apartment or fee simple housing development built exclusively for senior citizens whereby typically a dining facility, aquatic and or fitness center, library and community activities are incorporated in the development and independent living is promoted. 
    Return cornice: The continuation of a cornice in a different direction, as at the gable end of a house. 

2.14: Return Cornice
    Right-of-way: A strip of land designated, reserved, dedicated or purchased for the purpose of pedestrian or vehicular access, utility line installation or other use. 
    Road classification map: Comprehensive plan of arterial, collector and minor streets and roads for all or a portion of the city. 
    Runoff coefficient: The rate of runoff to precipitation. 
S 
    Salvage yard: Use of property for outdoor storage, keeping, abandonment, sale or resale of salvage including scrap metal, used lumber, salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. 
    Schedule of fees and charges: The phrase "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list compiled and published by the city which contains rates for utility and other public enterprises, fees, deposit amounts, performance bonds, and various charges as determined from time to time by the board of commissioners, an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the city clerk where it is available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
    School: A facility where persons regularly assembly for the purpose of instruction or education including any playgrounds, stadiums or other structures and grounds used in conjunction therewith. The term "school" shall include, but is not limited to, public and private schools used for pre-kindergarten, primary, secondary, or post-secondary education. 
    Seating, minimum: Where this Code requires seating for a minimum number of persons, only chairs, stools and booths shall be provided as the required seating. The capacity of seats without dividing arms shall be determined by allotting 18 inches per occupant. 
    Security bars: Metal bars, including, but not limited to, wrought iron guards and sliding scissor gates, attached to or covering a window or glass door which are intended to provide additional protection against vandalism and burglaries. 
    Segmental arch: A shallow arch; an arch that is less than a semicircle. 

2.15: Segmental Arch
    Self-storage: A building or group of buildings divided into separate compartments used to meet the temporary storage needs of small businesses or for personal use and may include refrigeration facilities. 
    Service station: A use which provides for the sale of motor vehicle fuels and automobile accessories and which may provide minor repair and maintenance services. A service station shall be limited to two bays. 
    Setback line: The minimum required distance from any lot line that establishes the area within which the principal structure may be erected or placed. 
    Shall, may: The term "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory; the term "may" is permissive. 
    Sidewalk: The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Sight triangle: A triangular-shaped portion of land established at street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection. 

2.16: Sight Triangles
    Sign: Any name, identification, description, display, illustration or device that is affixed to, posted on or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, land, vehicle or otherwise affixed for display in view of the general public and that directs attention to a product, place, activity, idea, person, institution or business. 
    Signature and subscription: The terms "signature" and "subscription" include the mark of all illiterate or infirm persons. 
    Site plan, final and subdivision (construction drawings): Engineered plans and necessary supporting documents required for a proposed project to constitute the complete application for construction approval. Plans shall include complete and detailed engineering and layout drawings for all public and private improvements and utilities, in addition to any ancillary calculations. 
    Site plan, minor: An engineered drawing proposed improvements to a site of less than 1.1 acres on which the city has not previously approved a site plan, or on which there is an existing approved plan that has been closed (built). The improvements must be minor in nature and generally, (1) not change the internal or external traffic flow patterns; (2) not increase the number of dwelling units; (3) not increase the non residential building size by more than 2,500 square feet or 75 percent of the gross building area, whichever is less; and (4) generally, the proposed disturbed area should not exceed 5,000 square feet. The applicant must provide the department of stormwater an impervious site change form noting the limits of additional impervious area on the site. 
    Site plan, preliminary residential and subdivision: Engineered plans required for all residential projects resulting in the creation of three or more lots or any new development involving 1.1 acres or more. Preliminary plans must show general design of a site development or subdivision project and its public improvements including, but not limited to, location and width of streets and structures and their general relationship to the topography of the land; water and sanitary sewer, drainage, lot sizes and arrangement, future development (if applicable) and location and use of adjoining property. 
    Site plan: A final construction plan, other than a final subdivision final plan, providing a graphic portrayal of a proposed development describing both existing and proposed conditions of the lot(s), including, but not limited to, use, location and bulk of buildings and structures, density of development, public facilities, means of ingress and egress, landscaping, signs, drainage and lighting. 
    Site work: Development activity to prepare a property for construction of buildings or finished structures, including clearing, grubbing, grading and installation of soil erosion and sedimentation control facilities. 
    Soil erosion and sedimentation control regulations: That section of the soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance dealing with sediment control during construction. These regulations are enforced by the public works and stormwater departments. 
    Soldier course: A course of bricks laid on their ends so that only their long sides are vertical. 

2.17: Soldier Course
    Special use: A use which within certain zoning districts specified by this ordinance is not permitted as a matter of right but may be permitted within a district by approval of the board of board of commissioners, following a public hearing at which the commission reviews the proposed plans for the use, its location, design, relationship to adjacent properties, and other conditions peculiar to the proposal which may adversely affect adjoining property, under objective criteria; has found the proposal not to be in conflict with the intent of this ordinance; and has approved the use as specified. A special use permit is valid for a period of one year from the date of approval. 
    State: Whenever the terms "state," "the state" and "this state" are used, they shall refer to the State of Georgia. 
    Storefront: Display windows of a building housing a commercial use visible from a street, sidewalk, or other pedestrian way accessible to the public, or adjacent to public or private property. 
    Storm drainage system: Any structure used principally to retain, detain, collect, direct, transfer, carry, convey, distribute or treat, singularly or in combination, storm water or other surface water, including, but not limited to, aprons, basins, berms, BMP facilities, catchments, conduits, culverts, dams, dikes, ditches, drains, drops, filters, grates, infiltration devices, inlets, manholes, man-made channels, outlets, pipes, ponds, rip-rap, risers, spillways, storm sewers, swales and trenches; and also including any maintenance easements needed for such structures. 
    Street: A right-of-way generally intended for the movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and which serves as point of access to abutting property. The term "street" includes streets, sidewalks, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes and all other public highways in the city, unless otherwise provided. Street type is officially defined according to the city's road classification map. 
    Street, classification: As described in the City of Griffin Comprehensive Transportation Plan adopted October 2002: 
a.  Arterials connect activity centers and carry large volumes of traffic at moderate speeds. The arterial system in Griffin includes US 19/41, SR 16, SR 155, SR 92 and Bus 19/41. 
b.  Collectors provide access to activity centers from residential areas. Their purpose is to collect traffic from streets in residential and commercial areas and distribute the traffic to the arterial system. The collector system in Griffin includes Meriwether Street, College Street, Poplar Street, Solomon Street, Experiment Street, Broad Street, Maple Drive, McIntosh Road, Old Atlanta Highway and North Hill St. 
c.  Local streets feed the collector system from low volume residential and commercial areas. The remaining roadways in the city are classified as local streets. The majority of Griffin's roadway system is classified as local streets. 
    Structure, accessory: A subordinate structure, customarily incidental to a principal structure or use and is located on the same lot. Examples of accessory structures in residential districts shall include tool sheds, storage buildings or detached garages. 
    Structure, principal: A structure in which the principal use or purpose on a property occurs, and to which all other structures on the property are subordinate. Principal may also mean the main or primary structure. 
    Structure: Anything constructed, erected or placed with a fixed location on or in the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. The term "structure" shall include, but is not limited to, buildings, manufactured or modular homes, signs, swimming pools or fall-out shelters. Privacy walls or fences shall not be considered structures. 
    Subdivision: All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, or building development and includes all division of land involving a new street or a chance in existing streets and includes re-subdivision and, where appropriate to the context relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. The term includes replatting of any division of land involving a new street, or a change in existing streets. 
    Subdivision, boundary adjustment plan: A legal document, prepared by a qualified professional licensed to prepare such in the State of Georgia, for the purpose of the legal reconfiguring of contiguous lots in the same ownership. 
    Subdivision, boundary adjustment: The adjusting of common property line(s) or boundaries between adjacent lots, tracts, or parcels for the purpose of accommodating a transfer of land, rectifying a disputed property line location, or freeing such a disputed property line location, or freeing such a boundary from any difference or discrepancies. The resulting adjustment shall not create any additional lots and all reconfigured lots shall contain sufficient area and dimension to meet minimum requirements for zoning and building purposes. (See also consolidation subdivision) 
    Subdivision, consolidation plan: A legal document, prepared by a qualified professional licensed to prepare such in the State of Georgia, for the purpose of the legal removal of common property lines between abutting lots in the same ownership. 
    Subdivision, consolidation: The removal of common property lines between abutting lots in the same ownership. (See also boundary adjustment subdivision) 
    Subdivision, major: Any subdivision that does not meet the requirements of a minor subdivision. 
    Subdivision, minor: Any subdivision that does not result in the creation of more than three lots out of one or more lots, and does not require the construction of new streets or public water or sewer mains. 
    Substantial compliance: A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code or ordinances amendatory thereof, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient; and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided. 
    SWM facility: Any storm drainage facility that is designed or otherwise intended to, or that actually does, detain or retain stormwater or other surface water. When this term is used in the text of these regulations, all portions of such a facility shall be considered as included. 
    SWM: Stormwater management. 
T 
    Tenant and occupant: The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupied, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Time of concentration: The time it takes for runoff to travel from the hydraulically most distant part of the watershed to the point of reference. 
    Title pawn: A title pawn is an act of using a vehicle title to acquire a pay day loan. 
    Traffic study: An analysis conducted to assess the impact of vehicular traffic generated by a new use or change in use on existing or future road network and to obtain the required information in evaluating any potential road network improvements. 
    Transit station: A commercial or public facility for the loading or unloading of passengers, luggage, and packages including sales of fares and which include accessory restaurants, indoor commercial businesses but not including airports. This facility operates a system of regularly scheduled buses and /or trains available to the public. 
    Transitional housing facility: A building or buildings in which is provided long-term but no permanent living accommodations for more than six (6) persons who have no permanent residence and are in need of long-term housing assistance. 
    Transom: A bar of wood or stone across the top of a door or window 

2.18: Transom
    Tree protection ordinance: The City of Griffin, tree protection ordinance concerning the planting or removal of trees. The City of Griffin Tree Board enforces the tree ordinance. All planting and removal of trees within city right-of-way requires the permission of the tree board. 
    Truck terminal: A primary use of property where trucks/trailers are temporarily stored, maintained or based. Trucks/trailers shall have current registration and license plats with decal. 
U 
    Urgent care: The delivery of ambulatory care in a facility dedicated to the delivery of medical care outside of a hospital emergency department, usually on an unscheduled, walk-in basis. Urgent care centers are primarily used to treat patients who have an injury or illness that requires immediate care but is not serious enough to warrant a visit to an emergency room. Often urgent care centers are not open on a continuous basis, unlike a hospital emergency room which would be open at all times. 
    Use, accessory: A use located on the same lot with a principal use or building such as a garage, storage building, swimming pool, children's play area, etc. 
    Use, principal: The main purpose for which a zoning is intended and for which it may [be] used. 
V 
    Variance: A relaxation of the terms of this ordinance that will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. A variance cannot be granted to change the text of this ordinance, to reclassify property on the zoning map or to allow a use not permissible within the district involved. 
    Veterinary services or clinic: An establishment for the care and medical treatment of animals. 
    VPD: Vehicles per day. 
W 
    Warehouse: A use engaged in storage, wholesale, and distribution of manufactured products, supplies and equipment, excluding bulk storage of materials that are inflammable or explosive or that present hazards or conditions commonly recognized as offensive. 
    Watchman's or caretakers single family dwelling: A temporary accessory structure containing living quarters and kitchen facilities for housing persons responsible for overseeing and maintaining security for the main use on the site. 
    Water and wastewater system: City of Griffin Water and Sanitary Sewer System. 
    Wholesale business: A business primarily engaged in the selling of goods or articles in gross to retailers for resale and not directly to the consumer. 
    Writing: The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals, and also pictures, illustrations and printed or written designs. 
Y 
    Yard, front: The minimum permitted space between the front building line and the front property line. 
    Yard, rear: The minimum permitted space between the rear building line and the rear property line. 
    Yard, side: The minimum permitted space between the side building line and the side property line. 
    Yard: An open space that lies between the building and the nearest property line. The minimum required yard on a zoning lot as set forth in this chapter that is left unoccupied with structures, parking and facilities. A yard may also be known as a setback. 
    Year: The term "year" means a calendar year. 
Z 
    Zoning administrator: The person who has been designated by the city manager to administer the enforcement of this ordinance. 
    Zoning decision: Final legislative action by the board of commissioners which results with: 
a.  The adoption of a zoning ordinance; 
b.  The adoption of an amendment to this ordinance which changes the text of this ordinance; 
c.  The adoption of an amendment to this ordinance which rezones property from one zoning classification to another; 
d.  The adoption of an amendment to this ordinance which zones property to be annexed into the city; or 
e.  The grant of a permit relating to a special use of property. 
    Zoning district: A section of the City of Griffin, Georgia, as designated on the official zoning map within which zoning regulations are uniform and compatible. 
    Zoning map: The official map of the City of Griffin, Georgia, entitled "Zoning Map of the City of Griffin," indicating the location of zoning districts in the city. 
    Zoning ordinance: An ordinance establishing procedures and zones or districts within the respective territorial boundaries of the City of Griffin, Georgia, which regulate the uses and development standards of property within such zones or districts. The term also includes the map adopted in conjunction with the textual ordinance which shows the zones or districts classifying property depicted thereon. 
    Zoning: The power of local governments to provide within their respective boundaries for the zoning or districting of property for various uses and the prohibition of other or different uses within such zones or districts and for the regulation of development and the improvement of real estate within such zones or districts in accordance with the uses of property for which such zones or districts were established. 
( Ord. No. 16-09, § 1, 7-26-2016 ; Ord. No. 18-08, § 1, 5-8-2018 ) 
203. - REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION POLICY. 
a.  It is the policy of the City of Griffin, Georgia, pursuant to the federal Fair Housing Act Amendments of 1988, 42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq. (hereafter "FHAA") and Title II of the Americans With Disabilities Act (hereafter "ADA", or collectively the "fair housing laws") to provide individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodation in its rules, regulations, standards, policies, practices, and procedures pertaining to housing and development to ensure equal access by persons with disabilities and to developers of housing for persons with disabilities. This section establishes a procedure for making requests for reasonable accommodation in land use, zoning, and development regulations as found and contained in this Code. It is the intent of the City of Griffin, its officers, staff, and agents to fully comply with the intent and purpose of fair housing laws. 
b.  Reasonable accommodation in the land use, zoning, and development context means providing individuals with disabilities or developers of housing for people with disabilities, flexibility in the application of land use, zoning, and building regulations, policies, standards, practices, and procedures, or even waiving certain requirements altogether, when it is necessary to eliminate legal and regulatory barriers to housing opportunities. 
1.  For purposes of this section, an individual with a disability is someone who has a physical or mental impairment that limits one or more major life activities; anyone who is regarded as having such impairment; or anyone with a history of such impairment. The terms "disability" and "handicap", for purposes of the fair housing laws have the same meaning. 
2.  A request for a reasonable accommodation may be made by any individual with a disability, his or her representative, or a developer or provider of housing for individuals with disabilities, when the application of a land use, zoning, or development regulation, policy, standard, practice, or procedure acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities. Development regulations shall mean those minimum standards set forth in this Unified Development Code and shall not include Georgia Statewide Minimum Building Codes, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20, or environmental regulations found in general law or the Code of Griffin, Georgia. 
c.  Notice of the availability of reasonable accommodation shall be prominently displayed on the official bulletin board (2d Floor, E. Solomon Street entrance to One Griffin Center), the city's website, and at the permit counter in the Development Services Office (3d Floor, One Griffin Center). Such notice shall state where applications for requesting reasonable accommodation are available to the public. 
d.  Any eligible person described in (b)(2) above may request a reasonable accommodation in the application of any land use, zoning, or development regulation, rule, standard, policy, standard, practice, or procedure as described in subsection (b)(2) above, by completing and filing an application requesting reasonable accommodation with the director of development services, in triplicate. Persons requesting reasonable accommodation are encouraged to consult the director prior to submitting the application in order to make the nature of and need for the request clear. 
1.  All requests shall be made in writing, on forms provided by the city, and provide the following information: 
A.  Name, address, and telephone number of person filing the request. When available, an email address should also be provided. When the request is being filed for the benefit of an individual with disabilities, the name, address, and telephone number for that person shall also be stated. 
B.  Address of property; name, address and telephone number of property owner, if different from requestor. 
C.  Detailed description of the requested accommodation and the regulation, rule, standard, policy, practice, or procedure for which accommodation is sought; and 
D.  Reason that accommodation is sought and any supporting documentation. If medical information is provided to support a determination that the requestor is a person with disabilities, it should be clearly marked as "Confidential" and will be used only as needed. 
2.  Any information identified by the applicant as confidential will be held and used by the city in such manner as to respect the individual's privacy rights and shall not be made available for public inspection. 
3.  A request for reasonable accommodation may be filed at any time; however, the city encourages its filing at the earliest opportunity to ensure the applicant with equal access to housing and to allow the city to make timely determinations of other related pending applications and permits. City staff will afford the applicant, upon request, such assistance as needed to ensure the application process is accessible and meaningful. There shall be no fee for requesting a reasonable accommodation. 
4.  Granting of a reasonable accommodation does not affect an individual's obligations to comply with other applicable regulations not at issue in the requested accommodation. 
e.  All requests for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by a committee, consisting of the chairperson, city manager, and development services director. A written decision on the request shall be issued to the applicant within ten business days of the receipt of a completed form (Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays excluded). After initial review of a request, the committee may request additional information from the applicant. 
f.  The written decision to grant, deny, or grant upon conditions a request shall be consistent with the fair housing laws and based upon the following factors: 
1.  Whether the housing, which is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation, will be used by an individual(s) with disabilities protected by the fair housing laws; 
2.  Whether the requested accommodation is necessary to make housing available to an individual with disabilities protected under the fair housing laws; 
3.  Whether the requested accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city; and 
4.  Whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental alteration of a material nature in the city's land use, zoning, or development policies. 
Where the written decision is to deny the request, or grant the request subject to conditions, a sufficiently detailed explanation of the reasons shall be given the applicant. The decision of the review committee shall be final and binding upon the city. Notice of the decision shall be given the applicant by Certified U.S. Mail, return receipt requested, unless the applicant consents to service in a different manner. 
g.  While a request for reasonable accommodation is pending, all laws, rules, regulations, standards, policies, practices, and procedures applicable to the property that is the subject of the request shall remain in full force and effect. This shall include any appeal of the decision until final. 
h.  Within 30 days of an adverse decision on a request for reasonable accommodation, an aggrieved person may file a Petition for Writ of Certiorari in the Superior Court of Spalding County, Georgia. Nothing in this procedure shall preclude an aggrieved person from seeking other available federal or state remedies. 
( Ord. No. 14-07, § 1, 12-9-2014 ) 
ARTICLE 3. - ESTABLISHMENT, FUNCTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION 

301. - INTRODUCTION. 
    This article establishes and defines the functions of the board of commissioners, zoning administrator and the planning and zoning board for purposes of this ordinance, amendments, appeals, variances and special uses. 
302. - ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. 
    The position of zoning administrator is designated by the city manager. 
302 A. - Functions. 
The functions of the zoning administrator shall be as follows: 
1.  Having the primary responsibility for administering and enforcing this ordinance; 
2.  Keeps up to date on current laws, recent court decisions and new techniques related to planning, zoning and development; 
3.  Serves as secretary to the planning and zoning board, coordinating review of amendments to this ordinance and special use applications; 
4.  Provides information to the city manager, board of commissioners and the public on zoning and related matters; 
5.  Makes recommendations to the planning and zoning board and to the board of commissioners on amendments to this ordinance, variances, special uses, annexations and development requests; 
6.  Maintains the official zoning map in a current manner, including all amendments to the map, at the planning and development department; 
7.  Maintains an official copy of the City of Griffin Zoning Ordinance at the planning and development department for public access; 
8.  Keeps up-to-date copies of the City of Griffin Zoning Ordinance available for sale to the public and a zoning map for review and access by the public; 
9.  Processes applications for rezonings, annexations, variances and special use permits; 
10.  Conveys written decisions on all requests or amendments to the zoning ordinance to the person or persons requesting such amendment within three days of decisions made by the board of commissioners. 
11.  Reviews applications for building permits for compliance with the City of Griffin Zoning Ordinance and denies such permits if they do not meet existing regulations; 
12.  Serves as liaison with developers and the City of Griffin Development Review Committee by accepting and processing applications for all commercial development and reviewing site plans for zoning compliance; 
13.  Inspects commercial projects to ensure zoning compliance; 
14.  Accepts and processes bonds for all commercial developments; 
15.  Maintains permanent records of amendments to the City of Griffin Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map; 
16.  Other functions as prescribed by the city manager. 
303. - PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD. 
    The Planning and Zoning Board of the City of Griffin is hereby established as follows: 
303 A. - Members. 
The planning and zoning board (PZB) shall be composed of seven members appointed by the board of board of commissioners. Each board of commissioners shall appoint one person who resides within their respective electoral district. The at-large commissioner shall appoint one person who resides within the limits of the City of Griffin. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the respective board of commissioners for the unexpired term and district of the member affected. There shall be no compensation for members of the planning and zoning board, but they may receive reimbursement of reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties with prior approval of such expenses by the city manager. 
303 B. - Qualifications of members. 
No member of the planning and zoning board shall serve as a board of commissioners, Spalding County Commissioner or hold any office or employment with the City of Griffin or Spalding County. Members shall be of good character and at least 18 years of age. 
303 C. - Terms. 
Each member of the planning and zoning board shall be appointed for a term of three years. Appointments shall be made in January of each calendar year with the members assuming office immediately. 
303 D. - Officers. 
At the first meeting of the planning and zoning board each calendar year, the members will elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson. The zoning administrator shall serve as the secretary. The chairperson will conduct meetings of the planning and zoning board. The vice-chairman shall serve in the absence of the chairperson. The chairperson and vice-chairperson shall vote on all matters brought before the planning and zoning board. 
303 E. - Meetings. 
The planning and zoning board shall hold regular meetings on the third Monday of each month beginning at 6:00 p.m. in the city courtroom. All meetings of the planning and zoning board shall be open to the public. The chairperson or any three members may call a special meeting. 
303 F. - Quorum. 
Three present and voting members of the planning and zoning board shall constitute a quorum. A failure of the planning and zoning board to have a quorum present and voting or a voting decision resulting in a tie shall constitute the staff recommendation being forwarded to the board of commissioners for review and consideration. 
303 G. - Conflicts of interest. 
If any member of the planning and zoning board shall find that his private or personal interests are involved in the matter coming before the board, he shall disqualify himself from all participation in that case. No member of the board shall appear before the planning and zoning board of the board of commissioners as agent or attorney. 
303 H. - Functions. 
1.  Review the zoning ordinance to make recommends to the board of commissioners for amendments where appropriate. Recommend goals and objectives to the board of commissioners for the implementation and enforcement of the zoning ordinance. 
2.  Conduct meetings to review proposed amendments to this ordinance in order to make recommendations to the board of commissioners on rezoning applications, annexation applications and special use permits after receiving written comments on the application from the zoning administrator; provided, however, no action by the planning and zoning board shall constitute "final action" on zoning decisions. 
3.  Other functions as prescribed by the board of commissioners relative to zoning. 
304. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. 
    The functions of the board of commissioners, as relate to this ordinance, shall be as follows: 
304 A. - Public hearings-Amendments. 
Conduct an official public hearing for amendments to this ordinance in accordance with subsections of Section 404. 
304 B. - Proposed amendments. 
Approve or deny any proposed amendment to this ordinance, including any and all amendments to the official zoning map (the rezoning of land), based upon an evaluation under the standards found within Section 404 of this ordinance, and after first receiving written comments and recommendations from the zoning administrator and the planning and zoning board. 
304 C. - Public hearings-Appeals. 
Hold public hearings and make decisions on appeals of decisions made by the zoning administrator; applications for variances and applications for special uses. 
304 D. - Publish decisions. 
Officially publish any decision made relative to approval or denial of any amendment to this ordinance, appeals, variances and special use permits. 
304 E. - Propose amendments. 
Propose amendments to this ordinance, as deemed appropriate, and submit such proposed amendments to the zoning administrator and planning and zoning board for their written comments and recommendations. 
304 F. - Appoint members. 
Appoint the planning and zoning board in accordance with Section 303 B. 
305. - CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURE AFFIDAVIT. 
    Members of the planning and zoning board and the board of commissioners shall make and file an affidavit with the zoning administrator in any zoning matter in which the official has a property interest in any real property affected by the rezoning action upon which that official is authorized to vote; has a financial interest in any business entity which has a property interest in any real property affected by the rezoning action upon which that official is authorized to vote; or has a member of the family having an interest described above. For purposes of this requirement, members of the family shall include the official's spouse, father, mother, brother, sister, son or daughter. Affidavits shall be filed immediately upon learning that a rezoning action is pending. Officials making disclosure under this requirement shall exercise discretion in whether to participate in consideration of the rezoning action. 
    Applicants applying for a rezoning action, within ten days of filing of the application, shall file with the zoning administrator an affidavit disclosing whether within two years immediately preceding the filing of said application, applicant has made campaign contributions or gifts totaling or having an aggregate value of $250.00 or more to a member of the planning and zoning board or board of board of commissioners who is authorized to vote on the rezoning action. This disclosure shall state the name of the official, the amount and date of the campaign contribution or a description and estimate of value of any gift. 
ARTICLE 4. - PROCEDURES 

401. - SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL BUILDING, DEVELOPMENT AND ZONING APPLICANTS. 
    All applications for reviews, approvals, annexations, administrative and legislative decisions specified in the Unified Development Code shall be submitted on forms provided by the city and shall be submitted with the documentation required for each type of application. The director of planning and development services is hereby authorized to establish administrative deadlines for the receipt of applications and associated information in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
401 A. - No application officially accepted until complete. 
1.  Review of application completeness. Upon submittal, each application shall be subjected to a review of application completeness prior to being officially accepted by the city. An application shall be considered "complete" if it is submitted on the required form, includes all submittal information, including all exhibits specified by the director, and accompanied by the application processing fee as adopted by the board of commissioners and as may be revised periodically. The review of application completeness shall be conducted by staff within five business days of the submittal deadline. If the city determines the application is complete, the application shall be processed pursuant to this chapter. 
2.  Incomplete applications. If the city determines that the application is incomplete, staff shall notify the applicant of that fact via the contact phone information provided and specify the ways in which the application is deficient. All incomplete applications shall receive no further processing until the deficiencies are corrected via a new submittal. 
3.  Resubmittal of applications. Resubmittal of the application shall be treated as a new application. Under no circumstances may staff delay conducting the review of application completeness in excess of five business days of the submittal deadline. If the review of application completeness is not completed within five business days of the submittal deadline, the application shall be determined complete. 
401 B. - Submittal fees. 
All applications shall be submitted with the required fee. The amount of each fee will be established by the city, and approved by the board of commissioners, which may be revised periodically. 
401 C. - Boundary survey. 
All applications shall be accompanied by a boundary survey prepared by a registered land surveyor; the number of copies shall be submitted as indicated on application forms established by the city; applications shall also include one copy of the boundary survey reduced to a size of 8.5 inches by 11 inches. 
401 D. - Legal description. 
All applications shall be accompanied by a written metes and bounds legal description. It must establish a point of beginning and from the point of beginning give each dimension bounding the property, calling the directions (e.g. north, northeasterly, southerly, etc.) which the boundary follows around the property returning to the point of beginning. If there are multiple properties, all properties shall be combined into one legal description. 
401 E. - Non-discrimination. 
1.  Purpose and intent. Throughout this Code, provisions are made for the issuance by the city of various licenses, permits, and approvals. Some are required by federal or state law while others are part of a comprehensive regulatory scheme adopted by this board of commissioners. The commission finds that the number of ever-increasing demands on city staff, resources, and infrastructure is limited, not only by budgetary constraints, but physical limitations and manpower. It is the objective of this commission to utilize its resources wisely, fairly, and in the most efficient manner, while requiring consideration of criteria and standards without discrimination or favor. The intent of this section is to recognize and provide guidance for city staff and this commission as the city's governing authority to ensure that city services, privileges, and benefits are delivered in a non-discriminatory manner. 
Most all forms of licenses, permits, and approvals required by the city involve some form of deployment of city resources. In order to conserve and allocate these resources wisely, the city often must balance competing factors affecting its citizens, property owners, residents and businesses. Licensing and permitting often requires some form of due process, or notice, and can only be approved following a hearing or other means of allowing citizens to be heard. Adequate advance notice to the pertinent city staff is key to timely and relevant decision-making, as well as a full understanding of material facts and the applicant's objectives. Normally, the burden is on the applicant to apprise the city staff of material information by filing a complete application. 
Fees charged in relation to permits or licenses are established to recoup the city's cost of permit/license review and administration. In certain cases, the fee will also seek to recoup anticipated costs to the city for the burden placed on infrastructure and services, such as additional security and traffic control. The upfront payment of required fees is part of the submission of a complete application. Waiver or reduction of fees and waiver of a complete written application is discouraged, except as incentives for economic development, and should only be approved by the city manager, upon written recommendation of a department manager. 
Last, while it is the general intent of this commission to make its permitting and licensing procedures as simplified as possible, the need for fully informed decision-making by city staff and this commission mandates the need for consistency and transparency, which are only attainable through a written application process, followed by documented verification and review. In all instances where applications are filed, the city will seek to provide a timely response to the applicant, with all final decisions (approval, denial, or approval upon reasonable conditions) given to the applicant in writing. 
2.  Non-discrimination. This provision shall apply to all licensing, permitting, and/or approval requests found in this Code. Though certain Code sections may contain objective criteria or standards relevant to the specific license, permit, or approval sought, this provision shall serve as an overlay and guide the decision-making process. 
a.  No license, permit, or approval shall be denied nor shall the applicant be given less favorable treatment as to time, place, or manner requirements or conditions on account of the race, color, creed, religion, gender, domestic relationship status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, political affiliation, or gender identity of the applicant and/or participants in the business, undertaking, event, or activity to be carried out by the applicant under such license, permit, or approval. 
b.  No license, permit, or approval shall be denied nor shall the applicant be given less favorable treatment as to time, place, or manner requirements or conditions based upon the message or content of speech of the applicant and/or participants in the business, undertaking, event, or activity to be carried out by the applicant under such license, permit, or approval. 
c.  Where it is assumed or reasonably believed that issuance of a license, permit, or approval is likely to result in unreasonable hostility by opponents of an applicant and/or its group or entity, or there is a heighten risk to public safety, based upon the content of speech or the message conveyed by the applicant and/or participants in the undertaking, event, or activity to be carried out by the applicant under such license, permit, or approval, reasonable accommodation as to time, place, and manner requirements shall be afforded, including provision of city resources necessary for traffic control, and police and fire protection; provided, however, payment for or reimbursement of the cost of such accommodation may be imposed by the city as a reasonable condition for such approval. 
d.  All other conditions or modifications of the time, place, and manner requirements for a license, permit, or approval shall be reasonable and imposed based upon compelling reasons relating to public safety, health, or the environment. When approval is based upon the imposition of reasonable conditions, all such conditions shall be clearly set forth in the written notice of decision. 
( Ord. No. 16-03, § 1, 2-9-2016 ) 
402. - PLAN REVIEW. 
    Prior to plat approval and prior to the issuance of any building, land disturbance, grading, construction or other development permit, applicants must submit site plans for city review. It is the policy of the City of Griffin to consider the approval site plans and subdivision plans as necessary for the orderly, efficient and economic growth and development of the city. 
402 A. - Building plan review. 
In addition to building plan review requirements, no building permit shall be released prior to a review for zoning compliance. Further no Certificate of Occupancy shall be released prior to field inspection for site and zoning compliance with items including but not limited to: setbacks, parking, plantings, building height and other form, building materials, block sizes, and conditions to zoning as may have been required at rezoning approval. Section 1311 establishes procedures for Certificate of Use and Occupancy. 
402 B. - Development plan and subdivision. 
Article 13 establishes review procedures for the land development process. Procedures involve Preliminary site plans (conceptual), Minor site plans, and Final site and Subdivision plans (construction) and As-Builts. Sections 1304 and 1305 define platting and conveyance procedures. 
402 C. - As-builts. 
Procedures established as follows: for all construction and grading (section 1310), and for Roads, Site and Drainage (section 1401). 
403. - SUBDIVISION AND THE CREATION OF NEW LOTS (COMBINATION AND/OR DIVISION). 
    Prior to plat approval and prior to the issuance of any building, land disturbance, or other development the subdivision or creation of new lots shall be reviewed for conformity with all zoning and development regulations, according to procedures established in Article 13. 
404. - AMENDMENTS. 
    Amendments to this ordinance may be proposed by the zoning administrator, the board of commissioners, the planning and zoning board and any other owner of property within the City of Griffin or the owner's legal representative. All amendments to this ordinance, either to the text or map, shall be in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
404 A. - Written ordinance requirement. 
All amendments to this ordinance, either to the text or map (rezonings) shall be in the form of a written ordinance and read at one meeting of the board of commissioners. Copies of the proposed ordinance, in final form, shall be available for distribution at the public hearing before the board of commissioners. 
404 B. - Consistency with Comprehensive Plan. 
All amendments to this ordinance shall be consistent with the most current, adopted future land use section of the City of Griffin Comprehensive Plan, as may be amended from time to time, unless significant justification exists based upon an analysis of the standards set forth in Section 405. The applicant shall bear the burden of proof and persuasion by demonstrating approval of a proposed amendment not consistent with the comprehensive plan is warranted, based upon evaluation of the standards set forth in Section 405. 
404 C. - Applications. 
All applications for annexation, rezoning, variance and special use shall be made in writing on form(s) provided by the City of Griffin and shall be submitted to the zoning administrator. No application shall be considered complete until all applicable form(s) have been submitted with payment of applicable fees. 
404 D. - Application submittal requirements. 
All application submittals shall include information deemed necessary by the City of Griffin, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  Completed application form. 
2.  Detailed description of existing land uses on all contiguous property; 
3.  The location of the subject property including street numbers, if available; 
4.  A boundary plat of the subject property, prepared in accordance with the Georgia Plat Act, showing the dimensions of acreage, location of tract and location of all existing improvements and easements; 
5.  A site plan drawn to scale showing: 
a.  Any and all improvements to be constructed if the application is approved, along with the proposed use and dimensions of all structures; 
b.  A statement with any prior conditions to zoning, plat and/or prior variance request approvals granted by the City of Griffin; 
c.  Site plans with variance requests shall indicate the dimension of the proposed subject of the variance request (see 415 [section 410] for variance procedures). 
6.  Spalding County Tax Map, block and lot number of the appropriate plat reference; 
7.  The present and proposed zoning district classification for the subject property; 
8.  The name and address of the owner of the subject property; 
9.  The area of land of the subject property, stated in square feet if less than one acre; 
10.  Date of application; 
11.  Any prior applications or actions for rezoning of all or part of the subject property within the past five years; 
12.  Documentation supporting the request based upon the standards of this article. 
404 E. 
Within a reasonable time following receipt of a complete application, the zoning administrator shall notify the planning and zoning board of the application submittal and the scheduled review process; a copy of this notice shall be mailed to the applicant. 
404 F. 
The planning and zoning board, upon receipt of the evaluation from the zoning administrator, shall submit its recommendation to the board of commissioners within 45 days of receipt of the application from the zoning administrator. 
404 G. - Public hearings. 
Public hearing shall be conducted as provided in Section 408. 
404 H. - Deferral authority. 
The board of commissioners, zoning administrator and planning and zoning board may defer action or recommendation for a reasonable length of time on any proposed zoning decision pending submission of additional information as requested of the applicant in writing. 
404 I. - Decisions and recording. 
Upon concluding the public hearing, the board of commissioners, in its legislative discretion, may approve, approve with conditions or deny the proposed zoning decision, as submitted or conditioned, defer a decision until a specific meeting date, require the applicant to file additional information or plans regarding the project development and defer action to a later meeting date or allow withdrawal by the applicant, if requested prior to a vote by the commission. 
1.  Voluntary withdrawal prior to a vote shall not constitute a denial. 
2.  In approving the ordinance, the commission may impose additional conditions or delete conditions recommended by the zoning administrator or planning and zoning board; provided, however, all such conditions shall be stated in the proposed ordinance prior to its second reading. 
3.  The second and final reading of the ordinance shall take place at the next regular scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners. The vote of each member of the commission shall be recorded in the official minutes. Any tie vote shall constitute a denial of the proposed ordinance amendment. 
404 J. 
After final action by the board of commissioners on a zoning decision, any necessary changes to the official and unofficial zoning maps shall be made by the zoning administrator within ten days and shall be dated and signed by the chairman. The zoning administrator shall maintain an official log of all authorized changes, either in the text of this ordinance or to the official zoning map, indicating the date the change was made and, if different, the effective date of the zoning decision. Only changes authorized to be made by the zoning administrator, after compliance with the amendment procedures of this ordinance, shall be made and recorded on the official zoning map and official copy of this ordinance, as maintained for public inspection and copying in the zoning administrator's office. 
404 K. 
The zoning administrator shall convey the final action, in writing, on a zoning decision to the applicant within three business days of the board of commissioners making such decision. 
404 L. 
All records concerning proposed zoning decisions, whether approved, denied or withdrawn, shall be maintained by the zoning administrator as public records of the city. 
404 M. 
If an application for rezoning is denied by the board of commissioners, the same request shall not be reconsidered for six months from the date of such denial. Voluntary withdrawal by the applicant, prior to a vote on final action by the commission, shall not constitute a denial. 
405. - REZONING EVALUATION CRITERIA. 
    All proposed rezonings of property shall be evaluated in light of the following standards used to interpret the balance between an individual's right to the use of their property and the public health, safety or general welfare of the community. In applying these standards, expression of opinions unsupported by objective factual analysis, using the criteria set forth below, should not be considered by the board of commissioners. 
405 A. 
Existing uses and zoning of adjacent property; 
405 B. 
Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned, although such use may not be its highest and best potential use. 
405 C. 
Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
405 D. 
The relative gain to the public as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner (applicant) by maintaining the existing zoning; 
405 E. 
The suitability of the subject property for the purposes for which the applicant seeks to have it rezoned, including availability of existing infrastructure (when required infrastructure is not available, applicant should address the means by which it will be provided); 
405 F. 
The compatibility of the applicant's proposed use of the property, if rezoned, with surrounding properties and uses (the applicant should address measures to reduce negative impacts of the proposed use, including applicant's position on any conditions attached to a recommendation for rezoning by the zoning administrator and/or planning and zoning board); 
405 G. 
Any environmental, historic, cultural or aesthetic concerns unique to the subject property or proposed use, and how applicant proposes to mitigate any negative impacts on surrounding properties and the community at large; 
405 H. 
Whether there has been a change in conditions of the subject property or properties in the vicinity of the subject which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal; and 
405 I. 
If applicable, the length of time the subject property has been vacant or substandard as zoned, when considered in the context of land development in the vicinity of the property. 
406. - SPECIAL USES. 
    Special uses are compatible uses or land or the improvement of structures within a zoning district that reasonably require special consideration and therefore are not allowed of right. All proposed special uses of property shall follow procedures for Sections 404 C., D., and E., and public hearing proceedings Section 408. 
406 A. 
Special use requests shall be evaluated according to the following standards: 
1.  It must not be detrimental to the use or development of adjacent properties, or to the general neighborhood so as to adversely affect the health, safety or general welfare of citizens; 
2.  It must not adversely affect existing property and uses and it must be proposed to be placed on a lot of sufficient size to satisfy the space requirements for the use; 
3.  General compatibility of the proposed special use with adjacent properties and other land uses in the general area; 
4.  The proposed use will not constitute a nuisance or hazard or otherwise adversely affect the public interest because of the number of persons who may normally be expected to use such facility or type of physical activity; 
5.  Other items that may be considered include traffic flow, availability of off-street parking, protective screening, hours and manner of operation of the proposed use, outdoor lighting, signage and ingress and egress to the property; 
6.  The applicant must meet all specific requirements established in this ordinance for the particularized special use requested, including design treatments required by Articles 5 and 6. 
406 B. - Decisions. 
In granting a special use permit, the board of commissioners may impose reasonable conditions as are deemed necessary in the particular case for the protection or benefit of existing properties in order to assimilate the proposed development or use into the neighborhood with minimal impact. The board's conclusion on the grant of a special use, or the reasons for denial, shall be afforded the applicant in writing, by certified U.S. Mail to the address shown in the application. Aggrieved applicants shall have 30 days from receipt of notice in which to petition the Superior Court of Spalding County for writ of mandamus. 
407. - ANNEXATION. 
    The zoning administrator and planning and zoning board shall make recommendations to the board of commissioners on the initial zoning of land proposed to be annexed in the City of Griffin, Georgia. Annexation applications, meeting the requirements of O.C.G.A. Title 36, Chapter 36, shall be submitted to the zoning administrator and shall include the following information: 
407 A. 
A legal description of said property to be annexed; 
407 B. 
Title opinion of an attorney certifying to ownership of the property as of the date of filing this application; 
407 C. 
A complete survey showing the property in relation to the present city boundary; 
407 D. 
A copy of the pertinent Spalding County Tax Map or maps showing where the property to be annexed is located in reference to existing municipal boundaries; 
407 E. 
Applicant's proposed initial zoning classification for the property under this ordinance; 
407 F. 
Governmental services currently provided for the property to be annexed, either by Spalding County, other municipalities or authorities; 
407 G. 
County-owned public facilities of the area proposed to be annexed; 
    Applicant's evaluation of initial zoning requested shall be conducted in accordance the criteria of Section 405. A vote by the board of commissioners on zoning for an annexation proposal shall not constitute final action on a zoning decision until the annexation is finally approved and effective, including pre-clearance pursuant to section 5 of the Voting Rights Act of 1975, as amended. No land annexed into the City of Griffin, Georgia, shall be unzoned. 
408. - PUBLIC HEARINGS. 
408 A. 
Public hearings shall be held prior to legislative and certain administrative action, as specified within the Unified Development Code. 
408 B. 
Public hearings shall be held by the board of commissioners prior to final legislative action which results with: 
1.  The consideration of an amendment to this ordinance that changes the text of the ordinance; 
2.  The consideration of any amendment to this ordinance that rezones property from one zoning classification to another; 
3.  The consideration of any amendment to this ordinance which zones property to be annexed into the City of Griffin; 
4.  The consideration of a permit relating to the special use of property as provided in this ordinance; 
5.  When a proposed zoning decision is sought to locate or relocate a half-way house, drug rehabilitation center or other facility for the treatment of drug dependency, an additional public hearing shall be conducted at least six months and not more than nine months before final action by the board; such hearing shall be supplemental to the public hearing required under subsection (A) above. For the supplemental hearing only, the published notice of the public hearing shall be at least six column inches in size and shall not be located in the classified advertising or legal advertising section of the newspaper and shall publish at least 15 and not more than 45 days prior to the hearing. In addition, a sign containing the information required by subsection (C) below shall be posted conspicuously on the property at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
408 C. 
The zoning administrator shall cause notice of the public hearing before the board of commissioners to be published in the legal notice section of the Griffin Daily News at least 15, but not more than 45, days prior to the date of the hearing, stating the time, place and purpose of the hearing, the location of the property by street address and tax map reference, the present zoning classification and, as applicable: 
1.  For zoning and special use public hearings, the proposed zoning classification or description of other zoning decision sought. 
2.  For a zoning decision for initial zoning of property to be annexed into the city, in lieu of the present zoning classification, the publication shall state the present zoning or use of the property under the Spalding County Zoning Ordinance. 
3.  For a variance request, the publications shall state the section(s) of the code applicant requests permission to vary. 
408 D. - Notification signs. 
If the action is for the rezoning of property shown on the official zoning map by a party other than the City of Griffin, initial zoning upon annexation of property or a special use permit, a minimum of one sign stating the time, place and purpose of the hearing, the location of the property by street address and tax map reference, the present zoning classification and the proposed zoning classification or description of other zoning decision sought, and the telephone number of the zoning administrator's office, shall be placed by the zoning administrator in a conspicuous location on the property not less than 15 days prior to the date of hearing. The sign may contain both the planning and zoning board and board of commission [commissioners] hearing dates. When the zoning decision is for initial zoning of property to be annexed into the city, in lieu of the present zoning classification, the publication shall state the present zoning or use of the property under the Spalding County Zoning Ordinance. Where feasible, the sign shall be placed at or near the property boundary adjacent to the public right-of-way in a manner most readily seen by the public. 
408 E. - Proceedings. 
At the official public hearing conducted by the board of commissioners, the chairman will announce the proposed request under consideration and that printed copies of the adopted standards governing exercise of the zoning power and procedures governing the hearing are available to the public. The zoning administrator shall advise the commission of the nature of the decision sought and the recommendation of the planning and zoning board and city staff, when applicable. The applicant or his attorney may then address the commission. Proponents, including the applicant or his attorney, shall have no less than ten minutes for presentation of data, evidence and expert opinions; opponents of the proposed decision shall have an equal minimum period of time. The chairman may grant additional time; provided, however, an equal period of time shall be granted both sides. The chairman may limit repetitious comments in the interest of time and may call for a show of hands of those persons present in favor or opposed to the proposed decision. It shall be the duty of the chairman to maintain decorum and to assure the Public Hearing on a proposed decision is conducted in a fair and orderly manner. Zoning and variance request decisions shall be placed on the agenda in the order in which they are filed with the zoning administrator. 
408 F. 
Copies of applicable sections of this ordinance shall be available for distribution to the public at all public hearings, without charge. Copies of the entire ordinance may be purchased at the planning and development department at a reasonable charge. 
409. - MEETINGS. 
409 A. 
All meetings, both regular and called, at which an application filed pursuant to this ordinance is to be discussed, considered or acted upon by the board of commissioners, shall be open to the public. Notice of special meetings shall be given in accordance with the Georgia Open Meetings Law. 
409 B. 
Where notice is given in accordance with this ordinance, no further notice to the property owner or any interested party is required. Failure to provide notice as required by this ordinance may constitute grounds for the final action of an application to be declared null and void. Appearance at the public hearing shall constitute a waiver of all claims based upon improper publication of notice or posting on the property. 
410. - VARIANCES. 
    Variances from the specific requirements of this ordinance are not zoning decisions and therefore application is made directly to the board of commissioners. To request a variance, the applicant must provide competent evidence that a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance will, in an individual case, result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and that the variance sought is the least departure from its terms, so that the spirit of this ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done. 
410 A. - Limits to variance considerations. 
The board of commissioners shall not grant variances for the following: 
1.  To increase the maximum density per acre above that established by the physical requirements for the zone in which the property is located; 
2.  To permit a use or expansion of a legal non-conforming use in a district in which the use is not permitted by right or special use under this ordinance; or 
3.  Due to the presence of non-conformities in other existing buildings or structures in the zoning district or adjoining zoning districts. 
410 B. - Application submittal. 
Applicant shall follow submittal requirements described in Section 404 C. and D. 
410 C. - Public hearing required. 
Prior to taking final action on any variance application, the board of commissioners shall conduct an administrative hearing, which shall follow public hearing notification and procedures as provided in Section 404, with the following qualifications: 
1.  The burden of proof and persuasion shall be upon the applicant to demonstrate entitlement to the variance, under the standards set forth below, by clear and convincing evidence. After first hearing from the applicant or his attorney, the city staff and/or any interested parties desiring to participate in the hearing shall be entitled to present evidence. The applicant shall have the right of rebuttal. 
2.  Interested parties shall be advised that administrative hearings differ from legislative hearings at which public sentiments may be considered. Expression of public opinion unsupported by objective facts shall not be given consideration by the board of commissioners in acting upon the variance request. It shall be the duty of the chairman to place all witnesses under oath prior to allowing such witness to testify. All hearings shall be recorded and a transcript of the evidence and proceedings at the hearing shall be prepared by the city, upon request of any party, who shall be responsible for the cost of transcription. 
410 D. - Variance evaluation criteria. 
The board of commissioners, upon conclusion of the administrative hearing, shall deliberate upon the evidence, evaluated in light of the following five standards: 
1.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
2.  The application of these regulations to this particular piece of property would create a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship; 
3.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; 
4.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of these regulations, provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this ordinance; and 
5.  A literal interpretation of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of any rights that others in the same district are allowed. 
410 E. - Variance decisions and appeals. 
1.  Approvals. On all variance applications, after hearing, the board shall make findings of fact and conclude the applicant's entitlement to a variance. In granting a variance, the board of commissioners may attach such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed building, structure or use as it may deem advisable so that the purpose of this ordinance will be served. The terms of the approved variance shall be fully set forth in a writing signed by the chairman and made a part of the official record, with a copy mailed to the applicant and any interested party. 
2.  Validity period. A variance is valid for the period of one year from the date of approval. Prior to the end of the year, if work has not begun, the applicant may request one extension not to exceed one additional year. 
3.  Denials. If the variance is denied, the findings of the board upon which the denial is based shall be served upon the applicant, by certified U.S. Mail at the address shown in the application. 
4.  Appeals. Aggrieved applicants shall have 30 days from receipt of a notice of denial in which to petition the Superior Court of Spalding County for writ of certiorari. Notice of the date, time and location of the administrative hearing shall be given the applicant and any interested party known to the zoning administrator, not less than 15 days prior thereto, by certified U.S. Mail to the address shown in the application or as furnished to the zoning administrator. In addition thereto, notice of the administrative hearing shall be published in the Griffin Daily News in the legal notice section not less than 15 days prior to the hearing, advising all interested parties of their opportunity to appear and participate. A telephone number for the zoning administrator shall also appear in the notice to allow interested parties to obtain more information. 
411. - REVOCATION OF APPROVAL. 
    In the case of any variance or special use permit granted in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, if the board of commissioners learns that such variance or special use permit was granted based upon false or misleading representations made by the applicant or his agents to the commission, the board of commissioners may revoke such special use or variance after giving due notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunity for hearing. Following revocation, an application for a variance or special use permit shall not be resubmitted for a period of six months. 
412. - RECORDS AND MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS. 
    The secretary to the board of commissioners shall cause the proceedings of all zoning public hearings to be recorded in the official minutes. A copy of the minutes of the public hearing and all evidence submitted at the public hearing shall also be made a part of the particular zoning decision's file in the office of the zoning administrator. Copies of applications, proposed ordinances, supporting documents and plats, written evaluations and recommendations by the zoning administrator and the planning and zoning board and minutes of all related proceedings shall be deemed as the official record. 
413. - DEVELOPMENTS OF REGIONAL IMPACT. 
    Any development or proposed project which is a development of regional impact (DRI), as defined by regulations of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, must first be submitted to the governing regional commission for review in accordance with the applicable state regulations and statutes before any zoning decision can be made by the city with respect to said project. 
414. - APPEAL OF DECISIONS. 
414 A. - Decisions by board of commissioners. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the board of commissioners may, within 30 days of such decision becoming final, petition the Superior Court of Spalding County, Georgia, for appropriate relief. A decision in regard to the denial of a rezoning, variance or special use shall be deemed to have been rendered on the date of receipt of a letter from the zoning administrator notifying the applicant of the board of commissioners action. 
414 B. - Decisions by directors. 
A written decision of the planning and development services director, director of public works and utilities, concerning interpretation or applicability of any provision of this ordinance shall be final. If any of the aforementioned directors disapproves any plan submitted pursuant to all processing requirements identified in this ordinance, and the applicant of such plan contends that such disapproval was not properly based on applicable state and/or local ordinances and policies, he may petition the Superior Court of Spalding County for a review on writ of certiorari. Such action must be filed with the superior court within 30 days of the written decision of the director. 
ARTICLE 5. - USE PROVISIONS: PERMITTED, SPECIAL, ACCESSORY AND NONCONFORMING 

501. - GENERAL. 
501 A. - Every use must be upon a lot. 
No building or structure may be erected or use established unless upon a lot as defined by this ordinance. 
501 B. - Only one principal building per lot. 
Except as herein after provided, there shall be no more than one principal building or structure upon any lot in a single-family residential district. 
501 C. - Utilities. 
Electric substations, natural gas facilities, cable or other communication facilities are permitted within all zoning districts. 
501 D. - Emergency shelters. 
Emergency shelters for the purpose of protecting individuals from life threatening weather storms or other emergencies shall be permitted as an accessory structure in all zoning districts and shall meet the setback requirements of such structures in the district. Shelters shall be maintained so as not to become a hazard or blight to the community. 
502. - PERMITTED AND PROHIBITED USES. 
502 A. - Permitted land use. 
The Unified Development Code establishes uses based upon zoning district, as well as certain criteria related to design, infrastructure and other location criteria. See Article 7 for the establishment of zoning districts and associated uses permitted within districts, as identified by Table 703. 
    The determination whether a proposed use is proper in a given zoning district shall be made by the director of development services. Interpretations concerning the meaning of this Code may be important in a particular case. Persons should not expend money on project development until the director has determined in writing that the proposed use meets city regulations and policies regarding permitted and prohibited uses and criteria for special uses. 
502 B. - Uses prohibited. 
1.  If either a use or class of use is not specifically indicated as being permitted in a zoning district, either as a matter of right or as a special use, then, such use, class of use, or structures for such uses, shall be prohibited in such district. 
Uses that are not specifically indicated but clearly resemble other permitted uses may be considered by director upon written request for review. Determination of whether such use clearly resembles other permitted uses shall be made based on (1) uses that share the same subcategory classification code in the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) or other standardized coding for businesses and (2) whether the proposed use generates equal or less traffic or nuisance than similar uses which are indicated as permitted. 
503. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS FOR SPECIAL USES. 
[503 A. - Reserved.] 
503 B. - Home occupations. 
A home occupation is a use conducted within residential premises by a person or family residing therein, which customarily is considered an occupation for gain or profit. A home occupation shall be governed by the following requirements: 
1.  Only residents of the dwelling shall be engaged in the home occupation; 
2.  The home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the essential residential character of the building; 
3.  No display of products shall be visible from the street; 
4.  Only one point of business identification sign, not exceeding two square feet in size, non-lighted and attached to the principal building shall be permitted; 
5.  No external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the building shall be permitted. If internal alterations are required they shall be permitted and meet all applicable building codes; 
6.  The occupation shall not constitute a nuisance in the neighborhood; 
7.  No accessory structures or outside storage may be shall be used in connection with the occupation; 
8.  Vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles only shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of the home occupation; 
9.  There shall be off-street parking provided (off the right-of-way) on the driveway or rear of the residence for a maximum of two customers. 
10.  No commercial grade equipment such as landscaping equipment or materials or machinery or materials associated with construction, grading or hauling shall be allowed to be stored or parked on the property; 
11.  The following, including but not limited to, are uses that shall be considered home occupations: addressing service, artist or art instructor, bed and breakfast, provided all parking is located in the rear of the dwelling; beauty shop (with no more than one operator), dentist, attorney, doctor, drafting, dressmaking, insurance agent, music teacher, notary public, photographer, real estate agent, tax consultant, bed and breakfast home, private consultant, or any other home office consisting of a personal computer, fax machine, phone or any other accessory office equipment used to establish a home office, day care for no more than six children; licensed family day care home, provided such home is located in a single-family residential district; 
12.  All home occupations must have an occupational tax certificate. 
503 C. - Kennels. 
Because of the potential impact of noise and nuisance upon surrounding and adjacent properties, the following criteria apply for commercial dog kennels: 
1.  A minimum lot size of three acres for kennels with no more than ten dogs at any one time 
2.  A minimum lot size of five acres for kennels with 11 or more dogs at any one time. If a property is smaller than the minimum acreage, the conditional use cannot be approved. The criteria also contain minimum setback requirements from lot lines for structures and outdoor pens and runs. 
503 D. - Day care standards. 
1.  Family day care home standards. This family day care home standards section applies to all districts. Each family day care home shall be subject to the following requirements, when located within a residential zoning district or residential dwelling: 
a.  All regulated facilities shall comply with the state regulation and acquire applicable state licenses for operation. 
b.  All facilities shall comply with the adopted Building Code for the State of Georgia. 
c.  Each family day care home shall provide not less than 35 square feet of indoor play area for each child, based on maximum permissible enrollment. 
d.  Each family day care home shall provide not less than 100 square feet of outdoor play area for each child, based on maximum permissible enrollment. 
e.  All required outdoor play/recreation areas shall be enclosed by a fence or wall not less than four feet in height. 
f.  The exterior appearance of any residential structure for which a family day care home is approved, shall be maintained as a residential structure and no signs other than a sign, attached to the primary structure, not exceeding two square feet, as authorized within Article 8, Sign Standards (SS), shall be erected, and no cut-outs, animals characters, or other graphics shall be affixed to the exterior of the structure or displayed upon the premises. 
g.  No family day care home shall be located within 1,500 feet of another day care facility. 
h.  All facilities must register with the department of community development and provide a copy of all state licenses and documentation. 
i.  All facilities must apply for and receive a City of Griffin Business License. 
2.  Group day care home standards. This group day care home standards section applies to all districts. Each group day care home shall be subject to the following requirements, when located within a residential zoning district or residential dwelling: 
a.  All regulated facilities shall comply with the state regulation and acquire applicable state licenses for operation. 
b.  All facilities shall comply with the adopted Building Code for the State of Georgia. 
c.  Each child day care facility shall provide not less than 35 square feet of indoor play area for each child, based on maximum permissible enrollment. 
d.  Each child day care facility shall provide not less than 100 square feet of outdoor play area for each child, based on maximum permissible enrollment. 
e.  All required outdoor play/recreation areas shall be enclosed by a fence or wall not less than four feet in height. 
f.  The exterior appearance of any residential structure for which a family day care facility is approved, shall be maintained as a residential structure and no signs other than a sign, attached to the primary structure, not exceeding two square feet, as authorized within Article 8, Sign Standards (SS), shall be erected, and no cut-outs, animals characters, or other graphics shall be affixed to the exterior of the structure or displayed upon the premises. 
g.  No day care facility shall be located within 1,500 feet of another day care facility. 
h.  All facilities must register with the department of community development and provide a copy of all state licenses and documentation. 
i.  All facilities must apply for and receive a City of Griffin Business License. 
3.  Day care home standards. These day care center standards section applies to all districts. Each day care center shall be subject to the following requirements when located within a commercial building or commercial zoning district: 
a.  All regulated facilities shall comply with the state regulation and acquire applicable state licenses for operation. 
b.  Each child day care facility shall provide not less than 35 square feet of indoor play area for each child, based on maximum permissible enrollment. 
c.  Each child day care facility shall provide not less than 100 square feet of outdoor play area for each child, based on maximum permissible enrollment. 
503 E. - Personal care, boarding and group home. 
This personal care home, boarding home, and group home standards section applies to all districts. Each personal care home, boarding home, and group home having six or more persons shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  All regulated facilities shall comply with the state regulation and acquire applicable state licenses for operation. 
2.  All facilities must register with the department of community development and provide a copy of all state licenses and documentation. 
3.  The exterior appearance of any residential structure for which a personal care home, boarding home, or group home is approved, shall be maintained as a residential structure and no signs other than a sign, attached to the primary structure, not exceeding two square feet, as authorized within Article 8, Sign Standards (SS), shall be erected. 
4.  Meet all regulations as identified in the adopted building code and adopted fire code. 
5.  Meet all parking standards as identified within section 6.32, Parking Standards (PK). 
6.  All facilities must apply for and receive a City of Griffin Business License. 
503 F. - Drive-through facilities (eating establishments or other). 
Drive-through facilities and service windows shall be located to the side or rear yard of the establishment and drive aisles must be located so as to avoid conflict with pedestrian traffic. To promote pedestrian oriented environments, drive through aisles shall not run parallel to a street. 
503 G. - Gas station, car washes and automobile services. 
Operations such as pumps, vacuum stations and finishing for such services shall be located to the rear of the structure on the site, or if properly screened, within the side yard. Supports for canopies shall be brick or other high quality material. 
503 H. - Cemeteries. 
The construction of all new cemeteries shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  The lot shall be a minimum of five acres in area; 
2.  No crematorium or dwelling, other than a single-family dwelling for a caretaker, shall be permitted; 
3.  No building or gravesite shall be located within 100 feet of any adjacent property boundary; 
4.  The lot shall have direct access to an arterial or major collector road. 
504. - ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES; TEMPORARY USES. 
504 A. 
Accessory uses (swimming pools, outdoor play structures or play sets), structures, (garages, storage buildings, etc.) or structures on residential lots when located within a front or side yard, shall be located no closer to property lines than would be allowed for a principal dwelling. 
504 B. 
Within a rear yard, an accessory building on a residential lot shall be located at least five feet from all property lines, except in the case of corner lots, accessory buildings shall be set back from the property line a distance equal to the front yard setback established for the zoning district on both streets. All accessory structures 200 square feet or more shall be constructed of the same building material as the principal dwelling. 
504 C. 
Accessory structures on non-residential lots shall not be permitted in the front yard and must comply with the side and rear-yard setback requirements established for the zoning district in which such accessory buildings or uses are located. Accessory structures on non-residential lots shall be finished using materials comparable to the principal structure. 
504 D. 
Accessory structures in all zoning districts shall be subordinate to the principal structure. An accessory structure's floor area shall be no larger than 50 percent of the principal residential dwelling floor area or 25 percent of a commercial structure(s) floor area. 
504 E. 
Permitted accessory uses and structures include the following: 
1.  Private garage; 
2.  Storage structure for equipment and supplies in maintaining the principal dwelling and grounds; 
3.  Private swimming pool, which shall be enclosed by a fence a minimum height of four feet; 
4.  Decks, patios, gazebos, grills or similar facilities; 
5.  Private tennis court, basketball court, volleyball court or similar outdoor sport facility, provided that lights are not used which would in any way be a nuisance to neighbors or the community; 
6.  Non-commercial garden, greenhouse, cold frame or similar structure; 
7.  Private boat docks and boat houses on lots adjoining a water body to which the residents of the development have legal right access; 
8.  Pump and well houses for on-site irrigation, with the exception of MDR, HDR-A, HDR-B and PRD zoning districts for which they are prohibited. 
9.  Ground-based satellite dish antennas shall be placed in a side or rear yard only and shall be a minimum of five feet from all property lines. 
504 F. 
These regulations are designed to allow short-term and seasonal commercial uses and activities that are temporary in nature, will not adversely impact the surrounding areas and land uses, and that can be terminated and/or removed immediately. Non-commercial uses and activities are not intended to be regulated hereafter. 
1.  Temporary commercial uses and activities are characterized by their short-term or seasonal nature and by the fact that permanent improvements are not made to the site. Temporary commercial activities include activities such as construction trailers, leasing offices, carnivals and fairs, parking lot sales and seasonal sales such as landscape materials and equipment, patio and lawn furniture, Christmas trees, pumpkin sales and produce stands. 
Temporary uses shall meet the following regulations: 
a.  No temporary use structure shall be located within a public right-of-way; 
b.  Adequate and safe ingress and egress to the site, such that the normal traffic pattern is not disrupted and parking for the intended activity shall be provided on site. Parking or stopping on the public right-of-way shall be prohibited; and 
c.  No structure of a permanent nature shall be constructed. 
2.  Outdoor promotional and/or seasonal sales events at retail stores, whether freestanding or in shopping centers, provided that the sales area is located on the same lot as the store holding the sales event and selling their own merchandise and goods normally used in the outdoors, including but not limited to, lawnmowers, wheelbarrows, lawn furniture, plants, barbecue grills, play sets, manufactured outdoor storage buildings, etc., do not require a temporary use permit if the business holds a current occupational tax certificate registered with the City of Griffin. 
Temporary use permits shall be issued in accordance with the following standards: 
a.  Real estate sales office located within a subdivision under current development, provided there are no cooking or sleeping accommodations, for a period not to exceed 12 months; 
b.  Contractor's office and equipment sheds in any district for a period not to exceed 12 months, provided that such office is placed on the property to which it is appurtenant, a final site plan has been approved and a land disturbance permit has been issued; 
c.  Seasonal produce and concession stands for a period not to exceed six months, provided the applicant submits written proof of permission from the property owner of the site including the proposed activity, date(s) activity is to operate and availability of adequate sanitary facilities, if necessary. The sale must be conducted within a commercial zoned district; the applicant must purchase or provide proof of an occupational tax certificate registered within the State of Georgia; 
d.  Carnivals, fairs, circuses, craft fairs, concerts, flea markets, car sales, temporary sales of goods, and similar activities shall be allowed one event per quarter per location for a period not to exceed 14 consecutive days and not to run consecutive to each other. The applicant must provide written proof of permission from the property owner. These temporary uses associated with existing businesses registered in the City of Griffin and all businesses sanctioned by the State of Georgia to conduct business in the state shall obtain a permit from the planning and development department. Permit fees shall be established in accordance with a schedule approved by the board of commissioners, as may be revised from time to time. If applicable, inspections will be conducted by the building division and fire marshal; 
e.  Temporary activities, structures and other requirements deemed necessary as a result of a natural disaster or other public health and safety emergency do not require a temporary use permit and may be authorized by the city manager for the duration of the emergency; 
f.  Tents used in conjunction with temporary commercial uses shall be permitted in all zoning districts. Any tent erected under this section which has an area of 200 square feet or more, requires a temporary use permit and submission of a flame retardant or flame resistant certificate; and 
g.  Outdoor sales of goods that are not normally used in the outdoors shall be allowed for one event per quarter per location for a period not to exceed 14 consecutive days. 
h.  These temporary uses associated with existing businesses registered in the City of Griffin and all businesses sanctioned by the State of Georgia to conduct business in the state shall obtain a permit from the planning and development department. Permit fees shall be established in accordance with a schedule approved by the board of commissioners, as may be revised from time to time. The maximum number of temporary use events to a single fixed business location shall be four per year. 
504 G. 
Permanent sales or displays of goods for sale are allowed in the commercial district as long as it is contained within the parcel in which the principal business structure holding the sales event is situated and is limited to goods normally used in the outdoors. Outside sales of goods not meeting the above regulations are prohibited, unless permitted in accordance with Article 5, Section 504 F. 
( Ord. No. 12-13, § 1, 9-11-2012 ; Ord. No. 18-05, § 1, 3-27-2018 ) 
505. - NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES. 
505 A. 
A legal non-conforming structure may not be enlarged or extended unless a special use permit is issued in accordance with Section 406. A legal non-conforming structure may be maintained, repaired or structurally altered, under permit, in accordance with all pertinent building codes and ordinances. Failure to maintain a non-conforming structure in minimal compliance with applicable codes and ordinances, such that the general condition of the structure constitutes dilapidation or significant disrepair, shall create a rebuttable presumption of the owner or occupier's intent to abandon the non-conforming structure. Revocation of a structure's certificate of occupancy for a period in excess of one year shall also evidence the owner or occupier's intent to abandon the non-conforming structure. 
505 B. 
A legal non-conforming use, in active existence on the effective date of this ordinance, may be continued without interference until such time as the property owner or occupier intentionally relinquishes his right to maintain such use, as evidenced by an overt act, or failure to act, sufficient to support a finding of such intent. For purposes of this ordinance, discontinuance of the use for a period of one year or more shall create a rebuttable presumption of the owner or occupier's intent to abandon the non-conforming use. A legal, non-conforming use may not be enlarged or expanded to a less restrictive use (i.e. residential to commercial) unless a special use permit is issued in accordance with Article 4 of this ordinance. 
505 C. 
Discontinuance of a legal non-conforming use or structure following its destruction by fire or other natural hazard shall not evidence intent to abandon if the owner applies for a permit to rebuild the structure or otherwise reactivate the use, within six months of the occurrence; provided, however, this period may be extended for an additional six months, but not to exceed a total of one year from the date of the occurrence, if the owner demonstrates substantial progress, time, effort and money in renovation of the structure. 
505 D. 
It shall be the objective of the city that whenever feasible, legal non-conforming uses and structures be rendered conforming through the issuance of special use permits in accordance with Section 406. Conditions imposed on such permits shall be designed to ameliorate the impact of the use or structure on adjacent or nearby properties and uses permitted by the zoning classification. 
505 E. 
Where the zoning administrator determines a use or structure was rendered non-conforming by the adoption of this ordinance or any amendment thereto, he or she shall notify the property owner, in writing, that the use or structure constitutes a legal non-conforming use or legal non-conforming structure and inform the owner of the consequences of the abandonment of such use or structure under the provisions of this ordinance. An owner may appeal the determination of the zoning administrator to the board of commissioners. 
505 F. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, any existing non-conforming use or structure which was illegal under any prior zoning ordinance shall continue to be an illegal non-conforming use or structure under this ordinance unless the use or structure is expressly permitted by this ordinance and meets all criteria for a permitted use or structure within its assigned zoning classification. Illegal non-conforming uses and structures are hereby declared to be a public nuisance, subject to abatement in accordance with Chapter 22 of the Code of Griffin, Georgia. 
ARTICLE 6. - SITE DESIGN AND ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS 

601. - YARDS AND STREETSCAPE. 
601 A. - Permitted modification of front yard setback requirements. 
When a building is proposed on a lot and when on either or both lots which adjoin such lot at the street right-of-way there exists a principal building which does not conform to the setback requirements of this ordinance, the required setback for such building shall be as follows: (1) where only one said adjoining lot contains a principal building with a non-conforming setback, the setback shall be the computed average of the normal setback requirements with the non-conforming setback; or (2) where both adjoining lots contain a principal building each with a non-conforming setback, the minimum setback shall be the computed average of the two non-conforming setbacks. 
601 B. - Side and rear yards not required adjacent to railroad. 
Within any non-residential district, side yards and rear yards shall not be required adjacent to railroad rights-of-way. 
601 C. - Lots with multiple frontage: side and front yards. 
Front yard building setback requirements shall apply to all corner lots and yards having multiple road frontage. One of the other lot sides must conform to the minimum side yard setback and one lot side must conform to the minimum rear yard setback. 
601 D. - Permitted encroachments of yards and setbacks. 
Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, steps, gutters, porches, decks and fire escapes may project not more than three feet beyond any required setback line, except where such projections would obstruct driveways used for access to service and/or emergency vehicles. For service stations, motels, restaurants, medical offices, churches and similar commercial uses, which serve the motoring public, canopies shall be allowed over a driveway or walkway within the front yard setback, not to exceed a point any closer than five feet from the right-of-way. 
602. - LOCATION OF LOADING DOCKS (REAR OR SIDE). 
    Loading docks and dumpsters shall not be visible from a public street and located within the rear yard or side yard with sufficient screening material to meet the intent of this Code. 
603. - INTERPARCEL CONNECTIVITY REQUIREMENT. 
    Nonresidential and mixed-use parcels shall provide interparcel connectivity with adjacent nonresidential and/or mixed-use parcels, unless topographic or other design constraints can be demonstrated. 
604. - BUFFERS, LANDSCAPING, AND OPEN SPACE. 
604 A. - Screening required. 
Whenever a buffer or screening is required by this ordinance, sufficient opacity by a fence shall be provided in conjunction with vegetation to create a visual blind aesthetically compatible with the character of adjoining properties. A solid fence constructed of vinyl or wood; or a decorative wall shall be provided. 
1.  The buffer requirements. 
a.  Where institutional, commercial, or industrial land uses are contiguous with land zoned for single-family residential use, the minimum width of the required planted or undisturbed buffer shall be 30 feet. 
b.  Where institutional, commercial or industrial land uses are contiguous with land zoned for duplexes, or multifamily residences, the minimum width of the required planted or undisturbed buffer shall be 20 feet. The buffer shall consist of a stand of trees of such variety that an average height of at least six feet can be expected by normal growth within no more than two years from the time of planting. 
c.  Plant materials in such planted buffers shall consist of 50 percent evergreen and established undisturbed natural buffers shall be retained. 
604 B. - Screening of dumpsters. 
Dumpsters shall have three-sided 8-foot enclosure of brick, stucco or other material compatible with principle structure primary façade. 
604 C. - Screening of outdoor storage. 
Where outdoor storage is allowed, screening shall be provided with decorative fencing and plantings. 
604 D. - Open space not to be encroached upon. 
No open spaces shall be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity to the yard, setback, off-street parking spaces and such other regulations required by this ordinance for the district in which such building is located. Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs and planted buffer strips shall not be considered encroachments of yards. 
604 E. - Required open space may not be used by another building. 
No part of any yard, other open space, off-street parking or loading space required or in connection with any building, structure or use by this ordinance shall be considered to be part of a required yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading space for any other building structure or use. 
604 F. - Encroachment into open space or on public rights-of-way. 
1.  No open space shall be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity to the yard, setback, off-street parking spaces and such other regulations required by this ordinance for the district in which such building is located. Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs and planted buffer strip shall be construed not to be encroachments of open spaces. 
2.  No privately owned building, service area, required off-street parking and/or loading facility other than driveways, access walkways and mailboxes shall be permitted within a public right-of-way. Signs and other structures belonging to the State of Georgia, City of Griffin, or Spalding County or for the purposes of railroad or private utility use are exempt from this provision. 
605. - BUILDING FORM, MASSING AND ARCHITECTURE. 
605 A. - Manufactured and industrialized buildings. 
This ordinance is not intended to discriminate against modular or industrialized buildings in favor of conventionally constructed structures. All structures erected or located within the City of Griffin shall be constructed, erected or installed on a permanent foundation and meet the physical requirements of the zoning district in which it is constructed including, but not limited to, setbacks, minimum square footage, etc. 
1.  Where a modular or industrialized building (residential, commercial or industrial) is to be installed, the unit must bear the insignia of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA) or the Southern Building Code Congress International (ICC). All such structures shall be affixed to the foundation in accordance with minimum standards of the certifying agency. All manufactured housing shall be considered for ad valorem tax purposes as real property. All such modular and industrialized buildings shall meet the following standards: 
a.  The pitch of the roof shall have a minimum vertical rise of six feet for each 12 feet of horizontal run; and shall be finished with a type of shingle commonly used in conventional residential construction; 
b.  The exterior siding of the home shall consist of wood, hardboard, vinyl, brick, masonry or aluminum (vinyl covered or painted) comparable in composition, appearance and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in conventional residential construction; 
c.  A curtain wall, not pierced except for required ventilation and access and constructed of masonry, shall be installed so it encloses the area under the manufactured home to the ground level; 
d.  The tongue, axles, transporting lights and towing apparatus are removed after placement on the lot and before a certificate of occupancy is issued; 
e.  All modular homes shall be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-110-8-2-121 et seq., of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
605 B. - Residential in-fill regulations. 
Residential in-fill regulations are designed to encourage re-development and construction on scattered, undeveloped lots that are compatible with the existing neighborhood. This includes architectural style, siding materials, building setbacks of existing dwellings and the streetscape of the neighborhood. 
1.  Purpose. This section is established to preserve the integrity of established neighborhoods, maintain property values, promote the public welfare and protect the tax base of the City of Griffin. Design standards are hereby adopted for all construction regulated by this Section and to supplement other city codes and ordinances. 
For purposes of applying the residential in-fill regulations, "neighborhood" is defined as those developed, single-family residential properties situated within 400 feet of the proposed building lot, on both sides of the street on which the front elevation of the proposed dwelling will face. Measurements are to be taken in both directions from the nearest corner of such lot. 
2.  Applicability. Except as may be otherwise specified herein, the provisions of this section shall apply to all new residential construction, exterior renovation, additions and buildings moved on to a lot. Construction on building lots created through subdivision of land involving a new street or streets shall also be exempt from this section. "Enclosed floor area" means any floor area which has a roof and is surrounded by walls, regardless of whether it is heated or finished. "Enclosed floor area" does not include garages, basements or porches, whether unenclosed or enclosed by screen. 
3.  Design standards. The following design standards shall control construction regulated by this section: 
a.  Architectural style. Notwithstanding other provisions of this ordinance regulating lot size, lot width, yard setbacks or other development standards, residential in-fill development shall conform to the maximum extent practicable with existing residential development in the neighborhood. Such conformance shall include but not be limited to, adherence to existing architectural style, as much as practicable, building height and scale, roof pitch, siding materials, dwelling size and setbacks. 
b.  Maximum floor area. The maximum enclosed floor area of any building regulated by this section shall not exceed 200 percent of either (a) the minimum floor area of the zoning district in which the lot is located, as indicated in Table 1 below, or (b) the average enclosed floor area of all single family detached dwellings on the same street as the proposed building within 400 linear feet of the nearest corner of such lot, in both directions, based upon floor areas as they exist on the date of adoption of this article. The maximum enclosed floor area for corner lots shall be determined as stated above, except that the average enclosed floor area of all single family detached dwellings on both streets as the proposed building shall be used. For purposes of this subsection, applicants need only comply with one of the foregoing options. For additions, this limitation shall apply to the entire building based on the sum of the amount of existing square footage and the amount of proposed additional square footage. 
c.  Minimum floor area . The minimum enclosed floor area of a dwelling shall not be less than 750 square feet. 
Table 1 District Minimum Floor Area 
(Square Feet) Minimum Floor Area Two Story 
(Square Feet) Maximum Floor Area 
(Square Feet) LDR - A 2,000 1,180 4,000 LDR - B 1,800 1,050 3,600 LDR - C 1,600 950 3,200 MDR 1,500 900 3,000  
d.  Building height. Maximum building height shall not exceed 30 feet and shall be subject to the further provisions of this section. Building height shall be the highest point along a roof or highest ridgeline, as measured from the average, natural, undisturbed, adjacent grade as it exists on the date of enactment of this ordinance. 
e.  Consistent building setbacks. On building lots for which the front yard setback of single family detached dwellings on the two adjoining lots on the same block face is less than that required for that zoning district, the average setback of the four adjoining dwellings on the same block face shall be used to determine the minimum setback applicable to the lot proposed for development. In no case shall the front yard setback be less than ten feet as measured from the front property boundary. 
f.  Roof pitch. Minimum roof pitch shall be consistent with the roof pitch of single family detached dwellings on the same street as the proposed building within 400 linear feet of the nearest corner of such lot, in both directions. Any building to be built on a corner lot must be consistent with single family detached dwellings on both streets of the proposed building. 
g.  Building materials. Siding materials shall be natural wood or an approved masonry product, as long as such product does not destroy the design standards of the neighborhood. Cementitious siding (such as "Hardiplank") may be used to replace wood or asbestos panel siding. Pre-fabricated metal buildings, synthetic stucco, "dryvit", exterior insulation and finish systems, vinyl siding and other materials found to be other than durable products are specifically prohibited. 
h.  Application. Applicants proposing development regulated under this section shall submit a site plan, architectural plans or other documentation sufficient for illustrating the architectural style, exterior finishing materials, enclosed floor area, building height, building setback and roof pitch of the proposed construction and all appropriate certifications required by this section. 
i.  Review process. All applications shall be subject to review as outlined in Article 4 Submittal Requirements for all Building, Development and Zoning Applicants. 
j.  Zoning conflicts. Whenever the provisions of this section require development which would exceed building standards for the zoning district in which the lot is located, and such increased building standards cannot be accommodated while maintaining yard or setback requirements under applicable district standards, the requirements of this section shall be followed only to the maximum extent possible in conformity with applicable yard or setback requirements unless such yard or setback requirements are reduced by the grant of a variance. 
k.  Reconstruction of damaged buildings. The rebuilding of a building damaged by fire, wind, flooding or other causes may be accomplished to the same specifications as the original building without regard to any limitations imposed by this section, as long as such reconstruction does not violate local zoning laws. 
4.  Whenever the provisions of this section require construction on a lot that renders conformance to the side yard impractical, the requirements of this section governing the size of the structure and compatibility of the structure shall control. 
605 C. - In-fill administrative variances: authority of the zoning administrator. 
The authority of the zoning administrator to exercise administrative discretion in application of the zoning ordinance to encourage residential infill to foster construction on undeveloped, non-conforming lots shall be as follows: 
1.  Granting of a variance not to exceed one-quarter (25%) of the requirement as established by this ordinance from the following standards: 
a.  Front yard setback. 
b.  Side yard setback. 
c.  Rear yard setback. 
2.  Granting of a variance not to exceed one-half of the requirements for front yard setback on both street frontages of a corner lot as established in this ordinance. 
In granting such variances under this subsection, the zoning administrator shall consider the following: 
1.  Relationship of the proposed dwelling to existing dwellings in the neighborhood 
2.  Relationship of the proposed front yard setback to the two adjoining single-family dwellings 
3.  Width of the lot upon which development is proposed 
4.  The actual building setback on the lot directly to the rear 
5.  The side-yard setback at the property line on the lot that is situated on the same frontage and having a side yard on the same street as the lot upon which development is proposed. 
6.  Granting of a variance involving structural addition to a non-conforming building, provided no further encroachment into the setback established by the building existing on the lot would occur. 
7.  Granting of a variance not to exceed 25 percent of the required number of parking spaces as established by Article 6 of this ordinance subject to consideration of the parking demand characteristics, use and landscaping requirements of the proposed development. 
8.  Granting of such variances under this section shall be subject to the standards for review contained in Section 410 D. of this ordinance. 
605 D. - New building and housing technologies. 
1.  Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as to discriminate against emerging building and/or housing technologies. No minimum height requirements for buildings or houses shall be established. 
2.  All property owners shall be permitted to construct a building or dwelling on their property, subject to the provisions of this ordinance and related regulations. All buildings or dwellings shall be designed and built so that the front doors of all single-family dwelling units face a private or public street. 
605 E. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person intentionally violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to citation before the Municipal Court, and upon conviction punished in the manner provided by the Code of Griffin, Georgia, section 1-12. Each day's continuance of a violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
    The owner of any building, premises or parts thereof, where anything in violation of this ordinance shall be constructed, places or shall exist and any builder, architect, contractor or agent of the owner who knowingly assists in the commission of such violation may be cited for separate offenses. Any person in possession or control of a building or structure in which a use in violation of this ordinance is found to exist or is being exercised may be cited for a separate offense. 
605 F. - General architectural design standards. 
The intent of this section is to provide aesthetics standards for exterior architectural design for all new construction. Architectural criteria for single-family dwellings located within a subdivision and/or minor subdivision: Dwellings constructed within a subdivision located within LDR - A,B,C (Single-Family Residential Low Density), MDR (Single-Family Residential Medium Density), HDR A,B (High Density Residential), PRD (Single and Multi-Family ), and CBD (Single and Multi-Family) zoning districts shall comply with the following architectural criteria: 
1.  Residential: 
a.  Each residential dwelling shall be constructed with a garage with minimum dimensions of 20 feet width by 20 feet length; 
b.  The facade of each residential dwelling that front along a public right-of-way shall include accents of brick, stone, cemplank shakes, or wood shakes which shall cover at least 50 percent of the surface area thereof; vinyl can be utilized in eaves and soffit areas only 
c.  Alternatively, on houses with a crawlspace or built-up slab of at least 18 inches, the facade may be full faced stucco or cemplank siding; however, all other exterior walls shall be required to be faced with cemplank siding as well. 
d.  For any subdivision with existing dwellings, the architectural style, not limited to accents, decorative facades, roof framing and slopes, side entry garages, paint recommendations etc. of any new structures shall resemble the existing structures as much as reasonably possible at the discretion of the zoning administrator. 
e.  All new single family dwelling construction shall be sodded and stabilized on the front and side yards 
f.  All new residential construction air conditioning units and HVAC systems shall be thoroughly screened from view from the public right-of-way and from adjacent properties by utilizing landscaping. 
g.  All new residential subdivisions are required to install underground utilities and implement decorative poles/street lights in accordance with city policies; 
h.  All residential subdivision developments shall include 25 percent greenspace, which shall be landscaped and accessible by all residents of the development; this space shall not include required fenced stormwater management areas. 
i.  All single-family residential dwellings shall have a minimum roof pitch of 6 to 12. 
j.  All new residential subdivisions are required to install underground utilities and implement decorative poles/street lights in accordance with city policies; 
k.  All residential subdivision developments shall include 25 percent greenspace, which shall be landscaped and accessible by all residents of the development; this space shall not include required fenced stormwater management areas. 
l.  There shall be an undisturbed buffer between all new subdivision developments and existing adjacent residential subdivisions a minimum of 50 feet and shall be landscaped in accordance with [section] 604A of this ordinance. 
2.  Commercial: 
a.  All new commercial developments' air conditioning units and HVAC systems shall be thoroughly screened from view from the public right-of-way and adjacent properties by utilizing walls, fencing, roof elements, or landscaping. 
b.  The exterior finish of all elevations visible from a public street for all new structures shall be constructed of brick, stone, stucco, cement board, glass and metal, decorative block or similar brand application of similar durable architectural materials. Awning materials shall be limited to canvas or metal. 
c.  All solid waste containers shall be screened from all public streets and adjoining properties in an enclosure comparable to the architecture of the primary structure. 
3.  Townhouses: 
a.  At least 25 percent of the exterior front facade of each dwelling constructed with ornamental brick or stone; 
b.  No exterior vinyl siding permitted; 
c.  Decorative gables and vents required; 
d.  Minimum roof pitch with an increase of five feet in height for horizontal run of 12 feet; 
e.  Rear entry garage required for multi-level dwelling; 
f.  All dwellings accessed by rear alley; 
g.  Connected dwellings to be constructed with staggered or offset front entry ways; 
h.  Adjoining dwellings must have differentiation in architecture for windows, entries and facades; 
i.  Adjoining dwellings must be constructed of different building materials; 
j.  Elevations of dwellings must be provided in advance of approval and are to be made a condition of approval; 
k.  Foundations or slab above grade (to make the appearance of a crawlspace) or crawlspace; and 
l.  Sodded front yards, with corner lots and double frontage lots having any yard fronting on the right-of-way sodded. 
4.  Condominiums: 
a.  At least 25 percent of the exterior front facade with ornamental brick, stone or cedar shakes accents; 
b.  Recessed staircases and stairwells; 
c.  Construction framing on 16 inches centers for wall studs; 
d.  No exterior vinyl siding permitted; 
e.  Decorative gables and vents; 
f.  Minimum roof pitch with an increase of five feet in height for horizontal run of 12 feet; 
g.  Balconies, patios or sunrooms/screened porches; 
h.  Fireplaces; 
i.  Washer/dryer connections in each dwelling; 
j.  Rear entry garage required. 
5.  Industrial: 
a.  All new industrial developments' air conditioning units and HVAC systems shall be thoroughly screened from view from the public right-of-way and adjacent properties by utilizing walls, fencing, roof elements, or landscaping. 
b.  The exterior finish of all elevations visible from a public street for all new structures shall be constructed of brick, stucco, cement board, glass and metal, tilt up concrete, decorative block or similar brand application of similar durable architectural materials. Awning materials shall be limited to canvas or metal. 
c.  All solid waste containers shall be screened from all public streets and adjoining properties in an enclosure comparable to the architecture of the primary structure. 
6.  Institutional: 
a.  All new institutional developments' air conditioning units and HVAC systems shall be thoroughly screened from view from the public right-of-way and adjacent properties by utilizing walls, fencing, roof elements, or landscaping. 
b.  The exterior finish of all elevations visible from a public street for all new structures shall be constructed of brick, stucco, cement board, glass, decorative block or similar brand application of similar durable architectural materials. Awning materials shall be limited to canvas or metal. 
c.  All solid waste containers shall be screened from all public streets and adjoining properties in an enclosure comparable to the architecture of the primary structure. 
7.  Multi-Family (Apartments/Duplexes): 
a.  All new multi-family developments' air conditioning units and HVAC systems shall be thoroughly screened from view from the public right-of-way and adjacent properties by utilizing walls, fencing, roof elements, or landscaping. 
b.  The exterior finish of all elevations visible from a public street for all new structures shall be constructed of brick, stone, stucco, or cement board; vinyl can be utilized in eaves and soffit areas only. 
c.  All solid waste containers shall be screened from all public streets and adjoining properties in an enclosure comparable to the architecture of the primary structure. 
d.  All new residential subdivisions are required to install underground utilities and implement decorative poles/streetlights in accordance with city policies. 
8.  Subdivision lots - 1/2 acre or more: This subdivision design features strong reliance on well developed, inclusive amenities. Streets are wide and include wide sidewalks. The streetscape design includes street trees and streetlights. Architectural design relies spacious homes with masonry facades. Existing neighborhoods with layout and design contemplated in this section are the Club Estates in Spalding County, Whitewater Creek in Fayette County and Coldwater Creek in Griffin. 
Architectural design criteria: 
1.  Brick, stone, or stucco front facade for each dwelling is required. 
a.  With a minimum three side brick, stone, stucco or hardy plank facade; 
2.  Additionally, the architectural design must include at least two of the following: 
a.  Porticos; 
b.  Transom windows; 
c.  Detailed balusters and pediments; 
d.  Masonry chimneys; or 
e.  Quoins. 
3.  Each residential dwelling shall be constructed with a garage with minimum dimensions of 20 feet width by 20 feet length and side entry. 
9.  Traditional design: This subdivision design is based upon architectural styles and neighborhood layout and design grids which were common in the era predating World War II. Houses in such subdivisions were of traditional design and construction with architectural features such as: front porches, Craftsman style, Victorian gingerbread, Queen Anne or Georgian cottage. Existing neighborhoods with architectural and layout design contemplated in this section are currently found within the City of Griffin along South 6th Street, South Hill Street and Terracedale Court. Additional examples are Apple Orchard in Fayetteville, Georgia and Honeysuckle Ridge in Peachtree City, Georgia. 
Architectural design criteria: 
1.  Traditional vernacular architectural design is required. 
2.  Each house within the subdivision must be built with at least two of the following: 
a.  Authentic exterior siding, i.e. wood or wood appearing; 
b.  Minimum ten feet ceilings on ground floor (with the exception of powder rooms, restrooms utility rooms, pantries and closets; 
c.  Minimum eight feet depth front porches extending at least 60 percent of the width of the facade of the house; 
d.  Foundations or slab above grade (to make the appearance of a crawlspace) or crawlspace; 
e.  Victorian gingerbread detailing; 
f.  Widows walks; 
g.  Bay windows or turrets; 
h.  Decorative gable vents and gables; 
i.  Entrance porticos; 
j.  Greek revival columns; 
k.  Decorative window pediments. 
605 G. - Structures permitted above the height limit. 
The height limits of this ordinance shall not apply to church spires, belfries, silos, cupolas, domes, ornamental towers, monuments, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers, chimneys, smoke stacks, conveyor, flag pole, radio or television tower, mast or aerial, parapet wall not extending more than four feet above the roof line of the building; necessary mechanical appurtenances and other such structures not intended for human occupancy; provided such structure does not interfere with any established airport approach zones, airport protection zones, flight patterns or solar access. 
605 H. - Retail, large-format. 
1.  Applicability. The standards of this section apply to all retail sales and service uses on sites that include more than 74,999 square feet of gross floor area (in aggregate). 
2.  Parking lots. 
a.  Large scale retail projects must design parking facilities as transitional spaces where users change modes of travel, from car, bus, or bicycle to pedestrian. The design of parking areas must therefore safely and attractively serve all transportation modes. 
b.  Parking areas must be distributed around large buildings on not less than two (2) sides in order to shorten the distance to other buildings and public sidewalks and to reduce the perceived scale of parking areas and paved surfaces. 
c.  In order to reduce the scale of parking areas, no single parking area may include more than 200 parking spaces unless divided into two or more sub-areas separated from each other by landscaping, access drives or public streets, pedestrian walkways, or buildings. 
d.  Placing large amounts of parking between the front door of buildings and the adjacent street contributes to a formless arrival experience for users, and creates a detached relationship between the primary building and the street. If more than 65 percent of the total off-street parking spaces for the entire site are located between the front façade of the principal building and the primary street abutting the site, additional landscaping, buffering and raised pedestrian walkway connection must be provided as a condition of development plan approval. 
3.  Pedestrian circulation. 
a.  At least one continuous internal pedestrian connecting walkway must be provided to link all abutting public sidewalks and on-site bus stops with the principal customer entrance of the principal building on the site. Such pedestrian connection must be at least five feet in width. Walkways must feature items such as adjoining landscaped areas that include trees, shrubs, benches, flower beds, planters, ground cover, or other such materials for no less than 30 percent of their length. 
b.  Walkways, no less than seven feet in width, must be provided along the full length of the building along any façade featuring a customer entrance, and along any façade abutting public parking areas. Such walkways must be located an average of six feet from the façade of the building to provide planting beds for foundation landscaping, except where features such as arcades, display windows, planters or entryways are part of the façade. 
c.  Customer entrances must have weather protection features, such as awnings, arcades, or vestibules. 
d.  All internal pedestrian walkways that cross parking aisles or driveways must be distinguished from driving surfaces through the use of durable, low-maintenance surface materials such as pavers, bricks, scored concrete or scored and painted asphalt to enhance pedestrian safety and comfort. Raised walkways may be installed if elevated six inches with tapered side slopes and meet ADA standards. 
4.  Building design. The following standards apply to all building façades and exterior walls that are visible from adjoining streets or properties 
a.  Buildings visible from public streets must include at least three of the following features: 
i.  Variations in roof form and parapet height. 
ii.  Clearly pronounced recesses and projections. 
iii.  Wall plane off-sets (dimension established by building module). 
iv.  Reveals and projections and changes in texture and color of wall surfaces. 
v.  Deep set windows with mullions. 
vi.  Ground level arcades and second floor galleries/balconies. 
vii.  Other features that reduce the apparent mass of a building. 
b.  Buildings must have architectural features that conceal rooftop equipment, such as HVAC units, from public view. 
c.  Each building must have a clearly defined, highly visible customer entrance featuring at least three of the following elements: 
i.  Canopies or porticos. 
ii.  Overhangs. 
iii.  Recesses/projections. 
iv.  Arcades. 
v.  Raised corniced parapets over the door. 
vi.  Peaked roof forms. 
vii.  Arches. 
viii.  Outdoor patios. 
ix.  Display windows. 
x.  Architectural details such as tile work and moldings that are integrated into the building structure and design. 
xi.  Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped areas and/or places for sitting. 
5.  Development agreement. Prior to the issuance of building permits, the property owner must enter into a development agreement with the city. The agreement must include at least the following: 
a.  Provisions preventing the property owner from prohibiting or otherwise limiting, through contract or other legal device, the reuse of the building for retail or other uses allowed in the subject zoning district. 
b.  Provisions requiring long-term maintenance of the property if the building is vacated. 
c.  Provisions requiring the preparation of an adaptive reuse plan and/or a demolition plan acceptable to the city. 
d.  Other provisions deemed necessary by the city to address the particular circumstances related to the project. 
( Ord. No. 18-07, § 1, 5-8-2018 ; Ord. No. 19-07, § 1, 2-26-2019 ) 
606. - REGULATIONS OF FENCES. 
606 A. - Chain link fences. 
In all zoning districts, chain link or other woven wire fences are prohibited in a front yard. 
606 B. - Fences. 
(a)  Intent. This section is intended to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city by regulating the height, location, design, construction and maintenance of fences within the city limits. 
(b)  Definitions. For purposes of administering this section, the following interpretations and definitions shall apply; words and terms not explicitly defined in this section shall have the meanings given in Article 2, Interpretations and Definitions, and words and terms not explicitly defined in this section or in Article 2, Interpretations and Definitions shall have the meanings given by common use. 
    Fence. A structure serving as an enclosure, a barrier, or a boundary, usually made of posts or stakes joined together by boards, wire or rails. 
    Fence height. The vertical dimension from the natural ground level to the top of the fence measured at any point along the length of the fence. 
    Natural ground level. The level of the ground prior to any recent manmade changes in the elevation of the ground. For purposes of administering this section, "natural ground level" shall also include the level of the ground established on any site plan or landscape plan approved in accordance with the city's review process for site plans and subdivision plats. 
    Yard, front. An unoccupied area extending the full width of the lot located between the front line and the front yard setback line. 
(c)  General standards, Residential. 
(1)  No fence located in a front yard shall exceed four feet in height above the ground level on property. 
(2)  No fence located in the rear yard shall exceed eight feet in height above the adjoining residentially zoned ground level. 
(3)  No fence shall encroach into the public right-of-way. 
(4)  Corner lots have two front yards and the same regulations and restrictions on fences in the front yard apply to the yard areas adjacent to both streets. 
(5)  Materials used for fences in the front yard must be ornamental in design and constructed with materials such as brick, masonry, picket or split rail. Materials shall not restrict the view through such fence by more than 50 percent of the total barrier as viewed from the street. 
(6)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property on which a fence is located to maintain the fence in good and proper repair so that at all times it presents a neat and orderly appearance to surrounding property owners and to the general public. 
(d)  General standards, Commercial and Industrial. 
(1)  Whenever screening is required by this ordinance, a durable masonry wall, or fence and hedge of sufficient opacity to provide a visual blind designed to be compatible with the character of adjoining properties, shall be provided. Such fences and/or walls shall be at least six feet in height, but no greater than eight feet in height, measured from the ground along the common lot lines of the adjoining properties. 
(2)  Barbed wire fence material shall be allowed on property zoned PCD or PID. No fence or portion of a fence shall exceed eight feet in height. Concertina (razor) wire shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Corner lots have two front yards and the same regulations and restrictions on fences in the front yard apply to the yard areas adjacent to both streets. 
(4)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property on which a fence is located to maintain that fence in good and proper repair so that at all times it presents a neat and orderly appearance to surrounding property owners and to the general public. 
(e)  Permits. A building permit shall be required for the construction or alteration of any fence. As a part of the permitting process, the building official shall review plans, issue permits, inspect installations, and secure compliance with the requirements of this section. All fences in the city must comply with the provisions of this section. 
( Ord. No. 18-09, § 1, 5-8-2018 ) 
ARTICLE 7. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

701. - ZONING DISTRICTS RELATION TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. 
    Article 4 includes criteria whereby rezoning requests are evaluated for their consistency with the current, adopted City of Griffin Comprehensive Plan. The intent of the zoning districts described herein is to fulfill the planning and land use policy established by the Comprehensive Plan and its Future Land Use map, whereby zoning districts appropriately correspond to the land use categories on the Future Land Use Map as follows: 
Table 7.1 Zoning Districts to Comprehensive Plan Categories Future Land Use Categories 
(2024 Comp. Plan) Zoning Districts Low Density Residential LDR-A LDR-B LDR-C AG/R Medium Density Residential MDR PRD SHROD High Density Residential HDR-A HDR-B PRD SHROD Office-Transitional CBD PCD Office-Professional CBD PCD MOD Neighborhood Business NBD Commercial CBD PCD Mixed Use PRD PCD MU/TOD Downtown Hub CBD MU/TOD Industrial PID Public/Institutional INST Park/Recreation/Conservation PRD AG/R CONS Transportation/Communication/Utilities  
702. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS. 
    In order to accomplish the purposes of this ordinance as stated in Article 1, the following zoning district classifications are established within the incorporated area of the City of Griffin, Georgia: 
Table 7.2 Zoning Districts and Abbreviations 705 LDR-A Low Density Residential "A" 706 LDR-B Low Density Residential "B" 707 LDR-C Low Density Residential "C" 708 MDR Medium Density Residential 709 HDR-A High Density Residential "A" 710 HDR-B High Density Residential "B" 711 NBD Neighborhood Business District 712 PRD Planned Residential Development 713 CBD Central Business District 714 PCD Planned Commercial District 715 PID Planned Industrial Development 716 INST Institutional 717 AG/R Agricultural/Residential 718 SPIOD Special Public Interest Overlay District 719 AOD Airport Overlay District 720 SHROD Special Housing Revitalization Overlay District 721 PAO Places of Assembly Overlay District 722 MU/TOD Mixed Use/TOD Overlay District 723 CONS Conservation Subdivision 724 MOD Medical Overlay District  
703. - ZONING TO APPLY WHEN LOT IS DIVIDED BY DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINE. 
    In the event that a district boundary line on the zoning map divides a lot of record held in one ownership on the date of passage of this ordinance, each part of the lot so divided shall be used in conformity with the regulations established by this ordinance for the district in which each such parcel is located. If the property owner or such a lot desires, he may extend the use allowed on the greatest portion of said lot beyond the district boundary line in accordance with setbacks and yard requirements for the district into which he is encroaching. 
704. - PERMITTED USES FOR ALL ZONING DISTRICTS. 
    Except for use provisions as specified by Article 5 and other sections pertaining to infrastructure criteria, location criteria and/or overlay regulations, Table 7.3 establishes permitted, conditional, and special uses for all zoning districts. See Article 5 regarding interpretations of uses. 
Table 7.3 Permitted Use Table by Zoning Category and Development Use Category By Specific Type 
P = Permitted by Right 
C = Conditional 
SU = Special Use 
? = Consult Supplemental Regulations Supplemental
Regulations LDR-A/R-1 *6 LDR-B/R-2 *6 LDR-C/R-3 *6 MDR/R-4 HDR-A *7 HDR-B *7 NBD CBD PCD PRD *8 Mixed Use
Overlay-
Neighborhood Mixed Use
Overlay-
Corridor Mixed Use
Overlay-
Village Mixed Use
Overlay-
Entertain/Arts PID INST. Conservation
Subdivision AG/R SPROD
Underlying
Zoning + AOD SHROD Medical
Overlay AGRICULTURAL Accessory Structures, Agricultural - See Accessory Uses ? P P P P P P Community Garden ? SU SU SU P SU P P Farm Operations ? P Farmstand ? P P Feed, Seed and Fertilizer Sales P P SU Greenhouse, Nursery ? P P P SU Keeping of Chickens/Pigeons ? P P Keeping of Bees ? P P Livestock, see Farm Operations ? Riding Stables ? P P Sale of Farm Goods on the premises ? P P COMMERCIAL *5 Ambulance service or rescue squad ? P P P Amusement or Commercial recreation facility ? P P Animal Hospital, see Veterinary Services Art shows, carnival rides, festivals, parades and special events of community interest, see Section 721 SU SU SU Automotive Body, Paint and Interior Repair and Maintenance P *13 P Automotive Engine Repair and Replacement Shops P *13 P Automotive Tire Dealers P *13 P Bakery P P P P SU Bank P P P SU P Barbershop, beauty parlor P P P P SU Brewery and Distilleries P Car wash ? P P P P Carnivals, see Section 721 ? SU SU SU Clinics, medical and dental ? SU P P P SU P P Commercial Kennel ? P P P P SU Commercial recreation, Indoor P P P *5 P *5 P *5 P P Commercial recreation, Outdoor P P P Consumer Fireworks Retail Sales Facility or Store P *10 Consumer Fireworks Retail Sales Stand P *12 Convenience Store with gasoline or diesel fuel ? P 
(<2,500 sf) P SU Convenience Store without gasoline or diesel fuel ? P 
(<2,500 sf) P SU SU SU Day care, Nursery ? SU SU P SU P P SU Dog Grooming ? P P P P Eating establishments ? P P P P *4 P *4 P *4 P SU Eating establishments, Fast Food ? SU P P P SU Emergency Services SU P Existing business and professional offices with no on-site storage of equipment and supplies P Extended Stay Hotel/Motel ? SU SU Farmer's Market ? P P P P P P Financial Institution P P P SU P P SU Florist, Flower Shop SU P P P SU Grocery shop (under 2,500 sf), convenience store P P P Grocery stores or other retail establishments over 15,000 sf P SU SU SU Health Club, see Section 721 P P P P Home Occupation as provided in Section 503 ? P P P P P P P P Home Stay Bed and Breakfast ? SU SU SU SU SU SU SU P P P SU Hospital or Clinic ? P SU SU P Hospital related out-patient services (Ambulatory and Diagnostic Clinics) P Hotel SU P P P P SU Kennel, Non-commercial (5 dogs max, must be at least 90 days old) SU SU SU SU Laboratories, Medical and Dental P Laundromat P P P SU SU Licensed Day Care center SU P SU SU P SU Locksmith shop P P P Medical or dental services and clinics P P P P P P Motel P P P SU Motor Vehicle Parts (Used) Merchant Wholesalers P Motor Vehicle Towing P Neighborhood retail, service or office uses ? SU SU SU Office space for governmental, business, professional: including but not limited to construction contractors, general contractors, heavy equipment contractors, special trade contractors, engineers, architects and land surveyors P Office Uses P P P P P Office, Medical or Clinic P P P P Office, professional SU P P SU P P P SU Office, temporary for on-site construction functions P P P Outdoor recreation entertainment facilities SU SU SU P Personal Service business P P P Personal Service establishment SU SU P P SU P P SU SU Pharmacy P SU P Photographer's studio P P P P Recreational facility P P Research or experimental laboratory P *2 Restaurant, Café - see Eating Establishments P P P P SU SU Retail business SU P P P P *3 P *3 P *3 P SU SU SU Retail dry cleaner, see Laundromat SU Retail Uses P P Shoe Repair P P P Sidewalk café, see Section 722 P P P P Stadiums, see Section 721 Studio-Art, music, dance, or other P P P P P Temporary Firework Stands P *12 Theatre, see also Section 721 P P P Veterinary Services, clinics or hospitals ? SU P P P P INDUSTRIAL Building, facility, or land for the distribution of utility services P P Central Trash Collection Dumpsters P *3 Enclosed commercial storage P Exterior display and sales facility P Junkyard - see Open, outdoor storage P *3 Light Industrial Use P Manufacturing P *2 Newspaper publishing facility P P P *2 P *2 P *2 P Open, Outside Storage of Materials, Vehicles, and Other Goods P *13 P Radio and/or television and/or transmission tower ? P SU SU Repair, accessory structure or service facility incidental to the primary use P *4 Retail Business, Heavy Equipment P *3 Self-Storage Facility ? P P Warehouse P Warehouse or other storage facility P P Wholesale Business P P INSTITUTIONAL Cemetery, see Section 503 ? P Churches, see Places of Worship Commercial Trade or Vocational school P Cultural facilities, see also Section 721 P P Funeral Home ? SU P P P SU Government office/facility P P SU P *2 P *2 P *2 P P *3 P Government uses P P P Institutional uses P P Neighborhood Clubhouse SU SU SU SU SU SU P Places of Worship, see Section 721 SU SU SU SU SU SU SU SU SU SU SU SU SU SU SU SU SU SU SU SU SU SU Private or Public Club, Lodge, Social Center or Meeting Room P P *5 P *5 P Publically owned building, facility, land P P SU *3 P Schools: Colleges/Universities, elementary, middle, high, postgraduate, vocational/commercial P RESIDENTIAL *1 *1 *1 Accessory dwelling unit - See Accessory Uses ? Aeronautical related uses P Airport related accessory uses SU Assisted living, retirement center, and nursing home SU SU SU SU SU SU SU SU SU Boarding home, group home, and personal care home having 5 or less persons P *11 P *11 P *11 P *11 P *11 P *11 P *11 P *11 P *11 P *11 P *11 P *11 P *11 P *11 Boarding home, group home, and personal care home having 6 or more persons P *11 P *11 P *11 P *11 P *11 P *11 P *11 P *11 P *11 P *11 P *11 P *11 P *11 P *11 Cluster Development ? P P P P P Dwelling, Single-Family Attached (including Townhouses) P P P *1 P P P P Dwelling, Multi-Family, Senior Housing P P SU P *1 P P P P P P Dwelling, Single-Family Detached ?- HDR-A P P P P SU P P P Dwelling, Two-family (duplex) P P P Live/Work, Efficiency or Loft apartment over ground floor level ? P P P P P P P P P Manufactured Homes in accordance with Section 605A ? P P Residential dwelling, provided the existing structure was originally constructed as a residential dwelling (single or multi-family) and is located on West Poplar Street or West Solomon Street P P P Vertical Mixed Use P P Watchman's or caretakers single family home ? SU P OTHER Accessory Uses and structures as provided in Section 504 ? P P P P P P P P All permitted uses in underlying zoning district P Any permitted use in PCD P Building facility or land for non-commercial park or recreation; Thoroughfares; Open space, or Public body of water and similar purposes P Building, Facility, Land for Parking ? P P P Building, Facility, Land for Parking ? SU SU P Mass Transit Station P SU Places of Assembly Overlay District (PAO) *9 SU SU SU P SU P Places of Assembly in accordance with Section 721 SU SU SU SU Railroad or bus passenger station P SU Transit Station ? P P SU P Transportation terminal SU P Transportation terminal in conjunction with a mass transit station P SU  
*1   Residential dwelling provided that the existing structure was originally constructed as a residential dwelling (single-or multi-family) and is located on West Poplar Street or West Solomon Street. 
*2   All operations are conducted entirely within a building and no noise, vibration, smoke, gas, fume, odor, dust fire hazard, radiation, or other injurious or obnoxious condition related to the operation creating a nuisance beyond the premises. 
*3   Such use shall be properly screened from view from adjoining streets and properties by a suitable fence or wall at least six feet in height above finished grade. The required fence or wall must provide for a reasonable visual separation between the use and adjoining properties. 
*4   The operation of the repair or service facility does not constitute a nuisance to adjoining properties and the operation is not otherwise prohibited in the zoning district. 
*5   Commercial uses are only allowed in multi-family developments, on the ground floor, not to exceed 20% of the floor area of the development exclusive of structured parking areas. In no case shall commercial uses exceed 20,000 square feet. 
*6   In order to maintain the integrity of single-family neighborhoods in the LDR-A, B, C zoning districts prohibit all uses except agricultural as noted and uses permitted under the Places of Public Assembly as provided in Section 721 of this ordinance. 
*7   Other neighborhood retail, personal service or office uses that are primarily for use of residents of the HDR-A, B zoning districts provided that they are conducted entirely in a permanently enclosed building and the buildings shall be an architectural design compatible with the dwelling within the HDR-A, B development. 
*8   Single-family attached dwelling, provided that such dwellings shall not represent more than 25% of total dwelling units within the proposed development nor shall such dwellings be established on the perimeter of the PRD development that adjoins LDR-A, B, C zoning districts. 
*9   A Special Use permit is required for all assembly uses over 3,000 square feet. 
*10   Fireworks Retail Sales Facility or Store must meet the minimum standards of NFPA 1124 for new and existing buildings. 
*11   Occupancy will be based on the requirements set forth in the International Residential Code (IRC)/International Building Code (IBC) and the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 101 Life Safety Codes (2012)/International Fire Code (IFC) 2012. 
*12   Consumer Fireworks Retail Sales Stands are allowed along the following commercial corridors: North Expressway, US 19/41 and Taylor Street/US 16. 
*13   Outside storage is prohibited; however, uses categorized as Automotive Engine Repair and Replacement, Motor Vehicle Parts (Used) Merchant Wholesalers, Automotive Tire Dealers, Motor Vehicle Towing, and Automotive Body, Paint and Interior Repair and Maintenance shall have no more than four motor vehicles per exterior service bay, which is a bay/garage door located on the outside of the principal business structure or shall have no more than the number of motor vehicles which can be legally parked in a paved, striped parking lot in conformance with the Unified Development Code, Articles 8 and 9, as required. 
( Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 5-27-2014 ; Ord. No. 14-04, § 1, 7-8-2014 ; Ord. No. 15-01, § 1, 1-27-2015 ; Ord. No. 15-08, § 1, 6-23-2015, eff. 7-1-2015 ; Ord. No. 15-10, § 1, 7-28-2015 ; Ord. No. 15-11, § 1, 7-28-2015 ; Ord. No. 16-01, § 1, 1-12-2016 ; Ord. No. 16-10, § 1, 7-26-2016 ; Ord. No. 18-06, § 1, 3-27-2018 ; Ord. No. 19-05, § 1, 1-22-2019 ) 
705. - LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL "A" (LDR-A). 
705 A. - Intent. 
It shall be the intent of this zoning district to be reserved for development of low density residential uses only, which is intended to provide and encourage a stable, healthy environment for single-family dwellings situated on lots having an area of one acre (43,560 square feet) or more. The provisions which apply to this district are designed to discourage encroachment of development that may adversely affect the residential integrity and character of the district. 
705 B. - Permitted and prohibited uses. 
Table 7.3 shall govern the use of this zoning district, including permitted, prohibited, and conditional uses. 
705 C. - Physical requirements. 
Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, principal dwellings permitted in the LDR-A district shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  Minimum lot area: One acre or 43,560 square feet. 
2.  Minimum heated floor area per dwelling unit: 2,000 square feet for single story; minimum building footprint for two or more story dwellings shall be 1,180 square feet. 
3.  Minimum street frontage: 100 feet for non-cul-de-sac lots; 35 feet for cul-de-sac lots. 
4.  Minimum lot width: 100 feet as measured at building line. 
5.  Minimum front yard: 50 feet. 
6.  Minimum side yard: 20 feet. 
7.  Minimum rear yard: 25 feet. 
8.  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
9.  Maximum lot coverage by impervious surface: 25 percent. 
10.  All dwellings shall be provided with a paved driveway accommodating a minimum of two automobiles and a garage or carport for a minimum of two automobiles. 
11.  100-year Floodplain. No permanent structure shall be constructed within the boundary of the 100-year floodplain unless the structure meets minimum floodplain ordinance requirements as established in Chapter 50, Floods, of the Griffin Code of Ordinances. 
705 D. - Special uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted, upon approval by the board of commissioners, as provided in Section 406 of this ordinance: 
1.  Uses permitted in the Places of Assembly Overlay District as provided in Section 721 of this ordinance. 
2.  Non-Commercial Kennel for keeping of five or more dogs, 90 days old or more. 
3.  Reserved. 
706. - LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL "B" (LDR-B). 
706 A. - Intent. 
It shall be the intent of this zoning district to be reserved for development of low density residential uses only, which are intended to provide and encourage the formation and continuation of a stable, healthy environment for single-family dwellings situated on lots having an area of one-half acre (21,780 square feet) or more. The provisions are also intended to discourage development that may adversely affect the residential character and integrity of the district. 
706 B. - Permitted and prohibited uses. 
Table 7.3 shall govern the use of this zoning district, including permitted, prohibited, and conditional uses. 
706 C. - Physical requirements. 
1.  Minimum lot area: One-half acre or 21,780 square feet. 
2.  Minimum heated floor area per dwelling unit: 1,800 square feet for single story; minimum building footprint for two or more story dwellings shall be 1,050 square feet. 
3.  Minimum street frontage: 80 feet for non cul-de-sac lots; 35 feet for cul-de-sac lots. 
4.  Minimum lot width: 80 feet as measured at building line. 
5.  Minimum front yard: 50 feet. 
6.  Minimum side yard: 15 feet. 
7.  Rear yard: 25 feet. 
8.  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
9.  Maximum lot coverage by impervious surface: 35 percent. 
10.  All dwellings shall be provided with a paved driveway accommodating a minimum of two automobiles and a garage or carport for a minimum of two automobiles. 
11.  100-year Floodplain: No permanent structure shall be constructed within the boundary of the 100-year floodplain unless the structure meets minimum floodplain ordinance requirements as established in Chapter 50, Floods, of the Griffin Code of Ordinances. 
706 D. - Special uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted, upon approval by the board of commissioners, as provided in Section 406 of this ordinance: 
1.  Uses permitted in the Places of Assembly Overlay District as provided in Section 721 of this ordinance. 
2.  Non-Commercial Kennel for keeping of five or more dogs, 90 days old or more. 
3.  Reserved. 
707. - LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL "C" (LDR-C). 
707 A. - Intent. 
It shall be the intent of this zoning district to be reserved for development of low density residential uses only, which are intended to provide and encourage the formation and continuation of a stable, healthy environment for single-family dwellings situated on lots having an area of one-third acre (14,520 square feet) or more. The provisions are also intended to discourage development that may adversely affect the residential character and integrity of the district. 
707 B. - Permitted and prohibited uses. 
Table 7.3 shall govern the use of this zoning district, including permitted, prohibited, and conditional uses. 
707 C. - Physical requirements. 
Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, uses permitted in the LDR-C district shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  Minimum lot area: One-third acre or 14,520 square feet. 
2.  Minimum heated floor area per dwelling unit: 1,600 square feet for single story; minimum building footprint for two or more story dwellings shall be 950 square feet. 
3.  Minimum street frontage: 70 feet for non cul-de-sac lots; 35 feet for cul-de-sac lots. 
4.  Minimum lot width: 70 feet as measured at building line. 
5.  Minimum front yard: 40 feet. 
6.  Minimum side yard: 15 feet. 
7.  Minimum rear yard: 25 feet. 
8.  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
9.  Maximum lot coverage by impervious surface: 40 percent. 
10.  Driveways: All dwellings shall be provided with a paved driveway accommodating a minimum of two automobiles and a garage or carport for a minimum of two automobiles. 
11.  100-year Floodplain: No permanent structure shall be constructed within the boundary of the 100 year floodplain unless the structure meets minimum floodplain ordinance requirements as established in Chapter 50, Floods, of the Griffin Code of Ordinances. 
707 D. - Special uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted, upon approval by the board of commissioners, as provided in Section 406 of this ordinance: 
1.  Uses permitted in the Places of Assembly Overlay District as provided in Section 721 of this ordinance. 
2.  Non-Commercial Kennel for keeping of five or more dogs, 90 days old or more. 
3.  Reserved. 
708. - MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (MDR). 
708 A. - Intent. 
It shall be the intent of this zoning district to be reserved for development of medium density residential uses, which is intended to provide a transition between low density and high density residential development districts. The provisions which apply to this district are designed and intended to encourage the formation and continuation of a stable, healthy environment for the residents of medium density residential developments. The provisions are also intended to discourage encroachment of uses that could adversely affect the intended residential character and integrity of this district. 
708 B. - Permitted and prohibited uses. 
Table 7.3 shall govern the use of this zoning district, including permitted, prohibited, and conditional uses. 
708 C. - Physical requirements. 
Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, uses permitted in the MDR district shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  Minimum lot area: One-fourth of an acre or 10,890 square feet. 
2.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: 1,500 square feet for single story; with a minimum building footprint of 900 square feet for two or more story dwellings. 
3.  Minimum street frontage: 60 feet for single-family dwellings on non cul-de-sac lots; 35 feet for cul-de-sac lots. 
4.  Minimum lot width: 60 feet as measured at building line for single-family dwellings. 
5.  Minimum front yard: 35 feet. 
6.  Minimum side yard: Ten feet. 
7.  Minimum rear yard: 25 feet. 
8.  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
9.  Maximum lot coverage by impervious surface: 45 percent. 
10.  Buffer requirements: Any R-4 development adjoining an R-1, R-2 or R-3 zoning district or property identified on the future land use map as low density residential development and proposing duplexes shall establish a minimum 30-foot landscaped buffer between the zoning districts, in accordance with Section 604. Such buffer may be reduced to 20 feet, provided a landscaped earthen berm with a minimum height of three feet is established. 
11.  Driveways: All single-family dwellings shall be provided with a paved driveway accommodating a minimum of two automobiles. Garages or carports shall be provided for a minimum of one automobile. No parking shall be permitted on the street. 
12.  100-year Floodplain: No permanent structure shall be constructed within the boundary of the 100-year floodplain unless the structure meets minimum floodplain ordinance requirements as established in Chapter 50, Floods, of the Griffin Code of Ordinances. 
708 D. - Special uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted, upon approval by the board of commissioners, as provided in Section 406 of this ordinance: 
1.  Uses permitted in the Places of Assembly Overlay District as provided in Section 721 of this ordinance. 
2.  Non-Commercial Kennel for keeping of five or more dogs, 90 days old or more. 
3.  Reserved. 
709. - HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL "A" (HDR-A). 
709 A. - Intent. 
It shall be the intent of this zoning district to be reserved for development of high density residential uses only. The provisions which apply to this district are designed and intended to encourage the formation and continuation of a stable, healthy environment for the residents of multi-family dwellings and to prevent developments that may adversely affect the intended character or integrity of the district. These provisions are also intended to permit neighborhood retail and office uses, to primarily serve residents of the development, by special use permit approved by the board of board of commissioners, and which will not adversely affect the residential character of the district. 
709 B. - Permitted and prohibited uses. 
Table 7.3 shall govern the use of this zoning district, including permitted, prohibited, and conditional uses. 
709 C. - Special uses. 
1.  Neighborhood retail, service or office uses primarily for use of residents of the HDR-A district provided they are conducted entirely within a wholly and permanently enclosed building or buildings which shall be of an architectural design compatible with the dwellings within the HDR-A development. 
2.  Single-family detached dwelling units that will provide for the utilization of vacant or underserved parcels of land within existing neighborhoods. 
a.  Minimum lot size: 4,800 square feet. 
b.  Minimum front yard: 25 feet. 
c.  Minimum side yard: Ten feet. 
d.  Minimum rear yard: 25 feet. 
e.  Minimum heated space: 1,100 square feet. 
709 D. - Physical requirements. 
Unless otherwise provided in this ordinance, uses permitted in the HDR-A district shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  Minimum initial tract size: 
a.  Duplexes: One-fourth acre or 10,890 square feet. 
b.  Cluster development, single-family attached and multi-family developments: Three acres; provided, however, the net minimum individual lot size shall not be less than 4,800 square feet for cluster developments or less than 2,460 square feet for single-family attached units. 
2.  Maximum density per acre: 
a.  Duplexes: Eight units per acre. 
b.  Cluster development: Six units per acre. 
c.  Single-family attached and multi-family developments: 12 units per acre. 
3.  Minimum heated floor area per dwelling unit for duplexes: 1,250 square feet with a minimum building footprint of 850 square feet for two or more story dwellings; cluster development, single-family attached and multi-family developments-900 square feet for one-bedroom units; 1,000 square feet for two-bedroom units and 1,100 square feet for three-bedroom units. 
4.  Minimum street frontage: 200 feet. 
5.  Minimum lot width: 200 feet as measured at building line. 
6.  Minimum front yard: 25 feet. 
7.  Minimum side yard: 20 feet, except that the side yard for interior, attached units shall be zero. 
8.  Minimum rear yard: 25 feet. 
9.  Minimum distance between buildings: 
a.  Front to front: 50 feet. 
b.  Front or rear to side: 50 feet. 
c.  Side to side: 20 feet. 
10.  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
11.  Maximum number of units per building: Eight. 
12.  Maximum lot coverage by impervious surface: 50%. 
13.  Minimum common open space: Cluster development, single-family attached and multi-family developments shall preserve a minimum of 20 percent of the gross acreage common open space. 
14.  Parking requirements: All single-family, attached, two-family (duplex) and cluster dwellings shall be provided with a paved driveway accommodating a minimum of two automobiles. No parking shall be permitted on the street. 
15.  Buffer requirements: Any HDR-A development adjoining an LDR-A, LDR-B or LDR-C district or property identified on the future land use map as low density residential which proposes cluster, attached or duplex dwellings shall establish a minimum landscaped buffer of 30 feet along the common property boundary between the zoning districts in accordance with Section 604. Such buffer may be reduced to 20 feet, provided a landscaped, earthen berm with a minimum height of three feet is established. 
16.  Ownership requirements: All of the land in single-family attached (townhouse and condominium) and cluster developments shall be owned initially by an individual, a corporation or other legal entity. Individual properties may be sold after a final plat has been approved by the City of Griffin Development Review Committee and recorded in the Office of the Superior Court Clerk of Spalding County. These developments shall also be subject to approval of restrictive homeowner's covenants providing for the maintenance of common open space, required stormwater management infrastructure, establishment and management of a homeowner's association. 
17.  100-year Floodplain: No permanent structure shall be constructed within the boundary of the 100-year floodplain unless the structure meets minimum floodplain ordinance requirements as established in Chapter 50, Floods, of the Griffin Code of Ordinances. 
710. - HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL "B" (HDR-B). 
710 A. - Intent. 
It shall be the intent of this zoning district to be reserved for development of high density residential uses only. The provisions which apply to this district are designed and intended to encourage the formation and continuation of a stable, healthy environment for the residents of multi-family dwellings and to prevent developments that may adversely affect the intended character or integrity of the district. These provisions are also intended to permit neighborhood retail and office uses which will primarily serve residents of the development. Such uses may be approved by the board of commissioners as a special use permit, provided they will not adversely affect the residential character of the district. 
710 B. - Permitted and prohibited uses. 
Table 7.3 shall govern the use of this zoning district, including permitted, prohibited, and conditional uses. 
710 C. - Special uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted, upon approval as provided in Section 406, in the HDR-B district: 
1.  Professional offices; 
2.  Licensed day care center; 
3.  Hotels; 
4.  Clinics; 
5.  Neighborhood clubhouse; 
6.  Funeral home; 
7.  Flower shop; 
8.  Other neighborhood retail, service or office uses primarily for use of residents of the HDR-B district provided they are conducted entirely within a wholly and permanently enclosed building or buildings, which shall be of an architectural design and scale compatible with the residential uses within the HDR-B development. 
710 D. - Physical requirements. 
1.  Minimum initial tract size: 
a.  Single-family attached and multi-family developments: Four acres; provided, however, the net minimum individual lot size shall not be less than 1,850 square feet for single-family attached units. 
2.  Maximum density per acre: 
a.  Single-family attached and multi-family developments: 14 units per acre. 
3.  Minimum heated floor area per dwelling unit: 800 square feet for one-bedroom units, 950 square feet for two-bedroom units and 1,100 square feet for three-bedroom units. 
4.  Minimum street frontage: 250 feet. 
5.  Minimum lot width: 250 feet as measured at building line. 
6.  Minimum front yard: 25 feet. 
7.  Minimum side yard: 20 feet, except that the side yard for interior, attached units shall be zero. 
8.  Minimum rear yard: 25 feet. 
9.  Minimum distance between buildings: 
a.  Front to front: 50 feet. 
b.  Front or rear to side: 50 feet. 
c.  Side to side: 20 feet. 
10.  Minimum building height: 35 feet. 
11.  Maximum number of units per building: 12. 
12.  Maximum lot coverage by impervious surface: 50%. 
13.  Minimum common open space: Single-family attached and multi-family developments shall preserve a minimum of 20 percent of the development tract as common open space. 
14.  Buffer requirements: Any HDR-B development adjoining an LDR-A, LDR-B or LDR-C district or property identified on the future land use map as low density residential shall establish a minimum landscaped buffer of 40 feet along the common property boundary between zoning districts in accordance with Section 604. Such buffer may be reduced to 30 feet, provided a landscaped, earthen berm with a minimum height of three feet is established. 
15.  Parking requirements: All single-family attached dwellings shall be provided with a paved driveway accommodating a minimum of two automobiles; multi-family units shall provide parking in accordance with Article 8 of this ordinance. No parking shall be permitted on the street. 
16.  Ownership requirements: All of the land in a single-family attached (townhouse and condominium) and cluster development shall be owned initially by an individual, a corporation or some other legal entity. Individual properties may be sold after a final plat has been approved by the City of Griffin Development Review Committee and recorded in the Office of the Superior Court Clerk of Spalding County. These developments shall also be subject to approval of restrictive homeowner's covenants providing for the maintenance of common open space, required stormwater management infrastructure, establishment and management of a homeowner's association. 
17.  100-year Floodplain: No permanent structure shall be constructed within the boundary of the 100-year floodplain unless the structure meets minimum floodplain ordinance requirements as established in Chapter 50, Floods, of the Griffin Code of Ordinances. 
711. - NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT. 
711 A. - Intent. 
It shall be the intent of this zoning district to promote and encourage the development and continued use of businesses located in and around the various neighborhoods of the city of griffin. These regulations are also intended to reduce traffic congestion, provide adequate off-street parking, prohibit the expansion of "strip" type business areas beyond existing "strip" development, and to discourage encroachment by other uses capable of adversely affecting the residential character of the district. 
711 B. - Ownership control. 
All of the land in a neighborhood business district shall be owned initially by an individual, by a corporation or some other legal entity. 
711 C. - Permitted and prohibited uses. 
Table 7.3 shall govern the use of this zoning district, including permitted, prohibited, and conditional uses. 
711 D. - Physical requirements. 
All development shall conform to the dimensions, design, and other standards identified within Figure 711-NBD. 
711 E. - Storage. 
No storage shall be permitted on the lot unless in a fully enclosed building. 
711 F. - Parking. 
No automobile parking or service areas will be permitted within the required front yard setback or within 15 feet of the property line of an adjoining residential zoning lot. parking and services areas must be separated from adjoining residential lots by a suitable planting screen, fence or wall at least six feet in height above finished grade. The above-required screen, fence or wall must provide for a reasonable visual separation between the properties. 
711 G. - Loud speaking systems. 
No outside loud speaking system shall be utilized prior to 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. if directly adjacent to a residential zoned use. 
711 H. - Lighting. 
All lights or lighting must be downcast lighting; arrangements for purposes of advertising, security or night operations must be directed away from adjoining or nearby residential zoning lots. 
711 I. - Exemptions. 
All neighborhood business structures built prior to the adoption of the ordinance will be exempt from the provisions of Section 711 D., Physical requirements. 

712. - PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT (PRD). 
712 A. - Intent. 
It shall be the intent of this zoning district to encourage the best possible site plans and building arrangements under a plan of development rather than under lot-by-lot regulations. The developer benefits from better land utilization, economy in the provision of roads and utilities and flexibility in design. The city gains the advantage of a variety in building types, compatibility of use and optimum community development. The planned residential development is intended to encourage ingenuity and resourcefulness in land planning including a variety of housing types in a mixed use environment of residential and commercial services, to assure the provision of open space such as parks and recreational land and other facilities for the use of the occupants of the development, to provide for a more efficient and imaginative development of property and to facilitate efficient housing. 
712 B. - Ownership control. 
All of the land in a planned residential development shall be owned initially by an individual, corporation or some other legal entity. Individual properties may be sold after a final plat has been approved by the City of Griffin Development Review Committee and recorded in the Office of the Superior Court Clerk of Spalding County. Such developments are also subject to approval of restrictive homeowner's covenants providing for the maintenance of common open space, required stormwater management infrastructure, establishment and management of a homeowner's association. 
712 C. - Permitted and prohibited uses. 
Table 7.3 shall govern the use of this zoning district, including permitted, prohibited, and conditional uses. 
712 D. - Special uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the PRD district upon approval by the board of commissioners as provided in Section 406 of this ordinance. No commercial uses shall be approved on the perimeter of a PRD district so as to adjoin an LDR-A, LDR-B or LDR-C district or property identified on the future land use map as low density residential. The architectural style of all commercial structures shall be compatible and consistent with the character of the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
1.  Licensed day care center, nursery, private school; 
2.  Professional offices; 
3.  Convenience store with or without gasoline or diesel fuel; 
4.  Government office or facility; 
5.  Branch bank; 
6.  Laundromat; 
7.  Other neighborhood retail, service business or office use, primarily for the use of residents of the PRD district. 
712 E. - Physical requirements. 
All development shall conform to the dimensions, design, and other standards identified within Figure 712-PRD. 
712 F. - Open space requirements. 
A minimum of 25 percent of the total development shall be reserved for open space, parks, recreation or other similar uses; provided the following criteria are met: 
1.  The required yards, parking areas, stormwater infrastructure (detention pond), wetlands, utility easements and other non-buildable areas shall not be credited toward the minimum open space requirements. Up to 25 percent of the land located within a noted floodplain, may be credited towards open space requirements, subject to review and approval by the City of Griffin Stormwater Department. The required open space shall be developed and landscaped by the developer in accordance with an approved site plan. Open space shall consist of contiguous property, where possible to allow connectivity of open areas. 
2.  If requested by the city, the owner of the planned residential development shall deed to the city the land set aside as required open space. 
3.  If the city does not request that the land be deeded to it, then, the open space shall be deeded to a property owner's association for the benefit of the residents. The organization of a property owner's association and its adequate financing for the discharge of its responsibilities shall be assured through acceptable private deed covenants running with the land. 
4.  In the event the property owner's association fails to maintain the open space properly, the city may serve written notice upon the property owner's association and upon the residents and owners of the planned residential development setting forth the manner in which the organization has failed to maintain the open space in reasonable condition. Said notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be corrected within 30 days thereof, and shall state the date and place of a hearing thereon which shall be held within 15 days of the notice. 
5.  If the deficiencies are not corrected within the said 30 days, the city, in order to preserve the taxable values of the properties within the planned residential development and to prevent the open space from becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon said open space and maintain the same until the property owner's association is prepared to provide proper maintenance. 
6.  The cost of such maintenance by the city shall be assessed ratably against the properties within the planned residential development that have a right of enjoyment and of the open space and shall become a tax lien upon said properties. The city, at the time of entering upon said open space for the purpose of maintenance, shall file a notice of such lien in the office of the clerk of superior court upon the properties affected by such lien within the planned residential development. 
712 G. - General deed covenants. 
The entire planned residential development shall be included within private deed covenants running with the land to assure the continuance of the planned residential development in accordance with approved plans and development. 
712 H. - Structures for commercial and office uses. 
Retail sales, services and offices may be conducted entirely within a wholly and permanently enclosed building or buildings, which shall be of an architectural design and scope compatible with the residential structures within the planned residential development. 
712 I. - Development in stages. 
The entire planned residential development may be divided into logical geographical sections with specific and reasonable periods within which the development of each section must be commenced and completed subject to approval of the City of Griffin Development Review Committee (DRC). 
712 J. - Architectural standards. 
Architectural standards are established for residential and commercial development within a PRD district. 
1.  Residential construction. The following standards pertain to residential construction: 
a.  Roof pitch in residential developments shall be a minimum of 6/12. Roof materials shall consist of asphalt or composite shingles, terra cotta, slate, cedar or standing seam metal. "Rolled" asphalt roofing materials shall not be used. 
b.  Brick, stone, concrete stucco, wood, hardy plank, vinyl or any combination thereof, shall be the only acceptable exterior finish materials. 
c.  Subdivision developments shall use a combination of compatible architectural styles and elevations to avoid repetition of dwelling unit appearance along any street. 
d.  Side and rear building elevations of attached residential developments shall be substantially consistent with the front building elevation. 
e.  Accessory structures shall be finished using materials identical to the principal dwelling. 
2.  Commercial construction. The following standards pertain to commercial construction: 
a.  Building materials used for exterior finishes shall consist of glass, metal, brick, stone, concrete stucco, decorative concrete block, solid wood, hardy plank, vinyl or similar brand applications or similar, durable architectural materials. Awning materials shall be limited to canvas or metal. 
b.  Architectural style within one block or other contiguous development unit shall be compatible and shall adhere to a single, consistent architectural theme compatible with the character of the surrounding neighborhood. 
c.  Side and rear building elevations of all commercial structures shall be substantially consistent with the front building elevation. 
d.  Placement of air-conditioning units and other mechanical systems and equipment shall be accomplished without detracting from the architectural integrity of the building or site. Generally, such equipment must be installed to the rear of the building or on the side, provided the view is partially obstructed through either the use of screening compatible with the building such equipment serves or landscaping. Rooftop equipment shall be completely screened from view from the public right-of-way as well as adjoining properties. 



713. - CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (CBD). 
713 A. - Intent. 
It shall be the intent of this zoning district to promote and encourage the development and protect the viability of the downtown commercial area of the city. The regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a stable, economically healthy and compatible environment for a mixture of commercial, (wholesale and retail), office, government services and residential uses that are located so as to provide the city convenient shopping and service facilities. These regulations are also intended to reduce traffic congestion, provide adequate off-street parking and avoid the development of "strip" type business areas capable of adversely affecting the basic commercial and office character of the district. It is also the intent of this section to limit the extent of the CBD as appearing on the original zoning map of this ordinance. 
713 B. - Permitted and prohibited uses. 
Table 7.3 shall govern the use of this zoning district, including permitted, prohibited, and conditional uses. 
713 C. - Special uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted upon approval by the board of commissioners as provided in Section 406 of this ordinance: 
1.  Licensed day care center, nursery or private school; 
2.  High-rise apartment building. 
713 D. - Physical requirements. 
All development shall conform to the dimensions, design, and other standards identified within Figure 713-CBD. 
713 E. - Storage. 
No storage shall be permitted on the lot unless in a fully enclosed building. 
713 F. - Access. 
All lots in the CBD district shall have access to an arterial or collector street, either directly or indirectly via local street. 
713 G. - Parking. 
No automobile parking or service areas will be permitted within the required ten buffer of the property line of any adjoining residential lot. If located within the original Downtown Commercial Historic District, public parking is provided; therefore, there are no specified parking requirements. 
    Parking and service areas must be separated from adjoining residential lots by a suitable buffer or screen as provided in Section 604 of this ordinance. 
713 H. - Loud speaking systems. 
No outside loud speaking systems shall be utilized. 
713 I. - Satellite dishes. 
Ground-based satellite dishes shall not be located within the Downtown Commercial Historic District of the city as listed on the National Register of Historical Places. 
713 J. - Lighting. 
All lights or lighting arrangements for purposes of advertising, security or night operations must be directed away from adjoining or nearby residential zoning lots. 
713 K. - New construction. 
New construction located within the Downtown Commercial Historic District shall be subject to architectural standards of existing buildings or those standards established by the City of Griffin Historic Preservation commission in order to retain the integrity of the original Downtown Commercial Historic District. 
713 L. - Security bars. 
1.  Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
SECURITY BARS. Metal bars, including, but not limited to, wrought iron guards and sliding scissor gates, attached to or covering a window or glass door which are intended to provide additional protection against vandalism and burglaries. 
2.  Prohibited use. The installation of security bars shall be prohibited on windows and doors in the front of buildings within the commercial business district. 


714. - PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT (PCD). 
714 A. - Intent. 
It shall be the intent of this zoning district to promote and encourage the clustering of commercial uses which occur along arterial thoroughfares; to promote and encourage the infill of commercial uses between existing commercial uses along arterial thoroughfares; to limit the number of access points from PCD to an arterial thoroughfare; to limit commercial development which occurs outside the CBD to areas on an arterial thoroughfare adjacent to existing commercial development. 
    The regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a stable, economically healthy and compatible environment for commercial and service uses that are located so as to provide the city with convenient, safe, attractive and efficient shopping and service facilities. These regulations are also intended to reduce traffic congestion, provide adequate off-street parking, prohibit the expansion of "strip" type business areas beyond existing "strip" development, and to discourage encroachment by other uses capable of adversely affecting the commercial character of the district. 
    The PCD district is also intended to encourage the best possible site plans and building arrangements under a plan of development rather than under lot-by-lot regulations. The developer benefits from better land utilization, economy in the provision of roads and utilities and flexibility in design. The city gains the advantage of variety in building types, compatibility of use and optimum community development. The planned commercial development is intended to encourage ingenuity and resourcefulness in land planning and to assure the provision of adequate land facilities for the use of the occupants of the development. 
714 B. - Ownership control. 
All of the land in a planned commercial development shall be owned initially by an individual, by a corporation or some other legal entity. Individual properties may be sold after a final plat has been recorded with the properties subject to private deed covenants that assure the continuance of the Planned Development as originally approved and developed. 
714 C. - Permitted and prohibited uses. 
Table 7.3 shall govern the use of this zoning district, including permitted, prohibited, and conditional uses. 
714 D. - Physical requirements. 
All development shall conform to the dimensions, design, and other standards identified within Figure 714-PCD. 
714 E. - Storage. 
No storage shall be permitted on the lot unless in a fully enclosed building. 
714 F. - Parking. 
No automobile parking or service areas will be permitted within the required front yard setback or within 30 feet of the property line of an adjoining residential zoning lot. Parking and services areas must be separated from adjoining residential lots by a suitable planting screen, fence or wall at least six feet in height above finished grade. The above-required screen, fence or wall must provide for a reasonable visual separation between the properties. 
714 G. - Loud speaking systems. 
No outside loud speaking system shall be utilized prior to 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. if directly adjacent to a residential zoned use. 
714 H. - Lighting. 
All lights or lighting arrangements for purposes of advertising, security or night operations must be directed away from adjoining or nearby residential zoning lots. 
714 I. - General deed covenants. 
The entire planned commercial development shall be included within private deed covenants running with the land to assure the continuance of the planned commercial development in accordance with approved plans and development, unless waived by the zoning administrator. 
714 J. - Development in stages. 
The entire planned commercial development may be divided into logical geographical sections with specific and reasonable periods within which the development of each section must be commenced and completed subject to approval of the City of Griffin Development Review Committee (DRC). 

715. - PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT (PID). 
715 A. - Intent. 
It shall be the intent of this district to establish and protect sites for light industrial uses which are not significantly objectionable in terms of appearance, noise, odor, fumes, etc. to surrounding properties. The regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a compatible environment for uses of a light industrial nature, to protect and preserve undeveloped areas of the city which are suitable for such industries and to discourage encroachment by other uses which are capable of adversely affecting the limited industrial character of the district. 
    It is also the intent of this district to locate PIDs at or adjacent to existing industrial land. In all cases the establishment of a new PID or the expansion of an existing PID shall be as close as possible to existing industrial uses. 
    The PID district is also intended to encourage the best possible site plans and building arrangements under a plan of development rather than under lot-by-lot regulations. The developer benefits from better land utilization, economy in the provision of roads and utilities and flexibility in design. The City gains the advantage of variety in building types, compatibility of use and optimum community development. The planned industrial development is intended to encourage ingenuity and resourcefulness in land planning and to assure the provision of adequate facilities for the use of the occupants of the development. Review of the development plan by the City of Griffin Development Review Committee (DRC) is required to assure that the development is in compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances and design regulations. 
715 B. - Ownership. 
All of the land in a planned industrial development shall be owned initially by an individual, by a corporation or some other legal entity. Individual properties may be sold after a final plat has been recorded with the properties subject to private deed covenants that assure the continuance of the planned industrial development as originally approved and developed. 
715 C. - Permitted and prohibited uses. 
Table 7.3 shall govern the use of this zoning district, including permitted, prohibited, and conditional uses. 
715 D. - Special uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted upon approval by the board of commissioners as provided in Section 406 of this ordinance: 
1.  Retail business on the following conditions: 
a.  The business is incidental to a permitted use; 
b.  The business is located on the same premises as a permitted use; and 
c.  The business involves no open storage of any type. 
2.  Restaurants where the use is intended to serve the food needs of the industrial area. 
3.  Watchman's or caretaker's single-family dwelling on the following conditions: 
a.  The dwelling is located on the premises of a permitted use; 
b.  There is only one dwelling on a zoning lot; and 
c.  A member of the family residing in the dwelling must be employed by the industry as a watchman or caretaker. 
4.  Publicly owned building, facility or land. 
715 E. - Physical requirements. 
All development shall conform to the dimensions, design, and other standards identified within Figure 715-PID. 
715 F. - Storage. 
No storage shall be permitted on the lot unless provided such use is properly screened from view from adjoining streets and properties by a suitable fence or wall a minimum of six feet in height above finished grade. The required fence or wall must provide for a reasonable visual separation between the use and adjoining properties. 
715 G. - Parking. 
No automobile parking or service areas will be permitted within the required front yard, side yard or rear yard setbacks. 
715 H. - Loud speaking systems. 
No outside loud speaking systems shall be utilized prior to 7:00 a.m. or 9:00 p.m. if directly adjacent to a residential zoned use. 
715 I. - Lighting. 
All lights or lighting arrangements for purposes of advertising, security, or night operations must be directed away from adjoining or nearby residential zoning lots. 
715 J. - General deed covenants. 
The entire planned industrial development shall be included within private deed covenants running with the land to assure continuance of the planned industrial development in accordance with approved plans and development unless waived by the zoning administrator. 
715 K. - Other required standards. 
No use shall be permitted in a planned industrial development that exceeds state and federal guidelines for allowance emissions and discharge of effluents into the air, water or soil. 
    No use shall be allowed in a planned industrial development that creates unabated noise creating a nuisance as defined under Georgia Law. 

716. - INSTITUTIONAL (INST.). 
716 A. - Intent. 
It shall be the intent of this zoning district to reserve land for institutional uses only. The regulations, which apply within this district, are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a stable, economically healthy and compatible environment for institutional uses that are located so as to provide nearby areas with convenient facilities. These regulations are also intended to reduce traffic congestion, provide adequate off-street parking, avoid the development of "strip" type business areas and discourage encroachment by other uses capable of adversely affecting the public/semi-public character of the district. 
    In most instances, Institutional uses are not for profit and exempt from ad-valorem taxation. 
716 B. - Permitted and prohibited uses. 
Table 7.3 shall govern the use of this zoning district, including permitted, prohibited, and conditional uses. 
716 C. - Special uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted, upon approval by the board of commissioners as provided in Section 406 of this ordinance: 
1.  Hospital, clinic or care home, provided that: the lot has an area of a minimum of three acres (130,680 square feet); no building is constructed within 75 feet of the property line of any adjoining residential lot; the lot shall front an arterial or collector street; no automobile parking will be permitted within the front yard setback or within 30 feet of the property line of any adjoining residential lot; parking and/or service areas are separated from adjoining residential lots by a suitable planted screen, fence or wall a minimum of six feet in height above finished grade and which provides for a reasonable visual separation between the properties. 
716 D. - Physical requirements. 
All development shall conform to the dimensions, design, and other standards identified within Figure 716-INST. 

717. - AGRICULTURAL/RESIDENTIAL (AG/R). 
717 A. - Intent. 
It shall be the intent of this zoning district to provide for the conservation and maintenance of land resources of the City of Griffin, Georgia, used for farming, agriculture, livestock, husbandry, timber and related purposes. The regulations, which apply within this district, are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a stable, economically healthy and compatible environment for farming uses. These regulations are also intended to reduce traffic congestion, provide adequate off-street parking, avoid the development of "strip" type business areas and discourage encroachment by other uses capable of adversely affecting the farming character of the district. 
717 B. - Permitted and prohibited uses. 
Table 7.3 shall govern the use of this zoning district, including permitted, prohibited, and conditional uses. 
717 C. - Special uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted, upon approval by the board of commissioners as provided in Section 406: 
1.  Feed, seed and fertilizer retail sales; 
2.  Kennel; 
3.  Radio and television tower; 
4.  Nursery (landscape materials, plants, etc.). 
717 D. - Physical requirements. 
All development shall conform to the dimensions, design, and other standards identified within Figure 716-AG/R. 

718. - SPECIAL PUBLIC INTEREST OVERLAY DISTRICTS (SPIOD). 
718 A. - Intent. 
The intent of the special public interest overlay districts established in the following sections is to protect and enhance specific lands, uses and structures that, by virtue of their type or location, have characteristics that are distinct from the lands and structures outside such overlay districts. It is the intent of the board of commissioners to permit, insofar as possible, those uses and structures that would otherwise be permitted, provided that reasonable and necessary conditions are met that insure the protection and enhancement of said lands, uses and structures. 
718 B. - General. 
1.  The provisions of this section apply to all lands, uses and structures in areas approved by the board of commissioners as Overlay Districts. Such lands, uses and structures are also subject to the provisions of their underlying zoning designation; provided, however, that where the provisions of this section are more restrictive than the provisions of the underlying designation, the provisions of this shall section shall apply. 
2.  The special public interest overlay districts established in this section generally operate by establishing performance standards to effectuate the purposes of the district. Except as otherwise provided, they do not supersede the regulations of the underlying district. 
3.  Land lying within special public interest overlay districts shall remain part of the underlying zone district(s) established by other provisions of this ordinance, and may, in addition, lie in one or more overlay districts in accordance with the designation of each. 
4.  Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance creating the special public interest overlay districts, when any lot or use is partially located within a special public interest overlay district, the remainder of the lot or use shall not be subject to the provisions of this section. 
718 C. - Creation of special public interest overlay districts. 
1.  Amendments to this section shall be adopted in accordance with the provisions of Section 404 upon the recommendation of the board of commissioners, planning and zoning board, city manager or director of planning and development department. 
2.  Every recommendation for creation of a special public interest overlay district or addition of land thereto shall address the following as applicable: 
a.  A statement of purpose and intent shall specify the nature of the special and substantial public interest involved and objectives to be promoted by the creation of the special public interest overlay district and imposition of the regulations proposed therefore; 
b.  Proposed district boundary shall be depicted on one or more maps that shall also display all other zoning districts applicable to the property proposed for inclusion in the district; 
c.  Regulations proposed to promote the special purposes of the district. 
3.  Regulations proposed with any special public interest overlay district shall be designed to reasonably promote the purposes of the district and may require or address any of the following, in addition to or in lieu of other regulations affecting property within the district: 
a.  Submission of specifically detailed site plans, building plans, elevations and maps showing the relation of proposed development to surrounding or otherwise affected property in terms of location, scale or intensity, character and continuity; 
b.  Protection of features designated as being of special concern within the district; 
c.  Mixtures or limitations of permitted uses; 
d.  Special performance standards and development regulations; 
e.  Other matters as appropriate to promote the special public interests of the district. 
718 D. - Mapping of special interest overlay districts. 
Upon approval of a special public interest overlay district, by adoption of an ordinance by the board of commissioners amending the zoning ordinance, a map of the district boundaries shall be incorporated into the ordinance, by reference, and constitute an integral part thereof, overlaying the official zoning map of the city. 
719. - AIRPORT OVERLAY DISTRICT (AOD). 
719 A. - Intent. 
The airport overlay district (AOD) is intended to protect an environment for the viable conduct of a general aviation airport facility. These regulations are also designed to encourage and foster the formation and continuance of uses compatible with a general aviation airport, uses compatible with a general business park and preserves undeveloped airport uses that are suitable for such activities. 
719 B. - Establishment and boundaries of the AOD. 
The boundaries of the AOD shall conform to the limits of the area as depicted on the City of Griffin Zoning Map. In lieu of a metes and bounds description, the overlay district boundaries may be described by fixing points of beginning and end in the centerline of a street and the distance on one or both of the sides from the centerline to which the AOD shall extend, or may be established by description of coterminous boundaries with the property boundaries of lots along such street or any combination of these methods. These surfaces shall be superimposed over the City of Griffin Zoning maps to delineate those areas covered by the AOD district. 
719 C. - Permitted and prohibited uses. 
Table 7.3 shall govern the use of this zoning district, including permitted, prohibited, and conditional uses. 
719 D. - Special uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted upon approval by the board of commissioners as provided in Section 406 of this ordinance: 
1.  Airport related accessory uses. 
719 E. - Physical requirements. 
All uses in the AOD shall be subject to the size, yard, setback and other requirements set forth in the underlying zone district(s), unless a more restrictive standard is established by the AOD. 
720. - SPECIAL HOUSING REVITALIZATION OVERLAY DISTRICT (SHROD). 
720 A. - Intent. 
The special housing revitalization overlay district (SHROD) is intended to encourage housing and economic development activities in older residential mixed-use neighborhoods in the city. The SHROD is intended to supplement the base zoning in an area by imposing additional regulations designed to achieve a desirable, active urban environment that includes a substantial residential component. These overlay districts are also intended to enhance older areas of the city that may contain large abandoned mill buildings by providing for specific regulations designed to facilitate the continued viability, reuse and redevelopment of the buildings. The overlay districts may also serve to preserve contributing historical structures within the city while preserving the overall character of the building(s) and neighborhood. 
720 B. - Establishment and boundaries of the SHROD. 
The boundaries of the SHROD shall conform to the limits of the area as depicted on the City of Griffin Zoning Map. In lieu of a metes and bounds description, the overlay district boundaries may be described by fixing points of beginning and end in the centerline of a street and the distance on one or both of the sides from the centerline of a street and the distance of one or both of the sides from the centerline to which the SHROD shall extend or may be established by description of coterminous boundaries with the property boundaries of lots along such street, or any combination of these methods. These surfaces shall be superimposed over the City of Griffin Zoning Maps to delineate those areas covered by the SHROD district. 
720 C. - Permitted and prohibited uses. 
All uses permitted by right in the underlying zoning district(s), shall be permitted in the SHROD; also refer to Table 7.3 for all permitted uses. 
1.  Special uses. The following uses shall be permitted upon approval by the board of commissioners as provided in Section 406 of this ordinance. 
2.  The following commercial uses are allowed in the SHROD zone to reduce traffic in the area by providing access to minor daily necessities on site and to improve the economic viability of the residential development by allowing limited mixed-use development. At the same time, commercial uses are limited to assure that residential uses remain the dominant use in the zone. These uses are allowed in multiple dwelling and condominium structures only. 
The uses shall be limited to the ground floor (the first habitable floor) of the building and shall be limited to 20 percent of the floor area of the development, exclusive of structured parking areas. However, in no case shall commercial uses exceed a maximum of 20,000 square feet of the total floor area of the development. 
a.  Convenience store; 
b.  Barber shop, beauty shop, tanning salon; 
c.  Florist, plant, gift shop; 
d.  Retail dry cleaners, Laundromat; 
e.  Drugstore; 
f.  Coffee shop, bakery; 
g.  Other retail uses, primarily for use of residents of the SHROD development. 
720 D. - Physical requirements. 
All uses in the SHROD shall be subject to the size, yard, setback and other requirements set forth in the underlying zone district(s) unless a more restrictive standard is established by the SHROD. 
1.  Minimum development size: Two acres. 
2.  Maximum density per acre: 20 units per acre. This maximum density may be increased in certain instances if permitted in Section 719 F. below. 
3.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: 550 square feet for studios, 600 square feet for one-bedroom units, 700 square feet for two-bedroom units and 900 square feet for three-bedroom and larger units. 
4.  Minimum front-yard: Zero. 
5.  Minimum side-yard: Zero. 
6.  Minimum rear-yard: Zero. 
7.  Maximum building height: 50 feet. 
8.  Front doors: The front doors of all dwelling units do not necessarily have to face a public street. 
9.  Minimum open space requirement: Ten percent of the gross land area of the development. 
10.  100-year Floodplain: No permanent structure shall be constructed within the boundary of the 100-year floodplain unless the structure meets minimum floodplain ordinance requirements as established in Chapter 50, Floods, of the Griffin Code of Ordinances. 
720 E. - Amenity bonuses. 
1.  Special amenity bonuses. Special amenity bonuses for increased density are intended to provide incentives to improve the livability of multiple-family developments for their residents and to promote family oriented multiple-family developments. The amenity bonuses are designed to allow additional dwelling units in a manner that is still consistent with the purposes of the multiple family zones. 
The bonuses are applicable to a range of development sizes. However, they may be more practical, feasible or workable for large projects. Not all bonus options will be applicable for all situations. The amenity options are designed to provide incentives, while leaving the specific choices to the developer. 
The amount of the bonus for each option is a result of balancing several factors including: 
a.  The likelihood that the amenity will be provided without the use of incentives; 
b.  The potential cost to the developer; 
c.  The importance of the amenity. 
2.  Regulations. 
a.  Qualifying types of development. The amenity bonus provisions are applicable to multi-dwelling and condominium apartment developments in a SHROD. 
b.  Computation of the bonus. The percentages of all bonus options included in the development project are added together. The total is then applied to the allowed number of dwelling units to determine the additional units allowed. Fractions of additional units earned are not counted. 
c.  Maximum bonus. The maximum density increase allowed for a development is 12 percent. 
d.  Compliance with the standards. The amenity bonus standards must be met in full to receive the bonus; exceptions are prohibited. In addition, adjustments to the development standards of the base zone or overlay district are prohibited if the project is to receive any density bonus. It is the responsibility of the applicant to document that all of the amenity bonus requirements are met. 
e.  Base zone development standards. The additional dwelling units must comply with all applicable development standards. 
f.  Covenants. The entire SHROD development shall be included within private deed covenants running with the land to assure the continuance of the SHROD in accordance with approved plans and development. The city attorney must approve the covenant as to form. The covenant must be recorded prior to issuance of building permits for the project. 
3.  Amenity bonus options. 
a.  Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities. Indoor recreational facilities may include gym, spa, racquetball courts, and other indoor recreational facilities. Outdoor recreational facilities may include such facilities as tennis, basketball or volleyball courts, ball field, swimming pool, horseshoe pit, running or walking trail, gazebo with permanent picnic tables and barbecue pit and similar facilities. The density bonus is one percent for each $5,000.00 of the overall project cost spent on outdoor recreational facilities. There is a maximum of a five percent density increase allowed for this bonus option. 
b.  Children's play areas. The density bonus for this amenity is two and one-half percent. A qualifying children's play area must comply with all of the following standards: 
i.  Size and location. Each child's play area must be at least 1,000 square feet and clearly delineated. Children's play areas must be separated from any other outdoor recreational facilities. 
ii.  Play equipment. Each children's play area must include a play structure at least 100 square feet in area, a swing structure with a minimum of four swings, and at least one of the following: a slide, permanent sandbox, permanent wading pool or other children's play equipment commonly found in a public park. Equipment must be constructed of adequate materials to comply with safety standards and to match expected use. 
iii.  Fencing. Each child's play area must be fenced along any perimeter that is within 20 feet of a street, alley, property line, driveway, service or parking area. The fence shall be any type of chain link. 
c.  Storage areas. The density bonus for this amenity is seven percent. The bonus is allowed if all dwelling units are provided with interior storage, including but not limited to shelve and drawer space in the kitchen, bedroom closets in each bedroom, linen closet in hallway or bathroom and entry closet; and additional storage for large items, including but not limited to areas that are dry and have locks for items such as barbecues, bicycles, storage boxes and sports equipment. 
( Ord. No. 14-3, § 1, 5-27-2014 ) 
721. - PLACES OF ASSEMBLY OVERLAY DISTRICT (PAO). 
721 A. - Place of assembly. 
A structure, portion of a structure or area (either indoor or outdoor), including, but not limited to, movie theaters; concert halls; stadiums; amusement parks; carnivals; churches; elementary, middle, high, secondary and post graduate schools; day care centers; private commercial schools, such as martial arts or dance studios; clubs, lodges and arenas, designed primarily for people to gather to observe or participate in a single event or series of single events, including but not limited to the presentation of a motion picture, a concert, an educational presentation, a sermon, an inspirational presentation, a rally, a lecture, a drama, dance, musical or other live performance, or a sporting event. 
721 B. - Assembly district regulations. 
The purposes of this district are to encourage the beneficial development assembly uses and to properly regulate such uses in a non-discriminatory manner. 
    It is the express intention of the board of commissioners that, in the event of any ambiguity in the language of this article, the administration and staff of the city shall interpret this article in the manner that best complies with all applicable federal laws, including but not limited to the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act (RLUIPA), 42 U.S.C.A. Section 2000cc, et seq. 
721 C. - Overlay district. 
This district is intended as an overlay district regarding and allowing the establishment of assembly uses within the areas described in this section. Unless otherwise provided, underlying district uses continue as permitted uses. Standards set out in this section shall control over any underlying district regulations. Front, rear and side yard setback requirements and all other development regulations not otherwise addressed in this section, set by the underlying zoning classification shall control, unless modified by the board of commissioners, as a condition for the assembly district. 
721 D. - Applicable area. 
The area included in the assembly district shall be shown on the City of Griffin Zoning Map and shall include any areas subsequently designated by the board of commissioners. 
721 E. - Uses permitted only upon approval of the zoning administrator. 
1.  Places of Assembly locating into shopping centers or building(s) under 3,000 square feet subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Maximum occupancy based on formulas contained in the Statewide Minimum Building Code (ICC; International Congress Code, with Georgia amendments). 
b.  Fire and life safety compliance based on Inspection. 
c.  Register with the City of Griffin Occupational Tax Permit (non-profit). 
d.  Upon vacating this location for its principal site, the PAO will be voided. 
2.  In making a determination as to whether or not an application for such use shall be approved at a particular time and location, the zoning administrator shall also consider the potential impacts, on existing or anticipated surrounding developments, Number of Parking and peak traffic impacts. Upon a finding that a particular use conforms to the intent and requirements of this section, the use may be approved by the zoning administrator. 
3.  The administrative approval shall be for a period of two years and if the use is not in operation within six months the PAO will be voided. 
721 F. - Uses permitted only upon approval of the board of commissioners. 
1.  Because of their special demands upon public services and facilities, and their potential for imposing significant financial burdens upon the city if established within certain timeframes and at particular locations, the uses listed below shall be special uses within the assembly district, but only upon approval of the board of commissioners, after recommendation by the planning and zoning board. 
In making a determination as to whether or not an application for such use shall be approved at a particular time and location, in addition to the standards contained in Section 406 of this ordinance, the board of commissioners shall consider the potential financial burdens to the city that would be generated, the potential impacts, on existing or anticipated surrounding developments, noise and peak traffic impacts and the potential special demands upon public services and facilities. Upon a finding that a particular use conforms to the intent and requirements of this section, the use may be approved by the board of commissioners. If approval for such use is granted, the board of commissioners may attach special conditions to the approval which have as their purpose minimizing potential negative impacts and burdens on public finances, facilities and/or services as well as surrounding properties and travelers on the city's streets and sidewalks. 
2.  The following uses shall be allowed as special uses within the assembly district only upon approval of the board of commissioners and subject to the conditions listed in subsection 3: 
a.  Place of assembly. 
3.  Said uses shall: 
a.  Be located on a lot fronting a public right-of-way, classified as either an arterial or collector street; 
b.  Be located on a tract of land not less than two acres in area and having a street frontage of not less than 200 feet. 
721 G. - Parking and loading regulations. 
For each use, parking shall meet the minimum requirements established in article 8 of this ordinance and shall be provided in the rear yard or within that portion of the side yard which lies between a main building and the interior side lot line, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
721 H. - Height regulations. 
No building shall exceed three stories in height nor shall it exceed 35 feet in height, except when a height variance is granted as defined and described in Section 410 of this ordinance. 
721 I. - Buffers. 
The potential for negative visual impact on adjoining uses by assembly district uses is substantial. Therefore, buffers are required for the protection of adjoining land uses. 
    A natural or manmade planted buffer shall be maintained along the property boundary of any assembly district use which abuts a non-assembly district use according to the following schedule: 
1.  Residential uses or districts: A buffer having a minimum horizontal dimension of 30 feet shall be provided, provided that if the owner prefers, a four foot high bermed buffer of 20 feet in depth is allowed; 
2.  Business park and office park uses: A buffer having a minimum horizontal dimension of 20 feet shall be provided. 
    Buffers shall be permanently maintained as indicated on the approved site plan, subject to inspection by the City of Griffin, and consistent with any other property improvement. The dimension of the buffer shall not be in addition to any other landscaping requirements of this section. 
    As the purpose of the buffer is to visually screen and distance the uses of the assembly district from adjoining uses, one-half of all plant materials shall consist of one or more species that retain foliage throughout the year. Provision of opaque fencing, though desirable, shall not decrease the horizontal dimension of the required buffer. 
    Within the assembly district, those uses identified as permitted uses may utilize the buffer requirement in computing the overall percentage of landscaping required by the tree preservation and landscaping ordinance. 
721 J. - Currently existing uses. 
No existing use as of the date of this ordinance and included in the areas described in Section 721 D. shall become a non-conforming use as a result of the adoption of the article. 
722. - MIXED USE/TOD OVERLAY DISTRICT. 
722 A. - General provisions. 
1.  Scope of regulations. This ordinance establishes standards and procedures that apply to any development, use, alteration, height, parking, open space, public space and building that lies, in whole or in part, within the Mixed Use/TOD Overlay District, hereinafter referred to as the Griffin Overlay District. The Griffin Overlay District is based upon the urban design and development guidelines included in the Downtown Griffin Livable Centers Initiative (LCI) plan, Griffin LCI Area Design Guidelines, as well as other associated plans. The plans call for a community that incorporates higher design standards in the downtown Griffin area and near the proposed commuter rail station while providing a mix of commercial, office, recreation, and housing options. 
Wherever the underlying zoning regulations are in conflict with the provisions of this overlay district, the regulations of this overlay district shall apply. 
2.  Statement of purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the board of commissioners in establishing the Griffin Overlay District is as follows: 
a.  To promote the development of a more dynamic, mixed-use district of appropriate scale and magnitude in the downtown Griffin area; 
b.  To design and arrange structures, buildings, streets, and open spaces to create an inviting, walkable, human-scale environment as well as active ground floor commercial spaces; 
c.  To ensure a proportional relationship of surrounding buildings with respect to the general spacing of structures, building mass and scale, and street frontage by using techniques to achieve compatibility; 
d.  To provide for connectivity of streets and communities and reduce the dependence on automobile use by increasing the ease of movement and opportunities for alternative modes of travel; 
e.  To promote the preservation of historic structures that reflect the history, character and architecture of the City of Griffin; 
f.  To provide property owners, builders and developers with a clear description of criteria used to review and evaluate the project; 
g.  To reclaim industrial land; and 
h.  To implement the policies and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan and other adopted planning documents within the Griffin Overlay District. 
3.  Applicability of regulations. This ordinance applies to each application for a business license, land-disturbance permit, building permit or sign permit which involves the development, use, alteration, or modification of any structure or land where the subject property is located in whole, or in part, within the boundaries of the Griffin Overlay District. The procedures, standards, and criteria apply only to that portion of the subject property within the boundaries of the Griffin Overlay District. This ordinance contains regulations for new construction, existing building renovation and rehabilitation and public improvements to encourage the orderly development within and along the edges of the central business district and the future commuter rail station. 
The ordinance divides development into two types, new construction and existing buildings. Depending upon the project scope and existing building status and condition, new construction standards may apply to an existing building. Design review and a certificate of compliance are required for all development. 
a.  Design review and a certificate of compliance by the planning and development services department are required for all new construction, existing building renovation or rehabilitation within the Griffin Overlay District. Plan submittal is required for buildings built on vacant lots after adoption or for the replacement of demolished buildings as well as any exterior rehabilitation or renovation. 
i.  Exceptions: 
The planning and development service department director can deem the project a minor application which requires more limited submittals from those outlined in Section 721 B., which will be determined on case by case basis. 
(a)  "Minor Modifications" are small deviations from otherwise applicable standards of this ordinance that may be approved by the planning and development services director without being required to apply for conceptual and final plan submittal. Minor modifications are to be used when the limited nature of the modification requested, and the unlikelihood of any adverse effects on nearby properties or the neighborhood, make it unnecessary to complete a formal process. 
1.  Applicability: The planning and development services director may approve a minor modification of up to a maximum of ten percent from only numeric development standard in this ordinance provided that the intent of this ordinance is met. At no time shall the planning and development services director approve a minor modification that results in the following: 
a.  An increase in the overall project intensity, density, or impervious cover; 
b.  Change in permitted uses; or 
c.  Design compatibility, based on this ordinance, is compromised. 
(b)  Routine maintenance does not require design review or a certificate of compliance. 
b.  Structures: The City of Griffin has a vast array of contributing historic structures that should be preserved and possibly adaptively re-used if their original use is no longer practical. The following criteria should be used by staff to determine if a structure is contributing or non-contributing. It also establishes the sections of the code that should be used for each type of structure 
i.  Contributing Structures: 
a.  The building adds to the historical or architectural qualities of the overlay; 
b.  The building retains its physical integrity; 
c.  The building is 50 years old or older; 
d.  If a building is 50 years old or older and considered contributing, development must comply with Section 722 L., Existing Buildings. 
ii.  Non-contributing Structures: 
a.  The building does not add to the historical or architectural qualities of the overlay; 
b.  The building has had inappropriate and irreversible alterations or additions; 
c.  Existing Buildings which are less than 50 years old and possess no distinguishing architectural features, are hereby determined to be non-contributing, and may be maintained, demolished or renovated. If a building of this type replaced with a new building or undergoes a substantial rehabilitation, it must comply with Sections 722 D-K. 
iii.  Demolition: Design review by the City Staff is required if the building is 50 years or older. Staff shall determine whether or not the building is contributing or non-contributing when determining the approval or denial of a request for demolition in accordance with the criteria established above. Contributing buildings shall be retained unless the applicant can provide a condition report and structural letter from a licensed building inspector or engineer who determines the building unsalvageable. The City Staff may call on the building official to provide them with a report on the state of the repair and structural stability of the structure under consideration. Request for demolition must be accompanied by a plan for the replacement of the building. 
4.  District boundaries and map. 
a.  The boundaries and development categories of the Griffin Overlay District are described below and shall be established by a zoning map amendment adopted pursuant to this ordinance which shall be incorporated herein and made a part of this ordinance (Figure 1, Overlay District Map). 
b.  Street Classification: Additional parcels outside downtown Griffin may achieve the Mixed Use Overlay district designation by application, according to procedures for zoning map amendments (rezoning). Applications must identify which Tier and Street Classification type most appropriately provides for the context of the proposed development. 
i.  Primary Streets: Hill Street from Overlay boundary to Chappell Street, Broad Street, Broadway Street; 
ii.  Secondary Streets: All other. 
c.  The Griffin Overlay District shall be divided into three development categories: 
i.  Neighborhood tier. The intent of the neighborhood tier is to preserve the residential traditional neighborhood character, historic structures and uses while allowing office adaptive re-use for structures along a primary streets and mixed use, and commercial uses along the primary streets where the property is vacant or currently utilized for commercial purposes within the district. This neighborhood character shall be guided by residential architecture such as pitched roofs, smaller scale, fenestration, cornices, columns and other architectural features. The height in this district shall be compatible to residential structures. 
(a)  Tier summary. The Neighborhood tier summary is provided in Figure 722.1. All development shall conform to the dimensions, design, and other standards identified within Figure 722.1. Where text differs from the figure, the text shall control. 
ii.  Village tier. The intent of the village tier is to revitalize the downtown core in conjunction with the Historic District and create a well defined, integrated core area for the downtown Griffin area. Vertical mixed use type development with commercial, residential, and office uses is encouraged to help enhance the downtown character. The urban character of this district shall be guided by zero setbacks, urban design features, preservation of historic building and compatible massing, scale and architectural detailing. 
(a)  Tier summary. The Village tier summary is provided in Figure 722.2. All development shall conform to the dimensions, design, and other standards identified within Figure 722.2. Where text differs from the figure, the text shall control. 
iii.  Corridor tier. The intent of the corridor tier is to encourage mixed use type development that creates a more aesthetically pleasing and pedestrian friendly environment. Commercial, office, residential, multi-family, vertical mixed use type developments are desired. The orientation of any development shall be toward the street, focused on the primary street (if one exists) and the secondary if no primary street exists; however access can be from the rear and historic structures shall be preserved. 
(a)  Tier summary. The Corridor tier summary is provided in Figure 722.3. All development shall conform to the dimensions, design, and other standards identified within Figure 722.3. Where text differs from the figure, the text shall control. 
d.  The planning and development services director shall have the final authority to determine whether any property is located within the boundaries of the Griffin Overlay District and which tier the subject property falls under. 

7.1 Overlay District Map
722 B. - Review process/procedures. 
The intent of this section is to guide new construction, rehabilitation/renovation of existing buildings to achieve compatibility between buildings and infrastructure and the preservation of contributing buildings. 
1.  Plans required: design review and certificate of compliance. 
a.  Applicability: No permit or license shall be issued within the Griffin Overlay District until the applicant for such a permit or license has submitted an application for design review, certificate of compliance, to the Planning and Services Development Department that meets all requirements of this ordinance and such application has been approved. 
b.  Reviews. Prior to the issuance of any land-disturbance permit, building permit, or sign permit, the applicant shall submit a conceptual design package and final design package to the planning and development services director. The plans will be forwarded to the downtown development authority for review and comment as well as the historic preservation commission, as applicable. The final design package must include full architectural and landscape architectural plans and specifications. 
c.  Conceptual plan package review. If the conceptual design package is deemed compliant and complete with no revisions required, it will be considered the Final Design Package. For parcels located outside the original Overlay boundary within Downtown Griffin, rezoning application packets shall also include conceptual site plans as described below. The conceptual plan package shall be composed of the following: 
i.  Site Plan: Seven copies of a site plan drawn to a designated scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred feet, certified by a professional engineer or land surveyor licensed by the state, presented on a sheet having a maximum size of twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches, and one eight-and-one-half-inch by eleven-inch reduction of the plan. If presented on more than one sheet, match lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join. Such plan shall contain the following information: 
a.  Boundaries of the entire property proposed to be included in the development, with bearings and distances of the perimeter property lines; 
b.  Scale and north arrow, with north, to the extent feasible, oriented to the top of the site plan and on all supporting graphics; 
c.  Location, size and dimensions in length and width of all landscaped areas, transitional buffers, and open space; 
d.  Existing topography with a maximum contour interval of five (5) feet and a statement indicating whether it is an air survey or field run; 
e.  Delineation of any floodplain designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, United States Geological Survey, City of Griffin or Spalding County; 
f.  The delineation of any jurisdictional wetlands as defined by ordinance 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act; 
g.  Delineation of any significant historic or archeological feature, grave, object or structure marking a place of burial if known, and a statement indicating how the proposed development will impact it; 
h.  Delineation of all existing structures and whether they will be retained or demolished; 
i.  Location of all proposed uses, lots, buildings, building types and building entrances; 
j.  Height and setback of all buildings and structures; 
k.  Areas, lot sizes and development density for each type of proposed use; 
l.  Lot coverage percentages; 
m.  Open space percentages; 
n.  Location, size, and number of all on-street and off-street parking spaces, including a shared parking analysis, if shared parking is proposed; 
o.  Identification of site access points and layout, width of right-of-way and paved ordinances of all internal streets; 
p.  Conceptual plans for drainage with approximate location and estimated size of all proposed stormwater management facilities and a statement as to the type of facility proposed; 
q.  Areas to be held in joint ownership, common ownership, or common control; 
r.  Location of proposed sidewalks and bicycle facilities trails, recreation areas, parks, and other public or community uses, facilities, or structures on the site; 
s.  Conceptual layout of utilities and location of all existing or proposed utility easements having a width of ten feet or more; 
t.  Standard details of signs, sidewalks, streetlights, driveways, medians, curbs and gutters, landscaped areas, fencing, street furniture, bicycle lanes, streets, alleys, and other details demonstrating compliance with the Griffin Overlay District regulations; 
u.  Seal and signature of professional preparing the plan; 
v.  Photos of all surrounding properties including those across the street; 
w.  If in the historic district or a contributing building: Note what type of architectural approach and style will be taken. 
ii.  Building Plan: Seven copies of conceptual building designs including elevation drawings drawn to a designated scale of not less than one-sixteenth inch equals one foot showing architectural details of proposed buildings, exterior materials, all of which demonstrate that the proposed design is in compliance with the requirements of the Griffin Overlay District regulations. Drawings shall be presented on a sheet having a maximum size of twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches, and one eight-and-one-half-inch by eleven-inch reduction of each sheet. If presented on more than one sheet, match lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join. 
iii.  Written Statement: A written statement explaining how the proposed development will meet the standards of this ordinance. The written statement shall also include information describing the number of acres contained in the development; the number of dwelling units by type; the gross residential density; the area (in square feet) of any commercial uses; the common open space acreage; the anticipated number, type, and size of other public amenities; and the proposed legal mechanism for protecting and maintaining common open space, if applicable. 
iv.  Multimodal Access: A multimodal access plan for projects over 0.5 acre, prepared at a scale not greater than one inch equals one hundred feet, to demonstrate a unified plan of continuous access to and between all structures in the proposed development and adjacent properties where connections are appropriate. The multimodal access plan shall cover the entire proposed development along with public rights-of-way of adjoining streets and any other property lying between the subject property and any primary or secondary streets. Safe and convenient pedestrian pathways shall be provided from sidewalks along streets to each structure entrance, including pedestrian access routes across parking lots and between adjacent buildings within the same development. 
v.  Demolition Requests: In any case involving the demolition or partial demolition of a structure in the overlay district, before granting approval, the planning and development services director must determine whether the building is contributing or non-contributing and may call on the building official to provide them with a report on the state of repair and structural stability of the structure under consideration. The staff shall, in making such judgments, consider the results of any available historic properties and structures surveys or shall otherwise attempt to discern the structure's historic importance and whether or not the structure is considered contributing as defined by this ordinance. If a contributing structure, the applicant must provide a structural conditions report or letter produced by a licensed building inspector or engineer. 
vi.  Public Art Plan: Seven copies of a Public Art Project Plan (new construction or substantial rehabilitation only) which shall include: 
a.  The required art investment, budget detailing applicable costs: artist's fees and expenses, costs for fabrication; installation, site preparation, structures to display artwork, plaque, and administrative costs; as outlined in Section 722 Q., Public Art; 
b.  The artists being considered and the type of professional artist needed for this project; 
c.  Name of professional artist; 
d.  Developer goals for the project; 
e.  Concepts and ideas for the art project; 
f.  Location and visibility of proposed artwork; 
g.  Narrative description of proposed artwork; 
h.  Agreement between the developer and artist(s); 
i.  Scale site plan and landscape plan (for art location); 
j.  Scale drawing or model; and 
k.  Perspective view showing the proposed artwork in the development context. 
Staff shall review the public art plan based on the following criteria: a. Is the selected artwork produced by a professional artist? The staff will review such items as the person's educational background in the arts, arts accomplishments within the past five years such as gallery or museum exhibits, and the person's recognition by accepted arts organizations as an artist. The artist should be a practitioner in the visual arts, generally recognized by his or her critics and peers as a professional possessing serious artistic intent and ability; b. Are the budget items and total amount acceptable to meet the minimum art investment for the development proposed?; c. The staff will review the artwork plans and its placement in regard to the public visibility and enjoyment of the artwork; and d. The content of the artwork is developer-selected; however, the staff will be interested in the durability, safety, placement and visibility of the exterior art project. 
d.  Final design package review and approval process. 
i.  Upon receiving comments on the conceptual plan package, the applicant will submit the final design package for review and approval unless exempted under 722.B.1.c. The final design package must include full architectural, site and landscape plans and specifications. The submitted plans must include: 
a.  Site plan; 
b.  Architectural elevations; 
c.  Renderings depicting the building design including elevations and architectural details of proposed buildings; 
d.  Exterior materials and colors; 
e.  Plans and elevations of all hardscape, landscape and signage, all of which shall demonstrate that the proposed design is in compliance with all requirements of this Griffin Overlay District and the underlying zoning classification. 
ii.  The applicant may submit the final design package simultaneously with the submission for permitting. 
iii.  Certificate of Compliance. 
a.  Approval: The planning and development services director or designee shall review each application for compliance with all requirements of the Griffin Overlay District and the underlying zoning classification. Where the planning and development services director determines that said plans comply with the requirements of the Griffin Overlay District a certificate of compliance shall be issued in the form of the planning and development services director signing the plans and drawings after which the applicant is approved for land disturbance, building or signs permits. 
b.  Denial: Where the planning and development services director determines that said plans do not comply with the requirements of this ordinance, then the planning and development services director shall notify the applicant in writing stating the manner in which said applicant fails to comply with such requirements. All applications shall be considered and decided within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete application. 
c.  Appeal: Any appeal of the planning and development services director's decision in this regard shall be addressed to the board of commissioners. 
722 C. - Principal Uses and Structures. 
The principal uses of land and structures which are allowed in the Griffin Overlay District are as provided by the underlying zoning district, subject to the limitations and standards contained within this ordinance. All properties zoned CBD (Central Business) District, PID (Planned Institutional) District, INST (Institutional) District, PCD (Planned Commercial) District, PRD (Planned Residential) District, MDR (Medium Density Residential) District, and LDR-C (Low Density Residential) District shall be used in accordance with the underlying zoning district or for the following principal uses of land and structures or a combination of uses in a mixed use development subject to the standards and limitations contained within this ordinance. 
1.  Principal uses and structures. Table 7.3 shall govern the use of this zoning district, including permitted, prohibited, and conditional uses. 
2.  Prohibited uses. The following principal uses of land and structures shall be prohibited within the Griffin Overlay District: 
a.  Two-family (Duplex) dwellings; 
b.  Manufactured homes; 
c.  Group homes for disabled persons, personal care homes and halfway houses; 
d.  Storage Structure for equipment and supplies in maintaining the principal building and grounds; 
e.  Commercial storage (mini-warehouses); 
f.  Commercial kennel; 
g.  Car wash; 
h.  Self-service storage facility; 
i.  Funeral home; 
j.  Any light industrial use which involves manufacturing, processing, assembly or storage operations where all operations are conducted entirely within a building; 
k.  Commercial Trade or Vocational School involved in any industrial training (such as car repair, large vehicle repair, welding etc.); 
l.  Warehouse; 
m.  Rental or retail business involving the rental or sale of heavy equipment; 
n.  Off street loading facilities; 
o.  Central trash collection dumpsters; 
p.  Completely enclosed building for the storage of supplies, stock, merchandise and equipment; 
q.  Repair, accessory structure or service facility incidental to the principal use; 
r.  The open, outside storage of building materials, junk, salvage and inoperative vehicles; 
s.  Convenience stores with gas pumps; 
t.  Laundromat, unless in conjunction with a mixed use or multi-family project; 
u.  Cemetery; and 
v.  Off-street parking located on a corner lot. 
3.  Special uses. The following uses and structures shall be authorized only by permits of the type indicated: 
a.  Special administrative permit from the board of commissioners: 
i.  Art shows, carnival rides, festivals, parades and special events of community interest. 
ii.  Outdoor recreation entertainment facilities. 
iii.  Grocery stores or other retail establishments over 15,000 square feet. 
b.  Special permit from the board of commissioners for the demolition of any building in the Griffin Overlay District which falls under the definition of contributing structure. 
722 D. - Development standards for new construction. 
The following requirements shall apply to new structures or substantial rehabilitation in the Griffin Overlay District. 
1.  When blocks are subdivided by new streets, the maximum length of resulting new blocks shall be 300 linear feet. 
2.  The maximum curb radius at any intersection or curb cut is 30 feet. 
3.  All parking shall be accessed via shared alleys or private drives. 
4.  No additional curb cuts shall be allowed on primary streets (Broad Street, Broadway Street, Hill Street) if the development is accessible by another street. If an existing block face on a primary street exceeds 700 linear feet, then one curb cut per 700 linear feet is allowed. If a development is accessible from more than one secondary street, the development shall be limited to one curb cut per block face. 
5.  All curb cuts shall be a maximum of 24 feet wide (must fulfill all city requirements). 
6.  Common or joint driveways are encouraged and may be authorized by the planning and development services director. 
7.  Driveways must be perpendicular to the adjacent street. Circular and non-perpendicular driveways are prohibited. 
8.  For nonresidential purposes, the primary ground floor entrance to all buildings shall be clearly visible from the street, and shall face the street. If a building fronts more than one public street, the primary entrance shall face the primary street or maybe orientated toward the corner. 
9.  Minimum space between buildings shall be zero feet, but if the property is adjacent to an existing building with windows facing the side property line, the setback shall be 20 feet from the lot boundary of the existing building. 
10.  Gates and security arms shall be prohibited from crossing any public street or sidewalk. 
11.  All utilities shall be located underground. 
12.  100-year Floodplain: No permanent structure shall be constructed within the boundary of the 100-year floodplain unless the structure meets minimum floodplain ordinance requirements as established in Chapter 50, Floods, of the Griffin Code of Ordinances. 
722 E. - Building height for new construction. 
1.  Within the Griffin Overlay District, there shall be three development tiers for the purpose of establishing allowable building heights (See Figures 722.1, 722.2, and 722.3). 
a.  All buildings within the Griffin Overlay District shall be a minimum of two stories tall and 28 feet in height except for single-family detached houses and commercial buildings in the neighborhood tier. 
b.  Single-family attached townhomes or live/work units in all of the development tiers shall not exceed three stories or 45 feet, whichever is less. 
c.  Buildings in the Corridor tier and Village tier shall be permitted to exceed the maximum building height limit established in Table 7.5 and Table 7.6 below based on bonuses. Mixed use buildings are permitted to use more than one of the bonuses established below up to the maximum established in Table 7.5 and Table 7.6. Other buildings can only employ one bonus option. Bonuses can be granted, provided the building meets one or more of the following: 
i.  Buildings are permitted to add one additional story if 15 percent of the total number of residential units within a development of 15 units or more are priced for "workforce housing" or moderate income households, as defined by HUD; 
ii.  Commercial, mixed use and multi-family developments are permitted to add one additional story to each building on a given lot if a contiguous publicly accessible open space, not including on-street parking and public sidewalks along roadways, comprising at least 15 percent of the development, is provided; or 
iii.  Commercial, mixed use and multi-family buildings fronting Hill Street, Broad Street and Broadway Street are permitted to add one additional story to the respective building if 75 percent or more of the ground-floor space is used for retail or service commercial uses with storefronts oriented toward a public street. 
iv.  Exception: Height averaging shall be employed if the new development is located between two contributing buildings. The average height of all the buildings in one block shall be used. 
d.  The maximum building height with any combination of height bonuses listed above shall be dependent upon building use according to the charts below. Special land use permits and variances shall not alter or allow structures taller than the maximum building heights provided herein within the Griffin Overlay District: 
i.  Exception: A building up to eight stories or 100 feet may be allowed by special permit by the board of commissioner but must employ a step-back design over five stories which preserves the perception of the height from street level. The planning and zoning board will review the special permit request based on: 
a.  Proximity to commuter rail station: 
i.  1/2 mile: Seven stories or 90 feet. 
ii.  1/4 mile: Eight stories or 100 feet. 
iii.  Figure 722.3-A on the Mixed-Use Corridor Tier Summary shows the parcels within either a 1/2 mile or 1/4 from the proposed commuter rail station. If a parcel is cut by the radius line the owner may request the maximum height allowed at that for the entire parcel. The Planning and Zoning Board has the right to approve or deny this request. 
b.  Other factors: 
i.  Distance from contributing buildings 
ii.  Approval of the increased height is consistent with the purpose and intent of this ordinance 
iii.  The increased height will not violate an established view corridor. 
Table 7.4 MU/TOD: Neighborhood Tier Building Height Building Use Max. Building Height Max. Building Height with Bonuses Single-Family Attached 3 stories or 45 feet* No Bonus Commercial 3 stories or 45 feet* No Bonus Multi-family 3 stories or 45 feet* No Bonus Mixed use 3 stories or 45 feet* No Bonus *Whichever is less 
All projects are subject to height averaging if the project is adjacent to contributing buildings. All projects are subject to transitional height plane regulations.  
Table 7.5 MU/TOD: Village Tier Building Height Building Use Max. Building Height Max. Building Height with Bonuses Single-family Attached 3 stories or 45 feet* No Bonus Commercial 3 stories or 45 feet* 4 stories or 60 feet* Multi-family 3 stories or 45 feet* 4 stories or 60 feet* Mixed use 3 stories or 45 feet* 5 stories or 70 feet* *Whichever is less 
All projects are subject to height averaging if the project is adjacent to contributing buildings.  
Table 7.6 MU/TOD: Corridor Tier Building Height Building Use Max. Building Height Max. Building Height with Bonuses Single-family Attached 3 stories or 45 feet* No Bonus Commercial 4 stories or 60 feet* 5 stories or 70 feet* Multi-family 4 stories or 60 feet* 5 stories or 70 feet* Mixed use 4 stories or 60 feet* 6 stories or 80 feet* *Whichever is less 
All projects are subject to height averaging if the project is adjacent to contributing buildings. Note: Applicants can apply to the board of commissioners to request additional height in this Tier when transit options are available.  
e.  Transitional height planes. Where a lot on the external boundary of the Griffin Overlay District is used for nonresidential purposes and adjoins the boundary of any property outside the district that is zoned for any residential classification without an intervening street, height within the tier shall be limited as follows: No portion of any structure shall protrude through a height limiting plane beginning 35 feet above the buildable area boundary nearest to the common residential district boundary and extending inward over the commercial subarea at an angle of 45 degrees. In addition, when a new development in the corridor tier abuts a property in the neighborhood tier used as residential, the transitional height plane shall apply. 
722 F. - Open space and landscape requirements for new construction. 
1.  Within the Griffin Overlay District, there shall be three development tiers for the purpose of establishing required open space. 
2.  Open space shall be provided for new construction as follows: 
Table 7.7 MU/TOD: Open Space Development Category Minimum Percentage 
of Open Space 
(Site Acreage)* Neighborhood Tier (Figure 722.1) 10% Village Tier (Figure 722.2) 5% Corridor Tier (Figure 722.3) 5% *Works of art, fountains, and pools, landscape and garden area can meet up to 25% of this requirement.  
a.  Open spaces shall be at grade, surrounded by buildings or streetscape elements with a mix of active uses on the ground floor on at least one side, face the public street, and be directly accessible from a public sidewalk along a street. Ground-floor active uses shall include primary entries and exits into the building and may include, but are not limited to, retail storefronts, professional office storefronts and/or the primary façade of residential buildings with direct entries and exits to multiple residential units. 
b.  Open spaces shall include appropriate landscaping, including shade trees. 
i.  At least one shade tree must be provided within or directly adjacent to the open space for every 2,000 square feet of open space. 
ii.  Shade trees must be a minimum of three and one-half inches in caliper measured 12 inches above ground. 
iii.  Shall have a minimum mature height of 30 feet and shall be limbed up to a minimum height of eight feet. 
c.  Open spaces include front yards, planted areas, fountains, parks, plazas, trails, paths, and hardscape elements related to sidewalks and plazas and similar features which are located on private property. 
d.  Private courtyards and other private outdoor amenities shall be located at the interior of the block, behind buildings or on rooftops. Private courtyards and outdoor amenities shall not be counted toward the minimum other open space calculations that may increase maximum building heights. 
e.  All open spaces including buffers, setbacks, sidewalk clear zones in excess of the minimum requirements or installed by the applicant, sidewalk zones in excess of the minimum requirements or installed by the applicant, and open spaces shall be fully implemented prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the primary development. 
f.  When a private property owner provides landscaping and the landscaping dies within one year of installation, such landscaping shall be replaced within the earliest possible planting season. 
g.  Covenants or other legal arrangements shall specify ownership of all open spaces, the method of and responsibility for maintenance, taxes, and insurance, compulsory membership and assessment provisions, and shall be incorporated into legal instruments sufficient to ensure that the open space requirements of this ordinance are maintained. 
h.  Seventy-five percent of open space provided on-site must be contiguous. 
3.  Transitional buffer zone requirements. Where a lot on the external boundary of the Griffin Overlay District is used for nonresidential purposes and adjoins the boundary of any property outside the district that is zoned for any residential zoning classification, a transitional buffer zone of not less than 15 feet in width shall be provided and maintained in a natural state or so as to maintain an effective visual screen. 
a.  Said transitional buffer zone shall not be paved or otherwise covered with non-pervious surfaces. 
b.  Shall not be used for parking, loading, storage, or any other uses, except that portions of the transitional buffer zone may be utilized for installation of utilities when necessitated by the development, and when the applicant shows that the utilities cannot be located outside of the transitional buffer zone. Water detention ponds shall not be located within the transitional buffer zones. 
c.  No trees, other than dead or diseased trees, shall be removed from said transitional buffer zone, but additional trees and plant material may be added to the transitional buffer zone. 
d.  When a new development in the corridor tier abuts a property in the neighborhood tier used as residential, the transitional buffer shall apply. 
4.  Landscape buffer requirements for new construction. There shall be the following landscape buffer requirements between buildings, structures, parking areas: 
a.  Landscape strips not less than five feet in width shall be provided along all rear property lines. Parking lot landscape requirements will be discussed in Section 722 R. 
b.  Ground cover shall also be provided in accordance with the Griffin Overlay Design Guidelines, as provided below, in order to protect tree roots and to prevent erosion. Ground cover shall consist of evergreen shrubs or groundcover plant material mulched with pine bark mulch, or other similar landscaping material. 
c.  Newly planted trees shall conform to the Griffin LCI Area Design Guidelines, and as provided below. 
d.  No tree shall be planted closer than three feet from the street or sidewalk, and no closer than eight feet from a fire hydrant, sign post, streetlight standard, utility pole, or similar structure. 
e.  Landscaping plant materials required to be provided along streets to meet the minimum requirements of this overlay district shall be selected from the following list of species. Plant materials provided in locations other than along streets, and plant materials provided along streets in excess of those required to meet this overlay district may be any species appropriate to the design and location subject to the approval of city staff. 
f.  The following Canopy Trees shall be allowed: 
i.  Zelkova; 
ii.  Red Maple Species; 
iii.  Ginkgo, male only; 
iv.  Thornless Honey Locust: Inermis; 
v.  Elm Species: Athena and Dynasty; 
vi.  Oak Species: Darlington, Willow, White; and 
vii.  Green Ash. 
g.  The following Understory Trees shall be allowed: 
i.  Maples: Trident, Hedge, Chalk, Paperbark; 
ii.  Chinese Fringe Tree; 
iii.  Okame Cherry; 
iv.  Aristocrat Pear; 
v.  Golden Raintree; 
vi.  Crepe Myrtle; 
vii.  Ironwood; and 
viii.  Treeform Holly Species. 
h.  The following Dwarf Shrubs shall be allowed: 
i.  Dwarf Holly Species; 
ii.  Dwarf Abelia Species; 
iii.  Dwarf Nandina Species; 
iv.  Dwarf Rose Species; 
v.  Dwarf Gardenia Species; 
vi.  Dwarf Cephalotaxus; and 
vii.  Dwarf Hawthorne Species. 
i.  The following Groundcovers shall be allowed: 
i.  Daylily Species; 
ii.  Liriope Species; 
iii.  Mondo Species; 
iv.  Pashsandra Species; 
v.  Hellaborus Species; 
vi.  Hosta Species; 
vii.  Asiatic Jasmine Species; 
viii.  Crinum Species; 
ix.  Evergreen Ferns; and 
x.  Dwarf Juniper. 
j.  Perennials: Since the City of Griffin is known as the Iris City, the Iris should be used in planters and planting beds. 
i.  Sedum Species; 
ii.  Lantana; 
iii.  Dianthus; 
iv.  Lilies; 
v.  Geranium; 
vi.  Phlox; 
vii.  Dwarf Evergreen Grasses; 
viii.  Iris; 
ix.  Verbena; 
x.  Salvia Daises; 
xi.  Rudbeckie 
xii.  Rainlies; 
xiii.  Bulbs; and 
xiv.  Coneflowers. 
722 G. - Building setbacks and lot size: new construction by tier. 
Intent: Downtown structures are traditionally located adjacent to sidewalks and neighboring buildings. Buildings located along sidewalks clearly define the street edge. This building placement also creates a pedestrian-friendly atmosphere that entices people to explore and invites them into the buildings. 
1.  Neighborhood tier. 
a.  Non-residential and mixed-use buildings. 
i.  Minimum lot size: None. 
ii.  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Front: Zero. 
b.  Rear: 20 feet (may be zero feet if adjacent to a public or private alley). 
c.  Side: Zero (unless [section] 722 D.9. applies). 
iii.  Maximum setbacks: 
a.  Front: 20 feet. 
b.  Side: 20 feet. 
iv.  All new buildings along a primary street are required to be placed on the edge of a ten-foot wide sidewalk, unless a public plaza, patio or courtyard area is incorporated into the site plan (See 722 N for sidewalk requirements). 
v.  Buildings located on corner lots will be placed adjacent to sidewalks on the two sides of the building that face the public right-of-way. 
b.  Single-family detached. 
i.  Minimum lot size: 10,890. 
ii.  Minimum public road frontage: 60 feet. 
iii.  Minimum setbacks: 
a.  Front: 20 feet, unless adjacent to contributing buildings in which case setback averaging is required. 
b.  Rear: 30 feet (may be zero feet if adjacent to a public or private alley). 
c.  Side: 7.5 feet (15 feet between buildings). 
d.  Minimum driveway length: 22 feet (except for units served by a private alley). 
e.  Front yards shall be landscaped with the exception of terraces, porches, stoops and walkways, which may occupy a maximum of one-half of the front yard area. 
c.  Single-family attached and multi-family. 
i.  Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet. 
ii.  Setbacks: 
a.  Front: Five (min.), 15 (max.) feet (Residences may be built to the edge of the right-of-way if parking/garage located in the rear or detached). 
b.  Rear (Minimum only): 40 feet. 
c.  Side (Minimum only): 15 feet. 
d.  Front yards shall be landscaped with the exception of terraces, porches, stoops and walkways, which may occupy a maximum of one-half of the front yard area. 
2.  Village and Corridor tier. 
a.  All front setback shall be zero feet, unless a design feature is incorporated not to exceed five feet unless a park or plaza is proposed. Buildings shall be permitted to be set back from the public sidewalk to allow for building stoops, front porches, balconies or steps, a public space or public park, outdoor dining, outdoor merchandising, or landscaping that does not completely cover the façade of the building. All ground floor uses shall have a sidewalk along the street. 
i.  At no time shall the setback of buildings located south of Broadway Street be greater than the average of the current buildings on the block. 
b.  Buildings located on corner lots will be placed adjacent to sidewalks on the two sides of the building that face the public right-of-way. 
i.  Exception: Open space in the form of a plaza, landscape area, area for public art or other spaces meeting the intent of this ordinance. Parking is not allowed in this area. 
c.  The minimum side and rear setbacks shall be zero feet except as provided in [section] 722 D.9. The side of a building facing a public street shall be permitted to set back from a public sidewalk to allow for building stoops, front porches, balconies or steps, a public plaza or park, outdoor dining, outdoor merchandising, or landscaping that does not completely cover the façade of the building. All ground floor uses must have a sidewalk or clear hardscape pathway connecting the building entrance to the public sidewalk along the street. 
d.  All new buildings along a primary street, excluding residential, are required to be placed on the edge of a ten-foot wide sidewalk with a five foot grass strip, unless a public plaza, patio or courtyard area is incorporated into the site plan. 
722 H. - Architectural regulations by type for new construction. 
1.  Standards for live-work units. 
a.  All off-street parking shall be hidden behind or within individual units. Garages may not face the public street (excluding single-family homes). 
b.  The front entrance to each unit shall be at grade opening directly onto the public sidewalk or a public space adjacent to the public sidewalk (excludes single-family homes). 
c.  For single-family homes the entrance must be oriented towards the primary street. If there is not a primary street than the structure must be oriented toward the secondary street. The garage or parking must be located in the side or rear yard behind front façade of the building. 
2.  Standards for commercial and vertical mixed-use buildings (VMU). 
a.  Ground-floor commercial and retail uses shall have entrances at grade opening directly onto the public sidewalk or a public space adjacent to the public sidewalk. 
b.  All commercial, mixed use, public and civic buildings shall have an awning or canopy over a building entrance that abuts the public right-of-way: 
i.  Awning and canopies shall overhang the sidewalk on which the building fronts by a minimum of five feet. 
ii.  Canvas, vinyl and metal awnings are permitted. 
iii.  Plastic and bubble awnings are prohibited. 
iv.  Vertical support poles are prohibited. 
v.  If illuminated, be lit internally so that the light system is encased or otherwise screened from public view. 
c.  A minimum of 45 percent of the ground-floor façade of VMU and commercial buildings shall be clear and untinted, transparent glass storefront 
d.  Pedestrian access shall be provided from parking behind buildings to the public sidewalk through the ground floor of the building or via sidewalks between buildings. 
e.  A principal building located on a corner lot shall provide a secondary entrance as well as fulfill the transparency requirements as required in [section] 722 H.2.c. 
f.  Arcades and balconies are allowed to encroach into the public right-of -way. 
g.  ADA requirements shall be met. 
h.  Any commercial or mixed use building façade which faces a public street shall feature bulkheads. 
i.  Entrance doors and architraves shall be recessed between four and eight feet. No broken pediments shall be allowed. 
j.  Any commercial or mixed use building façade which faces a public street shall feature transoms over store windows. 
k.  Rear entrances for customer use shall architecturally mimic the primary entrance. 
l.  Buildings located on a corner lot where two public rights-of-way intersect shall orient the front entrance toward the corner of the lot. Corner entrances shall be pronounced to highlight the buildings orientation. 
m.  Door surrounds shall include a combination of sidelights, transoms, pediments or other decorative features. Each building shall provide two of the above or provide documentation of another architectural feature which is compatible with the building's architectural style. 
n.  Window surround treatment shall include a combination of sills, lintel, sash, segmental arch, jack arch, hoods or other decorative features. Each building shall provide two of the above or provide documentation of another architectural feature which is compatible with the building's architectural style. 
o.  Aluminum or metal windows can only be used in exceptionally designed modern style buildings if they are a minimum of four inches in width. Modern buildings shall be compatible with the massing, scale and site design of the surrounding properties. 
p.  Fenestration on the upper levels shall be symmetrical. Window and door arrangements shall be associated vertically. 
q.  Applicant must employ one of the following architectural techniques to differentiate the first floor from the rest of the building such as: 
i.  Soldier course; 
ii.  Beltcourse; 
iii.  Cornice lines; or 
iv.  Similar architectural detailing between the first floor and the rest of the building. 
r.  Buildings, longer than 100 continuous feet shall vary the cornice height and create variations in façades with changes in façade depth, materials, textures, colors, and/or window and door patterns to provide visual interest and prevent a massive imposing appearance. In addition, any commercial building with primary tenant spaces greater than 50,000 square feet shall be structurally designed to be easily divided into smaller tenant spaces. 
s.  Blank, unarticulated, street walls for commercial, public, mixed use and civic buildings are prohibited on any street frontage. 
t.  Roof structures visible from the public right-of-way may be sloped or flat. 
i.  Sloped roofs shall be hip roofs of less than 45 degrees in pitch or gable roofs of at least 30 degrees in pitch. 
ii.  Sloped roofs shall have overhangs of at least 12 inches on all sides and shall not exceed 100 feet in length without a change in plane. 
iii.  Roofing materials for sloped roofs shall one or more of the following: asphalt or fiberglass shingles, solar shingles used with asphalt or fiberglass shingles, standing seam metal roof, ceramic tile, and slate or synthetic slate. 
iv.  Flat roofs shall have decorative and/or corbelled parapets on all sides visible from public rights-of-way and drain to internal roof drains and/or to the rear of the structure, prohibiting downspouts on façades along primary and secondary streets. 
v.  Simple barrel vaults or roofs are allowable. 
vi.  Mansard and gambrel roof forms are prohibited. 
3.  Standards for multi-family buildings. 
a.  Ground-floor residential units that face the street shall have entrances with a stoop or porch between the sidewalk and the building façade. A sidewalk shall connect all ground floor entrances to the public sidewalk; 
b.  Multi-family buildings with no commercial component shall be set back between five and 15 feet from the back of the sidewalk. 
i.  The area between the sidewalk and the building façade shall contain only steps, front porches or stoops, balconies, or landscaping. 
ii.  Mechanical equipment and other building service items may not be located within the setback area between the public sidewalk and building façade. 
iii.  All mechanical equipment and other building service items must be placed in the rear yard and screened. 
c.  Buildings, longer than 100 continuous feet shall vary the cornice height and create variations in façades with changes in façade depth, materials, textures, colors, and/or window and door patterns to provide visual interest and prevent a massive imposing appearance; 
d.  Door surrounds shall include a combination of sidelights, transoms, pediments or other decorative features. Each building shall provide two of the above or provide documentation of another architectural feature which is compatible with the building's architectural style; 
e.  Window surround treatment shall include a combination of sills, lintel, sash, segmental arch, jack arch, hoods or other decorative features. Each building shall provide two of the above or provide documentation of another architectural feature which is compatible with the building's architectural style; and 
f.  Applicant must employ one of the following architectural techniques to differentiate the first floor from the rest of the building such as: 
i.  Soldier course; 
ii.  Beltcourse; 
iii.  Cornice lines; or 
iv.  Similar architectural detailing between the first floor and the rest of the building. 
4.  Standards for single-family buildings-Neighborhood tier. 
a.  All new single-family homes will utilize setback averaging to determine the appropriate building siting and height. The building shall be within ten percent of the average (less or greater). 
b.  Each new building shall be substantially similar to the architectural style of the block. 
c.  Each new building should be a product of its own time but shall incorporate three of the following architectural elements compatible with the surrounding area or block: 
i.  Compatible materials (wood or brick); 
ii.  Window casements; 
iii.  Window style; 
iv.  Window fenestration; 
v.  Door casement; 
vi.  Door style; 
vii.  Corner boards; 
viii.  Return cornices; 
ix.  Decorative gables; 
x.  Decorative fretwork; 
xi.  Porch; 
xii.  Roofline; 
xiii.  Other decorative detailing. 
722 I. - Architectural regulations by type for new construction. 
1.  Allowable primary exterior building materials shall account for at least 80 percent of the building and shall include brick, stone, wood, architectural metal siding, and fiber cement siding. The following building materials shall be prohibited: vinyl siding, exposed concrete block or concrete masonry units, exposed plywood, plastic or PVC, and synthetic stucco or EIFS. 
2.  Allowable secondary materials shall account for at most 20 percent of the building, be concentrated in areas such as trim, and include all allowable materials above as well as stucco and exposed concrete. 
3.  No more than three materials shall be used on a standalone building or unit in an attached building configuration. The lighter material must be placed vertically higher than the heavier material. Example: stack stone - bottom, fiber cement siding - top. 
4.  Wood muntins and mullions shall be used; vinyl is not permitted. Muntins and mullions must be either TDL (true divided light windows) or be placed on both sides of the window pane. 
5.  Shutters shall be operable or appear to be operable (cover the windows). 
6.  Employ compatible architectural elements. 
7.  The following architectural styles are prohibited: 
a.  A-frame structures; 
b.  Dome structures; 
c.  Mediterranean motifs; 
d.  Tudor or mock Tudor styles; 
e.  Swiss chalet or Tyrolean motifs; 
f.  Colonial; 
g.  Standard prefabricated corporate/business structures, such as, but not limited to, metal, corporate colored gasoline island canopies and building façades, typically found in other areas unless specifically found to be compatible with these requirements; and 
h.  The use of same template or repetitive architecture within the same large scale building and/or the mere copying of adjacent building architecture or form. 
722 J. - Mechanical and service areas (applicable for all development). 
Service areas, trash dumpsters, trash compactors and all other mechanical areas and equipment shall be screened from view from all streets and public rights-of-way. Screening shall be permitted to include landscaping and/or architectural treatment of color similar to the building, to screen the equipment. If placed on the roof of a building, the mechanical systems shall be placed where not visible from the public right-of-way or blocked by a parapet. 
1.  Dumpsters. 
a.  All dumpsters/trash containment facilities must be located in the rear yard; 
b.  All dumpsters enclosures must be three sides brick or wood, finished side facing outward, with solid metal or wood gates on the front side; 
c.  The enclosure should be eight feet tall or two feet taller than the highest point of the grease containers, compactors or dumpsters, whichever is greater; and 
d.  Recycling receptacles must be screened from public view by landscaping or decorative fencing. 
2.  Fencing. 
a.  Decorative fencing shall only be made of brick, stone, wrought iron, or wood. 
b.  Fencing in the front yard of any property shall not be higher than four feet; 
c.  Fencing to the rear or side of a building shall not be higher than six feet; and 
d.  No barbed wire, razor wire, chain-link fence or similar elements shall be visible from any public plaza, ground level or sidewalk level outdoor dining area or public right-of-way. 
3.  Loading areas. 
a.  Loading areas should not face a public street; and 
b.  Loading dock entrances shall be screened so that the loading docks and related activities are not visible from the public right-of-way. 
722 K. - Approved paint colors (applicable for all development). 
1.  Paint distribution definitions: 
a.  Base Color: Used for the majority of the building surface including wall surfaces, storefront piers, cornice (when the same material); 
b.  Major Trim Color: Cornice, window hoods, window frames, storefront cornice, storefront columns, storefront bulkheads; 
c.  Minor Trim Color: Window sash, doors; 
d.  Accent Color: Used on signs, awnings, small details on window hoods, cornice, columns and bulkheads. 
2.  Paint color distribution: 
a.  The applicant shall be compatible or utilize colors on the surrounding contributing buildings as long as the color complies with Table 7.8. 
Permitted colors are as listed in Table 7.8. Glass and natural stones that are not painted are excluded from the color requirements. All whites, grays and blacks are allowed. Staff shall compare the colors below with the applicant's submittal. 
Table 7.8 MU/TOD: Permitted Colors Base Colors Major, Minor and Accent Colors 400U through 403U 5467C 406U through 409U 553C 413U and 414U 5535C Browns, Beiges and Tans 5605C 462C to 468C 5743C 4625C to 4685C 1545U 469C, 474C, 475C 161U 4695C to 4755C 175U 478C, 719C to 724C, 725C to 731C, 476U to 482U 295U and 296U 719U to 725U 343U 726U to 732U 349U and 350U Reds Warm Grey 9U, 10U and 11U 168C, 181C Black 2U through 7U 483C, 484C 4625U 1685C, 4975C 476U, 477U and 478U Red-Browns 553U 154U, 1395U 5535U 1405U 730U and 731U 434U, 435U and 436U 7483U and 7484U Warm Grey 1U through 5U 7503U, 7504U and 7505U Warm Grey 6U, 7U and 8U 7517U, 7518U and 7519U Cool Grey 1U through 4U 7530U, 7531U and 7532U 454U 871U through 875U 4545U 8003U and 8021U 467U and 468U Grey 4655U, 4665U, 4675U and 4685U 429U to 433 U 4735U, 4745U and 4755U 443U to 447 U 480U, 481U and 482U Warm Grey 6U-11U 4645U, 4655U and 4665U Cool Grey 6U-11U 5855U, 5865U and 5875U 5467U to 5527U 649U and 650U Grey-Blue 719U and 720U 5395U to 5455U 726U and 727U 621U to 627U 7407U 642U to 644U 7499U through 7502U 647U to 650U 7506U 654U to 656U 7527U, 7528U and 7529U Green-Grey 7534U, 7535U and 7536U 5605U to 5665U Greens 555U to 559U 560 C 614 C to 616 C 5467 C to 5527 C 5535U to 5595U  
722 L. - Existing buildings. 
The City of Griffin has a variety and critical mass of contributing buildings which create a sense of place and identity. For this reason, it is important to preserve and restore those remaining contributing buildings that reflect the city's history, character and architecture. 
1.  Standards for existing buildings. Buildings being renovated or rehabilitated (exterior only), or buildings falling under the category of substantial rehabilitation, that are less than 50 years old and considered non-contributing, shall conform to the design standards outlined for new construction in Sections 722 D. to 722 K. Buildings, contributing or noncontributing, or that were constructed less than 50 years ago but are not considered a substantial rehabilitation and undergoing renovations, shall conform the requirements established in this section of the ordinance and maintain compatibility with older adjacent buildings. 
a.  Buildings being renovated or rehabilitated, which are over 50 years old or which are eligible for listing in the Georgia Register of Historic Places or considered contributing should follow the following standards: 
i.  Respect the original character of the building; 
ii.  Preserve and repair original materials; 
iii.  Uncover intact façades that have had false fronts added; 
iv.  Preserve and restore original storefronts including: recessed entries, display areas, kick plates and transoms; 
v.  Maintain a building "edge" at the sidewalk or in line with the other adjacent buildings; 
vi.  Preserve and restore the size and shape of upper story windows; and 
vii.  Preserve and restore the original roof forms. 
2.  Site design standards. 
a.  Building Façades. 
i.  Contributing buildings shall maintain original appearance and design character. 
ii.  Contributing building shall maintain the design elements of the building and respect the original character of the building including, but not limited to the following elements: 
a.  Cornice or building cap; 
b.  Upper façade windows; 
c.  Lower façade composed of mostly glass and recessed entry; 
d.  Architectural details; and 
e.  Materials. 
iii.  Non-contributing buildings are allowed to maintain their current design but shall conform to the above regulations for any changes. 
3.  Height of buildings. 
a.  Contributing buildings shall maintain original height and roof design; and 
b.  Non-contributing building shall maintain their existing height or be compatible with the surrounding contributing building but are not allowed to exceed the substantial rehabilitation threshold and still fall under this section. 
4.  Setback of buildings. 
a.  New building additions to buildings shall conform to the established setback line of the other buildings on the street; and 
b.  New building additions shall comply with the zoning ordinance setback requirements unless they are in conflict with this ordinance or a variance is obtained. 
5.  Parking. 
a.  Existing buildings, at the adoption of this ordinance may continue to provide their current parking spaces without meeting new requirements; 
b.  Parking in front of buildings is prohibited unless it is on-street parking; 
c.  Multiple curb cuts for parking are prohibited; 
d.  Landscaping in and around parking lots is required in Section 519.18 B., unless only on-street parking is provided. 
6.  Architectural design standards. 
a.  Roof, Window and Door Openings. 
i.  Roofs shall maintain their original appearance. If a change is necessary it shall conform to the rooflines of neighboring buildings; 
ii.  Original windows and doors shall be maintained, as feasible; 
iii.  Commercial or mixed use building doors shall be composed mostly of glass and recessed into the building; 
iv.  Storefront windows shall be primarily of glass and fit original openings; 
v.  If a glass window is not feasible, the window area shall be developed in a manner that provides interest to pedestrians, such as with a decorative wall sculpture or display area. 
7.  Building materials. 
a.  Contributing buildings shall maintain original materials where feasible; 
b.  Buildings less than 50 years old and considered non-contributing shall conform to materials approved in Section 722 H. such as brick, stone, clapboard or other appropriate materials. 
8.  Lighting. 
a.  Outdoor lighting shall be provided through both public and private lighting fixtures in conformance with the Griffin LCI Area Design Guidelines; 
b.  Lighting shall be used in the storefront display window, around signage, entrance and as an accent for building details. 
722 M. - General maintenance (applicable to all development). 
1.  Each building owner is required to maintain all façades of the building. This includes areas of the structure which are not visible from the public right-of-way. Maintenance issues include, but are not limited, to the following: 
a.  Paint must be maintained; 
b.  Windows must be maintained, no boarded up windows shall be allowed. 
c.  Any new downtown alley must be paved with pavers to match the existing historic pattern; 
d.  Mechanical units shall not be located in the alleys unless screened. Elevate the units ten feet off the ground and house them in a structurally sound metal structure (see also building code); 
e.  No mechanical units shall block vehicular or pedestrian flow; 
f.  The rear of each building shall feature a light fixture. 
722 N. - Streets and sidewalks (applicable to all development). 
1.  All streets within the Griffin Overlay District shall meet city standards. 
2.  Streets shall be designed to create an interconnected system of grid-patterned roads, modified only to accommodate topographical conditions. See Section 722 D. for additional block size requirements. 
3.  Pedestrian zones in the Corridor tier and along primary streets in the Neighborhood tier: 
a.  Shall consist of a landscape/buffer zone and sidewalk clear zone. 
b.  The village tier consists of a sidewalk zone only. 
c.  If the above conditions are not provided, the applicant must comply and complete any construction required prior to Certificate of Occupancy. 
d.  Landscape zones shall be planted with trees, grass, ground cover or flowering plants, or consist of brick pavers or granite pavers where on-street parking is provided or pedestrian crossing and/or congregation is likely. 
e.  The intent of this ordinance in the Neighborhood and Corridor zone is to provide for a ten-foot-wide pedestrian zone with a five-foot-wide landscape/buffer zone measured from the back of the adjacent street curb and a ten-foot-wide sidewalk zone in the neighborhood and corridor zone. However, right-of-way variations and the current conditions may not provide for a uniform application of this requirement. As such, the Planning and Development Services Department in consultation with the director of public works shall determine allowable adjustments on a case by case basis. 
4.  All sidewalk paving materials shall be continued across any intervening driveway at the same prevailing grade and cross slope as on the adjacent pedestrian sidewalk area with all driveway crossings meeting ADA standards. 
5.  Brick sidewalk clear zones paved with materials other than concrete or brick that are consistent in color with concrete or brick sidewalks may be allowed with the approval of the planning and development services director. 
6.  Sidewalk zones shall be herring-bone patterns, basket weave or jack over jack running bond and kept clear and unobstructed for the safe and convenient use of pedestrians. 
7.  Where newly constructed sidewalks abut existing sidewalks, the newly constructed sidewalk shall provide safe facilitation, including tapering or expansion of widths, for pedestrian traffic flow to adjacent sidewalks. Any development that disturbs existing sidewalks on the adjacent property shall replace disturbed areas to their pre-disturbance state and condition. 
8.  Safe and convenient pedestrian pathways shall be provided from sidewalks along streets to each structure entrance, including pedestrian access routes to parking decks and through parking lots and between adjacent buildings where applicable given side setbacks, within the same development. All such pathways shall be concrete and a minimum width of five feet. 
Table 7.9 MU/TOD: Streets and Sidewalks Tier Street Light Pole 
Spacing Landscape Zone Sidewalk 
Clear 
Zone Neighborhood 
(Figure 722.1 H) Primary 90 ft. Possible red brick- 
See Streetscape 
project 10 ft. Secondary 60 ft. (or as currently spaced) 5 ft. 5-6 ft. Village 
(Figure 722.2 H) Primary 60 ft. None 8 ft. Secondary 60 ft. None 8 ft. Corridor* (may be impacted by grant installation) 
(Figure 722.3 H) Primary 90 ft. 5 ft. 10 ft. Secondary 60 ft. 5 ft. 10 ft.  
722 O. - Landscape zones (applicable to all development). 
1.  Street trees shall be planted in all landscape zones spaced at a maximum distance of 30 feet on center. 
2.  New street trees must be a minimum of three and one-half inches in caliper measured 12 inches above ground, shall have a minimum mature height of 30 feet and shall be limbed up to a minimum height of eight feet. 
3.  Street trees shall have a minimum planting area of four feet by eight feet. Tree-planting areas shall provide porous drainage systems that allow for drainage of the planting area. 
4.  Street tree species shall be consistent for entire block lengths. Species shall be permitted to change on individual block face due only to limited supply and/or concerns regarding disease or the health of existing and proposed trees with approval from the planning and development services director and consultation from a certified arborist. 
5.  Any benches, trash receptacles, and bike racks shall be placed within the landscape zone on primary streets. If no landscape zone is provided, required to be provided or exists then the above referenced items shall be placed on the sidewalk. ADA requirements shall be fulfilled. 
722 P. - Streetscape elements (applicable to all development). 
It is the intent of this ordinance to regulate all elements allowed along the street and sidewalk, including the landscape strips. 
1.  Newspaper Boxes. 
a.  No more than three per block face; 
b.  No mid block news boxes shall be allowed on blocks measuring less than 350 feet; 
c.  Installation (no less than): 
i.  Three feet from a curb edge; 
ii.  Two feet from a driveway; 
iii.  Five feet from a fire hydrant; 
iv.  Three feet from a traffic signal, utility pole, decorative street light pole, or tree; and 
v.  Must be painted black or another color which is compatible with the decorative street lights, street furniture or other public feature. 
2.  Post Drop Boxes (does not apply to free paper/advertisement circulation) 
a.  Shall not exceed three per parking lot; 
b.  Shall be located in the planting bed/landscape strip closest to the entrance/exit; 
c.  Shall be no more than eight inches from the curb; and 
d.  Shall be permanently affixed to the ground. 
3.  No permanent structures are allowed in the landscape strip except for the following: 
a.  Identification signage; 
b.  Light posts; and 
c.  Items in Section 722 O. and 722 P. 
722 Q. - Public art for new construction or substantial rehabilitation. 
1.  Developers of any new professional office, lodging projects, retail, service, commercial, wholesale, transportation, or expansion projects and multi-family projects with five or more dwelling units within the Griffin Overlay District are required to provide public artwork. 
a.  The public art must have an invoiced cost or appraised value equal to one percent of the cost of building construction, including associated site work, signage, and water features (encouraged to use recycled water); 
b.  As an alternative to providing public art, developers may contribute to a dedicated fund established by the City of Griffin for these improvements; the dollar amount shall be an amount equal to a minimum of one percent of the cost of building construction and associated site work and signage. 
i.  If a developer chooses to contribute the required art investment to the City of Griffin, monies must be deposited in order to receive approval for the Certificate of Occupancy. If requested, the City staff will work closely with the developer to identify an appropriate use of the contribution that will benefit both the developer and the city. 
c.  The public art requirement must be met prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. The art contribution should be approved by City Staff as being in compliance with the ordinance. Approved artwork must be installed in accordance with approved construction and landscape plans. Artwork selected by the developer must be integrated with the project must be located on an exterior of the structure or the building site, be visible to the public; and 
d.  Acceptable forms of art include the following: 
i.  All forms of limited edition or one-of-a-kind original creations of visual art created by an artist; 
ii.  Project features and enhancements which are unique and produced by a professional artist such as benches and fountains; 
iii.  Murals or mosaics covering walls; 
iv.  Professional artist sculptures which can be freestanding, wall-supported or suspended and made of durable materials suitable to the site and the climate; and 
v.  Other suitable artworks as presented in a catalogue and previously approved by city staff/board of commissioners. 
e.  The location of the artwork should be in an outdoor location. Approved sites are: 
i.  City owned property, including rights-of-way, parks; 
ii.  City Hall complex; and 
iii.  Subject site. 
Note: A plaque shall be placed at the approved location identifying the artist and date of installation. 
f.  Non-acceptable works of art: 
i.  Business logos or art that incorporates a logo; 
ii.  Directional elements such as signage or color coding except where these elements are integral parts of the original works of art; 
iii.  Mass-produced art objects, such as fountains, statuary objects, or playground equipment; 
iv.  Reproduction by mechanical or other means of original works of art; 
v.  Decorative ornamental or functional elements created by the project architect instead of an artist commissioned for this purpose; 
vi.  Landscape architecture or gardening except for elements designed by the artist as an integral part of the work of art; 
vii.  Electrical, water or mechanical service for activation of the works of art; 
viii.  Art exhibitions and educational activities; 
ix.  Security and publicity concerning works of art; and 
x.  Standard landscape or hardscape elements which would normally be associated with the project. 
g.  Eligible costs for artworks. When preparing a budget for the artwork, certain costs may be included to meet the developer's required art investment: 
i.  Professional artist's budget, including artist fees, materials, assistants' labor costs, insurance, permits, taxes, business and legal expenses, operating costs and art dealer's fees if such fees are necessary and reasonable; 
ii.  Fabrication and installation of the artwork, including base and/or foundation if necessary; 
iii.  Site preparation for artwork; 
iv.  Structures enabling the artist to display the artwork; 
v.  Documentation of the artwork; and 
vi.  Acknowledgment plaque identifying the artist, artwork and development. 
h.  Development responsibility after installation. 
i.  Art located on the subject site will remain the owner's property, subject to a covenant on the part of the developer that the piece will remain in public view. It will be the property owner's responsibility to insure and maintain the piece of art. The insured value must equal the appraised value. 
ii.  Art located on city-owned property shall be dedicated to the city. The final location will be reviewed by the city to ensure compliance with American with Disabilities Act (ADA), if applicable, and to minimize conflicts with public utilities in city rights-of-way. The city will be responsible for maintaining all pieces on city-owned property. 
i.  Development projects not subject to public art contribution. The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
i.  Tenant improvement projects; 
ii.  Building additions; 
iii.  Remodeling, repair or reconstruction of an existing structure; 
iv.  One hundred percent low-income housing projects; 
v.  Nonprofit agencies and institutions that exclusively provide social services only to the general public, upon approval of the board of commissioners; and 
vi.  Condominium conversion projects. 
722 R. - Parking. 
On-street parking spaces shall be counted toward total parking requirements. 
1.  Off-street parking requirements for uses and structures are authorized and permitted, as follows: 
a.  Residential. 
i.  Single-family detached. One space minimum, two spaces maximum. 
ii.  Single-family attached. One space minimum, two spaces maximum. 
iii.  Multi-family. One space per dwelling unit minimum for one bedroom, two spaces per dwelling unit (Minimum and Maximum). 
b.  Commercial. One parking space for every 400 square feet of gross building area (minimum and maximum). 
c.  Retail. One parking space for every 300 square feet of gross building area (minimum and maximum). 
d.  Other uses. One parking space for every 300 square feet of gross building area (Minimum and Maximum). 
e.  An applicant may apply for a 25 percent increase from the maximum parking allowance. The additional parking must be constructed with a pervious/porous surface such as grasscrete or other approved materials. The materials shall be submitted to the planning and development services director. 
f.  Shared parking is encouraged and may result in permitted reductions of off-street parking requirements. Parking facilities within a lot may be shared if multiple uses cooperatively establish and operate parking facilities and if these uses generate parking demands primarily when the remaining uses are not in operation. 
i.  Applicants shall make an application to the planning and development services director for authorization for shared parking. 
a.  Applicants shall include proof of a written formal shared-parking agreement between the applicant and all affected property owners; 
b.  Required parking for residential units shall be prohibited from being shared; 
c.  A to-scale site plan indicating location of proposed parking spaces shall be provided; 
d.  A shared parking calculation projection shall be provided that demonstrates that each use will have adequate parking provisions at all times; 
e.  For contiguous properties sharing parking spaces under this provision, cross-easements shall be filed establishing access to the parking spaces in perpetuity; 
f.  A reduction in the number of parking spaces that would otherwise be required for each of the various uses on a multiple-use property must be clearly shown on the development plan. If shared parking is proposed for a combination of contiguous properties, a plan must be submitted covering all of the properties that will be sharing the parking spaces; 
g.  Location on other property: If the required automobile parking spaces cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, such spaces may be provided on adjacent or nearby property, provided a major portion lies within 1,000 feet of the main entrance to the principal use for which such parking is provided, and measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground; 
ii.  Failure to meet the required parking space requirements at any time renders building occupancy permit or business license; 
iii.  Required residential parking shall be segregated from parking for all other uses with the exception of additional parking provided for live/work single-family units; and 
g.  Each development which provides automobile parking facilities shall provide bicycle parking facilities in adjacent parking structures, parking lots, or the landscape zone of the adjoining sidewalk. Nonresidential developments shall provide bicycle parking at a ratio of one bicycle parking space for every 20 vehicular spaces. Multi-family residential developments shall provide bicycle parking facilities at a minimum ratio of one bicycle parking space for every five multi-family units. No development shall have fewer than three bicycle parking spaces nor be required to exceed a maximum of 50 bicycle parking spaces. 
h.  Parking reductions by right. 
i.  Senior Housing units are allowed to provide only 0.5 spaces for each unit. 
ii.  TOD Provisions: Within 1500 feet of MARTA or another mass transit station, when constructed, has a 50 percent reduction in the parking requirements. 
2.  Parking design. 
a.  All off-street parking including surface lots and parking decks shall be located behind or beside buildings. If parking is located to the side of the building a vegetative screen (appropriate landscaping materials in Section 722 F.4) of at least three feet in height or a screen constructed out of the same material as the adjoining building shall be provided except where driveways, bicycle and pedestrian walkways are required. The parking lot shall adhere to the same setbacks as the adjoining buildings; 
b.  No parking lot shall be placed between the public right-of-way and an intervening building unless the lot is placed behind the rear wall of the primary building 60 feet back and screened; 
c.  Wheel stops or bumpers shall be placed at the head of all off-street parking spaces that abut a landscape strip or sidewalk; 
d.  Header curbs (Squared Edge design) are required for all parking lots; 
e.  Landscape Islands: 
i.  All surface parking lots of 15 parking spaces or more must include landscaping in the form of shade trees within the confines of the surface parking lot; 
ii.  One shade tree and landscape island of at least 200 square feet must be provided for every ten parking spaces; 
iii.  Shade trees shall be a minimum of three and one-half inches in caliper measured 12 inches above ground; 
iv.  Shade trees shall be a minimum of 16 feet in height; 
v.  Shade trees shall have a minimum mature height of 30 feet; and 
vi.  Shade trees shall be limbed up to a minimum height of eight feet. 
vii.  Each island shall be 100 percent landscaped with deciduous trees (four caliper min), evergreen shrubs, canopy trees, understory trees, not to exceed three feet in height at maturity and ground cover (no mowing required) or flowers in mulched beds; 
f.  This applicant can submit an administrative variance to the planning development services director if the total landscape island square footage can be met but the location as defined by this section cannot. 
i.  The applicant must prove the hardship and show how the intent of the ordinance is being met (heat islands, run-off). 
g.  There shall be a six foot wide landscape island (back of curb to back of curb) at the end of each row of parking-equal in length to the adjoining parking space. 
h.  All parking lots should have a landscape buffer of 6 feet wide and three feet in height except where driveways, bicycle and pedestrian walkways are required. 
i.  Parking decks: 
i.  Parking decks shall be located in the center of a building or site; 
ii.  If this is not possible, all parking structures shall have retail or service uses located on the ground floor or be designed in a manner that replicates the look; 
iii.  Street level openings on parking structures shall be limited to those necessary for store entrances, vehicle entrances and exit lanes, and pedestrian entrances to stairs and elevator lobbies; 
iv.  Tinted glass is prohibited; 
v.  No parking desk shall be higher than the adjoining building; 
vi.  Liner buildings shall be utilized to block parking decks whenever possible; 
vii.  All levels of the deck shall be or appear to be a building façade utilizing the material allowed in Section 722 I.; 
viii.  Parking decks shall conceal vehicles from view; 
ix.  Each deck shall incorporate the one or more of the following elements: 
a.  Recesses; 
b.  Projections; 
c.  Façade treatments; and 
d.  Planter boxes. 
x.  All parking decks and parking structures shall have pedestrian walkways a minimum with of five feet connecting ground level parking with public sidewalks and to all building entrances. 
722 S. - Signs. 
1.  Ground/monument signs. 
a.  Shall have a base and framework made of brick or stone; 
b.  Prohibited in the village tier; 
c.  Maximum height: Six feet; 
d.  Maximum size: 
i.  Single retail, office or commercial tenant: 35 square feet; 
ii.  Multiple tenant, retail office or commercial: 50 square feet. 
2.  Wall signs main building. 
a.  The combined area of any and all signage of any building or structure shall not exceed ten percent of the main building façade. 
3.  Individual wall signs painted directly on recessed panels on the building façade. 
a.  Flat/attached or signs painted on building façade 
i.  Maximum size: 25 percent of wall area. 
4.  Pole signs. 
a.  Allowed only in the Historic District and Village tier; 
b.  Shall be "L" Shaped"; 
c.  Constructed of wrought iron or wood; 
d.  Maximum height: Ten feet in height and not overhang into the public right-of-way; and 
e.  Maximum size: 16 square feet. 
5.  Projecting signs. 
a.  Mounted perpendicular to the building front; 
b.  Maximum projection: Three feet; 
c.  Minimum height: Eight feet; 
d.  Placement: Two feet from ingress/egress; and 
e.  Maximum size: Four square feet. 
6.  Sidewalk signs. 
a.  Maximum height: 3'6"; 
b.  Maximum size: Six feet; 
c.  Material: Wood or metal; 
d.  Temporary location: Five foot pedestrian access shall be maintained; and 
e.  Maximum: One per business. 
7.  Menu boxes. 
a.  Maximum size: Four square feet; and 
b.  Maximum: One per business. 
8.  Dedication or historic preservation plaques. 
a.  Maximum size: 10" × 12"; and 
b.  Material: Metal or wood. 
9.  Relief signs. 
a.  Maximum size: Letter size two feet in height; 
b.  Maximum: One replaces wall sign allowance; and 
c.  Location: Façade or awning. 
10.  Prohibited signs. 
a.  Internally lit; 
b.  Flashing, blinking, and rotating signs; and 
c.  Rood signs. 
722 T. - Lighting. 
1.  General. 
a.  Uplighting shall be required. 
b.  Exterior lighting shall be low intensity and avoid spill over on adjacent properties 
c.  Warm lighting colors such as incandescent, halogen, metal halide shall be required. 
d.  A minimum footcandle of 0.5 at the perimeter and between light sources. 
e.  A minimum footcandle of 5.0 under the light fixture. 
722 U. - Access. 
1.  Interparcel access. To the maximum extent possible, sidewalks and parking lots serving adjacent lots shall be interconnected to provide continuous driveway connections and pedestrian connections between adjoining lots and streets, except that this requirement shall not apply to lots zoned for single-family residential development. Where necessary, Spalding County and the City of Griffin may require access easements be provided to ensure continuous access and egress routes connecting commercial, office and multi-family lots. 
2.  Connections. 
a.  Connections to available transportation modes, such as driveways, sidewalk, and bike paths shall be shown along adjacent streets and those entering adjoining properties. 
b.  Safe and convenient pedestrian ways shall be provided from sidewalks along streets to each building entrance, including pedestrian access routes across parking lots and between adjacent buildings within the same development. 
c.  Where an existing or planned mass transit stop is within 1,250 feet (straight-line distance) from any boundary of the subject property, the access plan shall show how pedestrians may safely travel from such station or stop to the subject property, the access plan shall show how safe, continuous and convenient bicycle access shall be provided to the subject property. 
d.  All buildings surrounding a mass transit station must provide an entrance facing the station and a convenient pathway between the building and the transit station. 
722 V. - Design guidelines. 
The planning and development services director is authorized to create and administer, design guidelines for the Griffin Overlay District. These standards shall provide acceptable architectural design controls, landscaping, detail drawings, signage, fencing, lighting, street and site furniture and grating. These standards shall be used to promote proper design criteria for the overlay district and shall guide the planning director in deciding whether a proposed design complies with the requirements of this overlay district. The Design Guidelines are hereby made a part of this ordinance and shall be amended from time to time. 
722 W. - Publically accessible open space. 
1.  Legal mechanism. 
a.  Each applicant shall present as a part of the application for a building permit within the Griffin Overlay District a legal mechanism under which all land to be used for publically accessible space purposes shall be maintained and protected. Such legal mechanism may include deed restrictions, property owner associations, common areas held in common ownership or control, maintenance easements, or other legal mechanisms, provided that said legal mechanism shall be approved by the county attorney as assuring each of the following mandatory requirements: 
i.  That all subsequent property owners within said Griffin Overlay District be placed on notice of this development restriction through the deed records of Spalding County Superior Court; 
ii.  That all public space held in common will be properly maintained and insured with no liability or maintenance responsibilities accruing to the city; 
iii.  That a legal mechanism exists for notice of deficiencies in maintenance of the public space held in common, correction of these deficiencies, and assessment and liens against the properties for the cost of the correction of these deficiencies by a third party or the city. 
2.  When an applicant chooses to utilize a property owners association in order to comply with the requirements of (a) above, the applicant, in addition to meeting all of said requirements, shall provide for all of the following: 
a.  Mandatory and automatic membership in the property owners' association as a requirement of property ownership; 
b.  A fair and uniform method of assessment for dues, maintenance and related costs; 
c.  Where appropriate, party wall maintenance and restoration in the event of damage or destruction; and 
d.  Continued maintenance of public space held in common and liability through the use of liens or other means in the case of default. 
3.  Maintenance of common land. Covenants or other legal arrangements shall specify ownership of all public spaces, the method of and responsibility for maintenance, taxes and insurance, compulsory membership and assessment provisions, and shall be incorporated into legal instruments sufficient to ensure that the public space requirements are maintained. 















( Ord. No. 15-11, § 1, 7-28-2015 ) 
723. - CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION ZONING OVERLAY DISTRICT. 
723 A. - Background. 
Open space development has numerous environmental and community benefits, including: 
1.  Reduces the impervious cover in a development. Impervious cover contributes to degradation of water resources by increasing the volume of surface runoff, and preventing infiltration of rainfall into the soil surface. 
2.  Reduces pollutant loads to streams and other water resources. 
3.  Reduces potential pressure to encroach on resource buffer areas. 
4.  Reduces soil erosion potential by reducing the amount of clearing and grading on the site. 
5.  Preserves green space. 
6.  Preserves open space for recreation. 
7.  Reduces the capital cost of development. 
8.  Reduces the cost of stormwater management by concentrating runoff in one area and reducing runoff volumes. 
9.  Provides a wider range of feasible sites to locate stormwater BMPs. 
10.  Reduces the cost of future public services needed by the development. 
11.  Can increase future property values. 
12.  Creates urban wildlife habitat "islands." 
13.  Creates a sense of community and pedestrian movement. 
14.  Can support other community planning goals, such as farmland preservation, affordable housing, and architectural diversity. 
723 B. - Purposes. 
The purpose this zoning district is to protect natural, historic and community resources within the City of Griffin by promoting open space development within our jurisdictions. It also aims to serve as a tool for water quality and watershed protection and to enhance the visual and esthetic value of land in the City of Griffin by providing for and promoting the development of residential subdivisions that conserve open space and integrate natural features into site design. Specifically, the district intends: 
1.  To provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater runoff and watershed protection measure. 
2.  To provide a residential zoning district that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
3.  To preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. 
4.  To permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. 
5.  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
6.  To promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community. 
7.  To promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions. 
8.  To encourage interaction in the community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood. 
9.  To encourage street designs that reduce traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries. 
10.  To promote construction of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses, and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
11.  To conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of houses with direct access to and views of open space. 
12.  To preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
723 C. - General regulations. 
1.  Applicability of Regulations. This Conservation Subdivision option is available in all residential zoning districts as a use by right. Applicant shall comply with all other provisions of the zoning code and all other applicable laws, except those that are incompatible with the provisions contained herein. 
2.  Ownership of Development Site. The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
3.  Housing Density. Overall density of the site may exceed the underlying zoning district, provided that it does not exceed six units to the acre and that lot sizes vary in accordance with Section 723 C.5.a.(iii) below. 
4.  Housing Density Determination. The maximum number of lots in the Conservation Subdivision shall be determined by the following method: 
a.  Calculation: The maximum number of lots is determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in the underlying zoning. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
i.  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
ii.  The 100-year floodplain; 
iii.  Bodies of open water over 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
iv.  Wetlands that meet the definition of the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; or 
v.  Anticipated right-of-way needs for roads and utilities. 
5.  Development Standards. 
a.  To encourage conservation and the use of this district, design standards offer maximum flexibility, requiring only that: 
i.  Lot sizes along the perimeter of the overall development are not smaller than 20 percent of the average size of lots in adjacent, existing residential lots; 
ii.  Single family detached and townhome separation comply with building code footing distances; and 
iii.  A variety of lot sizes and residential types occur within the subdivision development, responding to the natural configurations on the site. 
b.  Waivers to parking standards, such as the provision for shared residential parking facilities, and other standards such as curb and pavement materials may be proposed on a site plan and application for consideration and approval by the public works director, provided they demonstrate how these variations meet the conservation purpose of this zoning district as defined herein. Such requests to vary from development standards must be explicit and cite the applicable code section. 
6.  100-year Floodplain. No permanent structure shall be constructed within the boundary of the 100-year floodplain unless the structure meets minimum floodplain ordinance requirements as established in Chapter 50, Floods, of the Griffin Code of Ordinances. 
723 D. - Application requirements. 
1.  Site analysis map required. Concurrent with the submission of a site concept plan, Applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed Open Space will meet the requirements of this article. The preliminary site plan shall include the following features: 
a.  Property boundaries; 
b.  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
c.  Topographic contours of no less than ten foot intervals; 
d.  All Primary and Secondary Conservation Areas labeled by type, as described in Section 723 E. of this section; 
e.  General vegetation characteristics; 
f.  General soil types; 
g.  The planned location of protected Open Space; 
h.  Existing roads and structures; and, 
i.  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
2.  Open space management plan required. An open space management plan, as described in Section 723 E., shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
3.  Instrument of permanent protection required. An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant and as described in Section 723 E., shall be placed on the Open Space concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
4.  Other requirements. The Applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the underlying zoning district and applicable sections of the Unified Development Code. 
723 E. - Open space. 
1.  Definition. Open space is the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
2.  Standards to determine open space. 
a.  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least 40 percent of the gross tract area. 
b.  The following are considered Primary Conservation Areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the Applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this article: 
i.  The regulatory 100-year floodplain; 
ii.  Buffer zones of at least 75-foot width along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
iii.  Slopes above 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
iv.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
v.  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and, 
vi.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
c.  The following are considered Secondary Conservation Areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible. 
i.  Important historic sites; 
ii.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre contiguous area; 
iii.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight inches caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line; 
iv.  Other significant natural features and scenic viewsheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
v.  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres contiguous area; and, 
vi.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
d.  Above-ground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the 40 percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
e.  At least 75 percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract. The open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
f.  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
3.  Permitted uses of open space. Uses of open space may include the following: 
a.  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
b.  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
c.  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
d.  Passive recreation areas; 
e.  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten percent of the total Open Space and are not located within Primary Conservation Areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; 
f.  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within Primary Conservation Areas; 
g.  Nonstructural stormwater management practices; 
h.  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or 
i.  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this ordinance. 
4.  Prohibited uses of open space. 
a.  Golf courses; 
b.  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
c.  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted Best Management Practices; and, 
d.  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
5.  Ownership and management of open space. 
a.  Ownership of open space. The applicant must identify the owner of the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities located thereon. If a Homeowners Association is the owner, membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. If a Homeowners Association is the owner, the Homeowners' Association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
b.  Management plan. Applicant shall submit a Plan for Management of Open Space and Common Facilities ("Plan") that: 
i.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
ii.  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
iii.  Provides that any changes to the Plan be approved by the board of commissioners; and, 
iv.  Provides for enforcement of the Plan. 
c.  In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the City of Griffin may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, Homeowner's Association, or to the individual property owners that make up the Homeowner's Association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
6.  Legal instrument for permanent protection. 
a.  The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
i.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
a.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
b.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this ordinance. 
If the entity accepting the easement is not the City of Griffin, then a third right of enforcement favoring the City of Griffin shall be included in the easement; 
ii.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or, 
iii.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the City of Griffin. 
b.  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this article, as well as any further restrictions the Applicant chooses to place on the use of the Open Space. 
724. - MEDICAL OVERLAY DISTRICT. 
724 A. - Intent. 
The intent of the Medical Overlay District (MOD) is to support the investment of the various institutional uses located within the district by providing restrictions on those uses deemed incompatible with the future land uses anticipated in the area. The area is also intended to have a more urban, pedestrian-friendly, walkable character in the future, and therefore replacement standards that support this vision are included in the overlay district. 
724 B. - Establishment and boundaries of the MOD. 
The boundaries of the MOD shall conform to the limits of the area as depicted on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Griffin. 

724 C. - Permitted uses. 
Table 7.3 shall govern the use of this overlay district, including permitted, prohibited, and special uses. 
724 D. - Prohibited uses. 
All uses not listed in the 724 C and E. 
724 E. - Special uses. 
The following uses, where permitted by right in the underlying zoning district, shall require a special use permit within the Medical Overlay District: 
1.  Licensed Day Care center. 
2.  Financial Institutions. 
3.  Funeral Home. 
4.  Personal Care Homes. 
5.  Hotel or Motel. 
6.  Professional Offices (non-medical related). 
724 F. - Applicability. 
Within the Medical Overlay District, as designated below, the standards of this chapter shall apply to: 
1.  All new building construction; 
2.  All existing buildings that are not in conformance with the requirements of the underlying district or this overlay district at the time of adoption shall be governed by Section 505 (Non-conforming uses and structures). 
724 G. - Site plan. 
All developments are required to submit a site plan pursuant to this section and shall require the dedication and improvement of public facilities to provide adequate public streets, sidewalks, or public infrastructure. 
724 H. - Authority. 
The Planning and Development Services Department is authorized to approve site plans within the Medical Overlay District. 
724 I. - Application procedure. 
1.  Submittal requirements: Site Plans shall be drawn at a scale of 1 inch equals 100 feet (1"=100'), and shall be limited to the following: 
a.  Property boundary lines and dimensions; available utilities; and easement, roadway, rail lines and public rights of way crossing and adjacent to subject property; 
b.  The proposed height, dimensions and arrangement of buildings; 
c.  The type and location of proposed landscaping (including illustration of applicable landscape plates); 
d.  The location of points of ingress and egress; 
e.  The location of driveway and parking lots; 
f.  The location of trash collection, trash compaction, recycling collection and other similar service areas; 
g.  The location of garage doors, bay doors or loading areas; 
h.  The location of all roof, ground and wall mechanical equipment (e.g. air handling equipment, compressors, duct work, transformers and elevator equipment); 
i.  The location of any drive-through facilities; 
j.  Illustrations of the proposed building or building expansion and its relationship to existing building within 100 feet of the site; 
k.  Illustrations of the exterior of the proposed building or building expansion; and 
l.  Illustrations of proposed signs including location, materials, dimensions and type of lighting. 
724 J. - Approval criteria. 
In approving a site plan, the approving entity shall consider the following: 
1.  Compliance with all requirements of Section 724 and the underlining zoning district; 
2.  That the site plan will not have a substantial or undue adverse effect upon the neighborhood, the character of the medical district, traffic conditions, parking, public infrastructure, and other matters affecting the public health, safety and general welfare; 
3.  That the site plan will be constructed and operated to be compatible with the neighborhood and with the purpose of this section; 
4.  That the proposed development can be served by adequate utilities; 
5.  That the proposed development will not result in the destruction, loss, or damage of any significant natural, scenic, or historical district, site or feature; and 
6.  The approving entity may impose reasonable conditions to minimize adverse effects on the neighborhood or on public facilities, and to insure compatibility of the proposed development with surrounding properties, uses, and purpose and intent of this section. 
724 K. - Administrative alteration to site plans. 
1.  Authority. During the site plan review process of projects proposed within the Medical Overlay District, the Planning and Development Department is authorized to approve administrative alteration to the building envelope standards where, owing to special conditions, strict enforcement of certain standards would be physically impractical. This optional process shall occur only where the applicant requests an administrative alteration to a standard as specified below. 
2.  Permitted alterations. The Planning and Development Department shall review the request in light of the intent and purpose of overlay district requirements. The Planning and Development Department shall have the authority to approve an administrative alteration for the following standards: 
a.  Building and parking placement. 
i.  Setback area-Increase of up to ten percent of the maximum permitted setback. 
ii.  Required building frontage (minimum percentage of build to)-Reduction of up to five percent of required length. 
iii.  Parking setback-Decrease of up to five percent of the minimum required setback. 
3.  Approved criteria. To approve an administrative alteration, the Planning and Development Services Department shall make an affirmative finding that all of the following criteria are met; 
a.  An administrative alteration does not conflict with streets, sidewalks, easements or landscape requirements. 
b.  An administrative alteration does not injure or damage the use, value or enjoyment of surrounding property or hinder or prevent the development of surrounding property 
c.  An administrative alteration does not have an adverse impact on land use compatibility 
d.  An administrative alteration does not materially and adversely affect adjacent land uses and the physical character of uses in the immediate vicinity of the proposed. 
e.  An administrative alteration will not have an adverse impact on the urban form and/or the street-space. 
724 L. - Special use. 
Follow the procedures outlined in Section 406 and 503 of the Unified Development Code. 
724 M. - Building envelope standards. 
1.  Applicability. Buildings are set back further from the street to allow for easier access by automobile. Parking occurs in front of buildings but is limited to two bays with a single drive aisle. There is usually a single entrance facing the primary street served by an internal sidewalk. 

2.  Building regulations. The building standards in the following table shall replace and supplement the respective regulations of the underlying nonresidential districts: 
BUILDING PARKING AND PLACEMENT Lot Area and Width  Area (min sq. ft.) -  Width (min ft.) - Setback Area  Front Setback (min ft.) 7  Front Setback (max ft.) 0 Side/Rear Setback (min ft.)  Abutting Single-Family 10  Abutting Multifamily, Nonresidential 0 or 10  Abutting Alley 5  Building Separation 10 Parking Setback (min ft.)  From Primary Street 10  From Side Street 10  Abutting Single-Family 10  Abutting Multi-Family, Nonresidential, Alley 0 Building Entrance  Facing Primary Street Allowed  
BUILDING AND PARKING PLACEMENT 

Lot Area and Width: No minimum. 
Setback Area: Ten feet behind ROW line. 
Parking Setback Line: 
1.  Primary/side street setback. Minimum ten feet behind ROW line. 
2.  Parking shall be located behind the parking setback line. A single 22-foot drive aisle serving 20-foot deep parking spaces on one or both sides may be located between the building and the street. Where parking is provided between the building and the street, the eight-foot parking setback area shall be landscaped. 
Building Entrance: 
1.  A building located on two primary streets shall have either one entrance per frontage or provide one angled entrance at the corner of the building at the intersection. Building located on corner lots shall meet all applicable intersection sight distance requirements. Additional entrances off another street, pedestrian area, or internal parking area are permitted. 
2.  Recessed entrances shall not exceed 3 ft. in depth and one floor in height. 
HEIGHT 
Building Height: See underlining zoning district for maximum height requirements. 
3.  Height standards. The following map designates maximum building story limits with the Medical Overlay District (MOD). 

4.  Streetscapes standards. The following minimum streetscape standards apply along a Pedestrian Frontage as designated in building envelope standards. 
Frontage Plan


5.  Street trees. A project developed in the Medical Overlay District shall provide street trees located at least every 30 feet on center. The street trees shall be planted in grates that are American with Disabilities Act (ADA) compliant or in planters with curbed beds. The location of street trees shall conform to the applicable streetscape plate. 
724 N. - Site development standards. 
1.  Applicability. The following supplemental site development standards apply only in the Medical Overlay District (MOD). 
2.  Landscaping and screening. 
a.  Any building, structure, or use is subject to the landscaping requirements of this chapter. 
b.  Trash collection, trash compaction, recycling collection and other similar service areas shall be located on the side or rear of the building and shall be screened from view from residentially zoned property or public rights of way. Screening enclosures shall be fully enclosed walls or fences at least eight feet high with self-closing access doors and shall be constructed of the same materials as the primary building or buildings. 
c.  Trash collection, trash compaction, recycling collection and other similar service area shall be located a minimum of 50 feet away from any residentially zoned property line. 
d.  No garage doors bay doors or loading areas shall face a pubic roadway. 
e.  Loading areas shall be subject to the following screening requirements: 
i.  Provide a minimum 100 percent year-round screen of all loading areas visible from residentially-zoned property or public right-of-way. 
ii.  This screen shall consist of berms, walls, fences, plant material or combination totaling eight feet in height at installation or completion of construction. Wall or fence material shall be compatible with primary structure. 
iii.  Loading docks shall be located to the side and rear of building when within 50 feet of any residentially-zoned property, unless the loading area is wholly within a closed building. 
f.  All roof, ground and wall mounted mechanical equipment (e.g., air handling equipment, compressors, duct work, transformers and elevator equipment) shall be screened from view from residential properties or public right-of-way at ground level of the property line. 
g.  Roof mounted mechanical equipment shall be shielded from view on all sides. Screening shall consist of materials consistent with the primary building materials, and may include metal screening or louvers which are painted to blend with the primary structure. 
h.  Wall or ground mounted equipment screening shall be constructed of planting screens; brick, stone and wrought iron. 
i.  Above ground utilities and appurtenances to underground utilities which require above ground installation shall be screened by a continuous planting of shrubs, with a minimum mature height equal to that of the utility structure. Required access ways to these utilities are exempt from screening provisions. 
3.  Fences and walls. 
a.  Fences and wall shall be constructed of high quality materials, such as decorative blocks, brick, stone and wrought iron. 
b.  Chain-link fences, barbed wire or concertina wire shall not be permitted. 
c.  Breaks in the fence or wall may be provided for pedestrian connections to adjacent developments. 
d.  The maximum length of a continuous, unbroken and uninterrupted fence or wall shall be 100 feet. Breaks shall be provided through the use of columns, landscaped areas, transparent sections and a change in material. 
4.  Drive-through facilities. 
a.  A drive-through window shall only be permitted where it is not facing the public right of way of a Pedestrian or Urban Frontage. 
b.  No drive-through window shall be permitted on the side of a building adjacent to any residentially zoned property. 
5.  Parking. See underlying zoning requirements for parking. 
6.  Signs. All signs within the Medical Overlay District shall be monument signs to be erected not closer than five feet from the right of way (on private property). Monument signs shall not exceed ten feet in height or 40 square feet in sign area. 
7.  100-year Floodplain. No permanent structure shall be constructed within the boundary of the 100-year floodplain unless the structure meets minimum floodplain ordinance requirements as established in Chapter 50, Floods, of the Code of Griffin, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 13-11, § 1, 8-27-2013 ) 
ARTICLE 8. - PARKING AND LOADING 

801. - SCOPE OF ARTICLE. 
    Except as provided in this article, no application for a building permit shall be approved unless there is included with the plan for such building, improvements or use, a site plan showing the required space reserved for off-street parking and service purposes. Occupancy shall not be allowed unless the required off-street parking and service facilities have been provided in accordance with those shown on the approved plan. 
802. - PARKING PLAN REQUIRED. 
802 A. 
Before any building permit is issued, the parking lot layout and area must be found by the zoning administrator to be in compliance with all requirements of this article. The building inspector shall not allow occupancy or use of a building until advised by the zoning administrator that parking facilities meet the requirements of this article. 
802 B. 
No permit shall be issued for any parking area, except those for detached, single-family residences, until the plans and specifications, including required location, entrances, exits, aisles, landscaping, screening, surface materials and drainage, have been submitted to the zoning administrator or for review by the historic preservation commission, whichever has jurisdiction, and are in compliance with this section. Plans shall include proper drainage and stormwater management, surface materials, curbing and screening as may be required, and with handicapped and loading or other special (i.e., compact, porous material) spaces also designated when required. 
803. - PARKING AREA DESIGN. 
    Parking spaces shall have a minimum width of nine feet and a length of 18 feet. 
803 A. - Compact car dimensions. 
Spaces marked and intended for compact cars can be reduced to a width of eight feet by a length of 16 feet. 
803 B. - Interior drives. 
There shall be provided adequate interior driveways to connect each parking space with a public right-of-way. 
1.  Interior driveways shall be a minimum of 24 feet wide where used with 90 degree angle parking; a minimum of 18 feet wide where used with 60 degree angle parking; and a minimum of 12 feet wide where used with 45 degree angle parking and a minimum of 12 feet wide where used with parallel parking or where there is no parking. 
2.  Interior driveways shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide for one-way traffic movement and a minimum of 24 feet wide for two-way traffic movement. 
803 C. - Location of parking: non-residential and multi-family districts. 
1.  Parking shall not be located in the front between a building on the street, but shall be distributed such that all or the majority of the parking is located in the rear (or rear and side). 
a.  Exceptions. Lots smaller than 13,000 square feet may be exempt from the location provision. 
b.  Redevelopment on lots with existing structures and nonconforming sites must strive to comply with standards herein, but may qualify for administrative infill variances as provided in Article 6. 
2.  Parking shall not be permitted in required buffer areas. 
3.  Parking on lots adjacent to residential lots may not be located within 30 feet of the property line of an abutting residentially zoned lot. 
4.  Parking may be permitted in side and rear setbacks, provided it does not violate C(3) above related to distance of parking from adjacent residential property lines. 
804. - ACCESSIBLE PARKING. 
    Access aisles adjacent to accessible spaces shall be a minimum of five feet wide making the total space 13 feet wide. One in eight accessible parking spaces, but not less than one, shall be served by an access aisle a minimum of eight feet wide and shall be designated "van accessible." Two accessible spaces may share one aisle. 
    Accessible parking shall be located as close as possible to an accessible entrance, walkway, elevator or ramp and where feasible shall be the main entrance used by the majority of the public. All accessible parking spaces shall be identified by above-grade signs as being reserved for physically handicapped persons. 
Table 8.1 Accessible Parking Total Spaces in Lot Required Number of Accessible Spaces Up to 25 1 26 to 50 2 51 to 75 3 76 to 100 4 101 to 150 5 151 to 200 6 201 to 300 7 301 to 400 8 401 to 500 9 501 to 1,000 2% of total Over 1,000 20, plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000  
805. - JOINT PARKING FACILITIES. 
    Location of off-street parking areas. All off-street spaces required by this section shall be provided on the same lot with the main building or use which it serves unless the project is the reuse of any structure built prior to 1959 which is zoned CBD and located in the Historic District shall be exempt from off-street parking requirements. Upon demonstration that the parking spaces required by this section are not available and cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot was the building structure or use which it serves, the zoning administrator may review a joint parking facilities plan. 
    Joint parking facilities. Two or more neighboring uses, of the same of different type, may provide joint parking facilities, provided that the number of off-street parking spaces is not less than the sum of the individual requirements. These spaces must be provided on a lot a substantial portion of which is within 800 feet of such building structure or use. This provision shall require submittal of evidence of ownership or a valid agreement to the lease the parking area off-site that is intended to be used to comply with this section. 
806. - PAVEMENT MARKINGS AND SIGNS. 
    Each off-street parking space shall be clearly marked and directional arrows or signs shall be provided wherever necessary. Markers, directional arrows and signs shall be properly maintained by the property owner so as to ensure their maximum efficiency. 
807. - NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES. 
    In order to assure proper and uniform development of parking areas, to relieve traffic congestion on the streets, to lessen the amount of impervious surface in the city and to minimize any detrimental effects on adjacent properties, off-street parking spaces shall be provided and maintained as called for in the following schedule. The requirements shall be the same as a similar use as mentioned herein. Parking requirements for additions to existing uses shall be based upon the new addition even if the existing use is non-conforming. 
    No existing or future off-street parking area shall be reduced in capacity to less than the minimum required number of spaces, or increased to more than the maximum permitted number of spaces, or altered in design or function to less than the minimum standards, unless provided by this section. 
Table 8.2 Number of Parking Spaces Use Minimum Parking Required Maximum Parking Permitted COMMERCIAL USES Veterinary service; kennel One per 400 square feet One per 250 square feet Art studio One per 400 square feet One per 300 square feet Automated teller machine, no drive-through Two per machine Three per machine Auto parts store One per 500 square feet One per 300 square feet Automobile sales One per 200 square feet of repair space plus one per 400 square feet of showroom/office One per 150 square feet of repair space plus one per 300 square feet of showroom/office Garage, major/minor One per 250 square feet One per 200 square feet Financial institution One per 300 square feet (also see stacking requirements for drive-through facilities) One per 200 square feet (also see stacking requirements for drive-through facilities) Personal service-Barber shop or beauty parlor One per 300 square feet One per 250 square feet Home stay bed and breakfast Two for the owner-operator plus one per guest bedroom Two for the owner-operator plus one per guest bedroom Car wash Two stacking spaces for each car wash lane plus two drying spaces per lane Three stacking spaces for each car wash lane plus two drying spaces per lane Office-Contractor's establishment One per 300 square feet of office space and one per 2,000 square feet of outdoor storage One per 250 square feet of office space and one per 1,500 square feet of lot outdoor storage Convenience store with gasoline or diesel fuel One per 200 square feet One per 150 square feet Convenience store without gasoline or diesel fuel One per 200 square feet One per 150 square feet Day care center One per 500 square feet One per 375 square feet Funeral home or mortuary One per four seats in largest chapel One per three seats in largest chapel Furniture and home furnishing store One per 600 square feet One per 300 square feet Grocery store One per 300 square feet One per 250 square feet Hardware store One per 400 square feet One per 300 square feet Health or fitness club One per 200 square feet One per 150 square feet Hotel, extended stay 1.5 per unit lodging unit Two per lodging unit Hotel or motel One per lodging unit, plus one per each 150 square feet of banquet, assembly, meeting, or restaurant seating area 1.2 per lodging unit, plus one per each 100 square feet of banquet, assembly, meeting, or restaurant seating area Laundromat One for each three washer/dryer combinations One for each two washer/dryer combinations Nursery or garden center One per 300 square feet plus one per 1,500 square feet outdoor sales or display area One per 250 square feet plus one per 1,000 square feet outdoor sales or display area Office One per 300 square feet One per 250 square feet Open air sales One per 250 square feet of indoor floor space plus one per 600 square feet of outdoor sales One per 200 square feet of indoor floor space plus one per 500 square feet of outdoor sales Personal service establishment One per 250 square feet One per 200 square feet Photofinishing laboratory One per 250 square feet One per 200 square feet Photographic studio One per 300 square feet One per 250 square feet Restaurant, bar, or tavern One per 125 square feet One per 75 square feet Retail store One per 275 square feet One per 250 square feet Self storage facility (mini-warehouse) One per 40 storage units One per 25 storage units Service station One per 250 square feet of office space plus two per service bay One per 200 square feet of office space plus three per service bay Shopping center One per 275 square feet One per 225 square feet LIGHT INDUSTRIAL USES Manufacturing, processing, assembling One per 1,300 square feet One per 1,000 square feet Warehouse One per 2,000 square feet One per 1,500 square feet Wholesale One per 1,000 square feet One per 600 square feet GOVERNMENT-INSTITUTIONAL USES Assembly hall; auditorium; nonprofit club or lodge One per four seats in room with greatest seating capacity or one per 40 square feet in largest assembly area without fixed seating One per three seats in room with greatest seating capacity or one per 30 square feet in largest assembly area without fixed seating Church, temple, synagogue and place of worship One per four seats in room with greatest seating capacity or one per 40 square feet in largest assembly area without fixed seating One per three seats in room with greatest seating capacity or one per 30 square feet in largest assembly area without fixed seating Government office One per 300 square feet One per 250 square feet Hospital 1.5 per bed Two per bed Library One per 400 square feet One per 300 square feet Museum One per 500 square feet One per 300 square feet Nursing home One per four beds One per three beds Post office One per 200 square feet One per 150 square feet School One per 300 square feet One per 200 square feet School for the arts One per 300 square feet One per 200 square feet School, trade or business One per 200 square feet One per 150 square feet RESIDENTIAL USES Multi-family, one bedroom 1.5 per unit plus 0.1 per unit for guest space Two per unit plus 0.2 per unit for guest space Multi-family, two or greater bedroom 1.5 per unit plus 0.1 per unit for guest space Two per unit plus 0.2 per unit for guest space Home occupation (See provisions for home occupations) Residence within building containing a non-residential use One per unit 1.5 per unit Single-family detached or attached Two per unit Four per unit Two-family dwelling Two per unit Three per unit RECREATIONAL FACILITIES Amusement park Per parking generation study funded by applicant and approved by the zoning administrator Athletic field 20 spaces per field 25 spaces per field Billiard hall/amusement arcade One per 200 square feet One per 150 square feet Bowling alley Two per each bowling lane (add parking for billiard hall/amusement arcade, if provided) Three per each bowling lane (add parking for billiard hall/amusement arcade, if provided) Community center One per 300 square feet One per 250 square feet Golf course 2.5 per hole Three per hole Golf driving range, principal use 0.75 per tee 1 per tee Ice or roller skating rink One per 200 square feet One per 150 square feet Miniature golf Two per hole Three per hole Stadium or sport arena One per twelve feet of bench seating One per ten feet of bench seating Swimming pool-Subdivision amenity One per 150 square feet of surface water area One per 100 square feet of surface water area Swimming pool-Public One per 125 square feet of surface water area One per 75 square feet of surface water area Tennis or racquet ball court Two per court Three per court Theater, cinema, auditorium, stadium, assembly hall, gymnasium, community recreation center One per four fixed seats, or one space for each 40 square feet of floor area available for the accommodation of moveable seats, plus one space for each employee One per three fixed seats, or one space for each 40 square feet of floor area available for the accommodation of moveable seats, plus one space for each employee  
808. - MAXIMUM PARKING EXCEPTIONS. 
808 A. 
Any parking above the maximum parking shown in the above table must be pervious but shall never exceed 125% of the maximum or is provided through use of structured parking. 
808 B. 
For some uses, a property owner may build more than 125 percent of the required parking ratios without building pervious spaces or structured parking. The property owner must submit a parking study for the proposed development showing the need for the additional parking must be submitted to the planning and development director for approval. This applies to the following uses: golf courses, hospitals, cultural facilities, theaters, auditoriums, gymnasiums, stadiums/arenas, transit stations, airports, and freight service facilities. 
808 C. 
Where a project is intended to be developed in phases, the planning and development director may approve development of a parking area intended to serve current and future development. 
808 D. - Modifications. 
The planning and development director may reduce the required number of spaces by up to five percent for uses within one-quarter mile of a designated heavy rail, streetcar/light rail or bus rapid transit station. 
808 E. - Carpool/vanpool parking. 
For office, industrial, and institutional uses where there are more than 20 parking spaces on the site, the following standards must be met: 
1.  Five percent of the parking spaces on site must be reserved for carpool use before 9:00 a.m. on weekdays. More spaces may be reserved, but they are not required. 
2.  The spaces will be those closest to the building entrance or elevator, but not closer than the spaces for disabled parking and those signed for exclusive customer use. 
Signs must be posted indicating these spaces are reserved for carpool use before 9:00 a.m. on weekdays. 
809. - MINIMUM NUMBER OF LOADING SPACES REQUIRED. 
809 A. 
Industrial, wholesale and retail operations shall provide loading spaces as follows: 
1.  Spaces appropriate to functions. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided as appropriate to the functions and scope of operation of individual of groups of buildings and uses. 
2.  Design of loading spaces. Off-street loading spaces shall be designed and constructed so that all maneuvering to park and un-park vehicles for loading can take place entirely within the property lines of the premises. Loading spaces shall be provided so as not to interfere with the free, normal movement of vehicles and pedestrians on public rights-of-way. 
3.  Ingress and egress. Ingress and egress to off-street loading spaces shall conform to driveway entrance regulations as required by the Georgia Department of Transportation and the City of Griffin Development Ordinance. 
4.  Industrial and wholesale operations with a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or over shall conform to the following schedule: 
Table 8.3 Loading Spaces Gross Floor Area Required 
Loading Berths  10,000-49,000 square feet 1  49,000-100,000 square feet 2 100,000-160,000 square feet 3 160,000-240,000 square feet 4 240,000-320,000 square feet 5 320,000-400,000 square feet 6 Each 90,000 above 400,000 square feet 1  
ARTICLE 9. - PARKING LOT LANDSCAPE AND DESIGN 

901. - SCOPE OF REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS. 
    The requirements and standards for installation and maintenance shall apply to landscape planting areas in off-street parking facilities and service areas. Such requirements and standards shall apply to all new development and redevelopment in the city. Applications for review of preliminary site plans, minor site plans or final site and subdivision plans shall include the required space reserved for off-street parking and service purposes. The purpose of landscaping parking facilities is to enhance the quality of life by minimizing impacts of noise, dust, pollution, sun, heat, air pollution, Stormwater runoff, motor vehicle headlight glare and other activities associated with parking lots. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all requirements for off-street parking and service facilities have been met in accordance with this ordinance. 
902. - DRAINAGE, CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE. 
    All off-street parking, loading and service areas shall be drained, stabilized and paved so as to prevent damage to adjacent properties and/or public streets and shall be constructed of materials, which, will assure an environmentally safe impervious surface resistant to erosion. All such areas shall be at all times maintained at the expense of the owners thereof in a clean, orderly and dust free condition to the extent that it does not create a nuisance. 
903. - SEPARATION FROM WALKWAYS, SIDEWALKS AND STREETS. 
    All off-street parking, loading and service areas shall be separated from walkways, sidewalks and streets by curbing or other suitable protective devices and approved landscaping. 
904. - PARKING LOT AND OTHER VEHICLE USE AREAS. 
    Off-street multi-family, commercial, industrial and institutional parking lots and other vehicle use areas shall contain landscaping and plantings, with the exception of approved or permitted driveways. The minimum total lot area to be landscaped shall be ten percent for tracts of five acres or less and 15 percent for tracts of 5.1 acres or more of the total available net area of the development site. This amount of land shall be devoted to landscaping which includes but is not limited to grass, shrubs, vines and trees. 
904 A. - Interior landscaping. 
Interior landscaping of parking lots shall contain planter islands located at both ends of each single and double parking rows and one planter island every ten parking spaces in a row. Planter islands shall be a minimum of 160 square feet in area for single parking rows and 320 square feet in area for double parking rows. Planter islands shall contain at least one tree for single parking rows and two trees for double parking rows. All trees shall have a minimum height when planted of ten feet and a mature height of a minimum of 20 feet. The remaining area in the planter islands shall be landscaped with appropriate materials. 
904 B. - Border landscaping. 
Each parking lot or vehicular use area must have a planted landscape strip not less than ten feet in width parallel to right-of-way lines and planted borders not less than five feet in width along any side of a parking lot or vehicular use area that abuts adjoining property that is not a public right-of-way. 
904 C. - Access ways. 
Landscape border areas and landscape strips may be interrupted to provide vehicular and/or pedestrian ingress and egress. 
904 D. - Encroachment. 
Landscaped areas shall require protection from vehicular encroachment. Wheel stops or curbing shall be located so as to prevent damage by vehicles to any tree, fence, shrub or other landscaping. 
904 E. - Off-street parking lots. 
In off-street parking lots, when the city has determined that the strict application of this ordinance will interfere with the function of the vehicle use area, the required interior landscaping may be located near the perimeter of the paved area, subject to the approval of the planning and development, public works and utilities departments. 
904 F. - Driveway. 
When a driveway (ingress) intersects with public right-of-way the city public works department shall review proposed landscaping to ensure unobstructed visibility for vehicular traffic entering or leaving the site. 
905. - PLANT MATERIAL STANDARDS. 
905 A. - Trees. 
Trees shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Height. Trees shall have a minimum height of ten feet at the time of planting and a mature height minimum of 20 feet. 
2.  Planting area. The planting area for each tree shall be maintained with an approved landscape material. 
905 B. - Shrubs and hedges. 
Shrubs and hedges shall be subject to a minimum height of 18 inches. 
905 C. - Vines, ground cover, etc. 
Vines, ground cover, lawn grasses and architectural planters shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Vines shall be 12 inches in length within one calendar year from the time of planting. 
2.  Ground covers other than lawn grasses shall be planted so as to provide 75 percent coverage within one calendar year from the time of planting. 
3.  Lawn grasses shall be perennial species capable of thriving in the city. They shall be planted so as to achieve complete coverage within two calendar years from the time of planting. Grass areas may be sodded, sprigged, plugged or seeded. Sod shall be used in swales or other areas subject to erosion. 
4.  Architectural planters for shrubs shall have a planting area of not less than ten square feet and a depth of not less than 18 inches. Architectural planters for trees shall have a planting area of not less than 12 square feet and a depth of not less than four feet. 
905 D. - Maintenance, preservation and use standards. 
1.  All required plant material and nonliving landscape material shall be maintained in good condition at all times and is the responsibility of the property owner. 
2.  Dead plant material shall be replaced within a time period appropriate to the growing season of the species in question, not to exceed 90 days. 
3.  All required landscape areas shall be protected from unpermitted vehicular encroachment by use of wheel stops, curbing or other suitable methods. Vehicles may overhang no more than two feet into the landscape areas. 
4.  No required landscape area, buffer or setback shall be used for parking, driveways, service areas or any functional uses contrary to the intent and purpose of this ordinance. 
905 E. - Recommended trees for parking lots. 
Table 8.4 Recommended Trees Crepe myrtle Persian parrotia Maple, amur Maple, trident Elm, Chinese Hornbeam, European Maple, Japanese Maple, red Pistache, Chinese Planetree, London Oak, Shumard White fringetree Oklahoma Redbud Flowering dogwood Japanese dogwood American smoketree Washington hawthorne Nellie R. Stevens holly Japanese crabapple Southern wax myrtle Willow oak Pin oak Overcup oak Chaste tree Japanese zelkova Chinese fringetree  
906. - MAINTENANCE. 
    Landscaping shall be fully completed prior to issuance of a final certificate of occupancy. If it is not feasible to complete the landscaping due to weather conditions or other extenuating circumstances; the owner shall post a performance or landscaping bond, in the form of cash, letter of credit or commercial surety bond, in accordance with this ordinance. The owner shall maintain all landscaping in good condition and replant, as necessary all diseased or dead plants and/or trees. 
ARTICLE 10. - MAPS 

1001. - ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING AND OTHER MAPS. 
    In order to implement this ordinance, the Official Zoning Map is established to facilitate the administration of this ordinance and is made an integral part of this ordinance. The official zoning map shall be on display at all times in the zoning administrator's office, during regular business hours of the planning and development department. This map shall be available to the public for inspection and copying in accordance with the Georgia Open Records Law. The zoning administrator shall assist any interested person in obtaining an accurate reproduction of this map. 
1002. - OFFICIAL ZONING MAP. 
1002 A. - Zoning district boundaries. 
All zoning district boundaries shall be shown on the official map. All amendments to the zoning map shall follow the guidelines established in Article 4 of this ordinance. 
1002 B. - Centerlines as district boundaries. 
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, where district boundaries are indicated on the zoning map as approximately following the centerline of a street, highway, railroad right-of-way line, stream bed or river bed, such centerlines shall be construed to be such district boundaries. 
1002 C. - Boundaries following platted lot lines. 
Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
1002 D. - Boundaries following corporate limit line. 
Where district boundaries are indicated on the zoning map as approximately following the corporate limit line of the city, then, such corporate limit lines shall be construed to be such district boundaries. 
1002 E. - Boundaries parallel to setbacks. 
Where district boundaries are indicated on the zoning map as being set back from a street, road, highway, railroad or river and parallel thereto, then, such district boundaries, unless specifically indicated, shall be construed as being at the scaled distance from the centerline of such street, road, highway, railroad, stream or river as being parallel thereto. 
1003. - OTHER MAPS. 
    For convenience in showing zoning district classifications to individual tracts of property, a series of Spalding County Tax Map may be color-coded. These maps may be kept in the office of the zoning administrator for public reference; provided, however, only the official zoning map should be relied upon in determining how a particular property is validly zoned. 
ARTICLE 12. - SIGNS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 15-15, § 1, adopted Oct. 27, 2015 , repealed the former Art. 12, §§ 1201-1222, and enacted a new Art. 12 as set out herein. The former Art. 12 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 12-12, adopted March 13, 2012 ; Ord. No. 13-05, § 1, adopted May 14, 2013 ; Ord. No. 15-04, § 1, adopted April 28, 2015 ; Ord. No. 15-09, § 1, adopted July 13, 2015 . 

1201. - FINDINGS AND PURPOSE. 
1201 A. 
The City of Griffin finds that signs are a proper use of private property, are a means of personal free expression and a necessary component of a commercial environment. As such, signs are entitled to the protection of the law. In the absence of regulation, however, the number of signs tends to proliferate, with property owners desiring ever increasing numbers and sizes of signs, leading to cluttered and aesthetically blighted thoroughfares. In addition, the competition among competing sign owners for visibility of their signs contributes to safety hazards for both vehicles and pedestrians and undermines the sign owners' original purpose of presenting a clear message of its idea or identification of its premises. 
1201 B. 
Regulation of the size, height, number, and spacing of signs is necessary to protect the public safety, to assure compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses, to enhance the business and economy of the city, to protect the public investment in the streets and highways, to maintain the tranquil environment of residential areas, to promote industry and commerce, to eliminate visual clutter and blight, to provide an aesthetically appealing environment, and to provide for the orderly and reasonable display of advertising for the benefit of all the city's citizens. To the extent regulation of signs affects speech protected by the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and Art. 1, Sec. 1, Par. 5 of the 1983 Constitution of Georgia, the regulation should be content-neutral on its face; otherwise, the need to regulate must be justified by a compelling government interest and narrowly tailored to be the least intrusive imposition on free speech. 
1201 C. 
The city further finds that there is a substantial difference between signs erected by public authority and signs erected by private citizens or businesses. Signs erected by public authority are virtually all erected on public rights-of-way for the purpose of maintaining the public safety either through direct control of traffic or through provision of such type signage as street signs or wayfinding signs which enable the traveling public to know where they are located and to find where they are going. As such, with the exception of signs identifying government buildings, virtually all government signs are erected purely for public safety purposes. Moreover, their use in the public right-of-way is necessary to ensure their visibility to the motoring public. 
( Ord. No. 15-15, § 1, 10-27-2015 ) 
1202. - LEGAL AUTHORITY. 
    This article is enacted pursuant to Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV of the 1983 Georgia Constitution, express powers in the Charter of the City of Griffin (2004 Ga. Laws, p 4232 et seq.), the general police powers of Georgia municipal corporations, and other authority provided by federal, state or local laws applicable hereto. 
( Ord. No. 15-15, § 1, 10-27-2015 ) 
1203. - DEFINITIONS. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them. 
    A-frame sign or easel sign: A portable sign consisting of two sign faces placed back to back and hinged together at the top in such a manner that each sign face leans toward the other, connecting at the top and forming a self-supporting structure. 
    Awning: A roof-like cover that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway, walkway, or window from the elements. Awnings are often made of fabric or flexible plastic supported by a rigid frame, and may be retracted into the face of the building. 
    Banner: A sign other than a flag, made of paper, cloth, thin plastic, or similar lightweight material and usually containing a message or logo. 
    Billboard: An outdoor advertising sign or structure which is designed, intended, and used to advertise businesses, goods, products, or services which are not confined to those available, sold, manufactured, or distributed on the premises where the billboard is located, and to inform, as well as non-commercial messages. Generally, billboards are distinguishable from freestanding signs by their purpose, size, placement, and type of construction. 
    Building sign: A sign that in any manner is fastened to, projects from, or is placed or painted upon the exterior wall, window or door of a building. This includes lettering, pictures or other attention-getting devices attached or affixed to windows. 
    Building official: The officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this Code, or duly authorized representative. 
    Business premises: A building, suite, office or other unit used for nonresidential purposes. In the case of businesses licensed by the city, the area occupied by a certificated occupation taxpayer shall be deemed as one business premises. In the case of professionals paying individual taxes to the city, each professional corporation, partnership or other entity in which the professional participates shall be considered the occupant and all area occupied by that occupant shall be the business premises. For the purpose of this article, business premises shall include nonresidential space occupied by charitable organizations, political organizations, institutions or other noncommercial entities. 
    Business day: Any weekday (Monday through Friday) except for City of Griffin holidays or when the Offices of the City of Griffin are closed due to a weather or other emergency. 
    Canopy: A roof-like structure supported by columns or projecting from a building and open on at least three sides. 
    Changeable copy sign: A sign that is capable of changing the position, format, words, numbers, or pictures displayed on the sign face manually or mechanically, or which changes the display of words, numbers, symbols, or graphics by electronic means, including the streaming of a video over the Internet; such manual or mechanically-controlled signs also known as "reader boards", and such electronic signs also being known as "multiple message signs". 
    Easel sign: See "A-frame sign." 
    Feather banner: A banner made from lightweight material and attached to a pole and designed to wave in the wind. 
    Flag: A sign consisting of any fabric containing distinctive colors, patterns, logos, or symbols. 
    Freestanding sign: A sign which is supported by one or more columns, uprights, or braces, in or upon the ground, is not attached to a building, and is not mobile or temporary. A freestanding sign may only identify a business, person, thing, or event located on the premises and advertise goods, products or services sold, manufactured, or delivered on the premises where the sign is located, as well as any non-commercial message. The term "freestanding sign" includes but is not limited to the following: 
a.  Pole sign. A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or similar support such that the bottom of the sign face is at least six feet above the ground. 
b.  Ground sign. A freestanding sign, other than a pole sign, in which the bottom of the sign face is less than six feet above the ground but not directly in contact with the ground. 
c.  Monument sign: A freestanding sign in which the entire bottom of the sign face is in contact with the ground, providing a solid and continuous background for the sign face from the ground to the top of the sign upon which background the sign face is mounted. 
    Frontage or street frontage: The width in linear feet of a lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any street from which access may be directly gained. 
    Fronts or fronting on a street: A parcel "fronts" on a street when the lot line on the property on which the business is located also forms the line marking the edge of a publicly dedicated right-of-way. 
    Illuminated signs: 
a.  Internally-illuminated sign. Any sign that is illuminated by an artificial light source from within the sign structure over any or all of its sign face. 
b.  Externally-illuminated sign. Any sign that is partially or completely illuminated at any time by an artificial light source that directly or indirectly illuminates the face of the sign from outside the sign structure. 
    Industrial or commercial activity: Those properties on which activities commonly or generally recognized as commercial (includes office and non-profit uses) or industrial, and vacant land under common ownership adjoining such property, except that none of the following shall be considered commercial or industrial: 
a.  Outdoor advertising structures; 
b.  Agricultural, forestry, ranching, grazing, farming and related activities, including but not limited to wayside fresh produce stands; 
c.  Transient or temporary uses; 
d.  Activities of a primary residential nature; and 
e.  Railroad tracks and sidings. 
    Official signs and notices: Signs and notices erected, generally within the public right-of-way or on other public property, by public officers or public agencies and in accordance with direction or authorization contained in federal, state, or local law for the purpose of carrying out an official duty or responsibility. Historical markers authorized by state law and erected by state or local agencies or non-profit historical societies shall be considered official signs. 
    Parcel: The unit identified on county tax maps as a single lot for purposes of ad valorem taxation; provided, that two or more adjoining lots owned by one person or entity shall be deemed to be one parcel for the purpose of these regulations. 
    Permanent subdivision sign: Signs that advertise residential, commercial and industrial sites developed as one project. 
    Portable sign: 
a.  Any sign: 
1.  That is capable of being moved or intended to be moved from one location to another; or 
2.  That is considered a portable sign in the normal course of commerce, even though the sign may be temporarily affixed to the ground; or 
3.  That the design of which indicates it is capable of being moved or intended to be moved from one location to another; or 
4.  That is not permanently affixed to a building or the ground; or 
5.  That is used in such a manner as to be portable. 
b.  Signs meeting the standards of the following categories shall not be considered portable signs: 
1.  Freestanding signs; 
2.  Building signs; 
3.  Monument signs; 
4.  Billboards; 
5.  Changeable copy sign; 
6.  Standard informational sign; and 
7.  Temporary sign. 
c.  Removal of wheels, chassis or frame from a portable sign shall not result in a change of its classification. 
d.  Vehicles regularly used in the course of business or that are driven to and from a place of business may contain information identifying the business on the vehicle and may be parked in lots serving the identified business, provided that such vehicle is regularly used for transportation. Vehicles parked in commercial lots or on property located in the city for indefinite periods of time and not regularly used in the course of business that contain identifying information about a business shall be considered portable signs. 
    Roof sign: A sign erected upon and above a roof structure and wholly supported by the roof structure or a structure placed upon the roof. Roof signs shall also constitute any signage placed upon sloped building fascia intended to appear as or actually be roof elements of the building. 
    Shared sign: A sign that serves as common or collective use for a group of persons or businesses operating on the same parcel, such as, but not limited to, a shopping center or business park. Ownership of and responsibility for a shared sign shall remain with the owner of the building or buildings served by the sign. 
    Sign: Any structure, display, or device that is used to advertise, identify, direct, or attract attention to a business, institution, organization, person, idea, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design characteristics, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, movement, or illumination. 
    Sign area (for freestanding signs and billboards): 
a.  The area of a sign structure shall be computed as the area within the smallest rectangle enclosing the limits of the surface of a sign whereon the sign face or sign face modules may be placed, including all portions of a sign structure that provide a background for the sign face and forming an integral part of the sign face. Portions of the sign structure that are not intended to contain any message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature are not included in the computation of sign area. 
b.  Any open space contained within the limits of the rectangle delimiting the sign face or sign face modules shall be included in the computation of the area of such sign face or sign face module. 
c.  For multi-faced signs, when the sign face surfaces are parallel (back-to-back), or where the interior angle formed by the faces is 45 degrees or less, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area on the largest side. For all other multi-faced signs, the area of the sign shall be the total area on all sides that can be viewed at one time from any angle. 
    Sign area (for building signs): 
a.  The area of a sign shall be computed as the area within the smallest rectangle enclosing the limits of a sign face, or the combination of the areas of all such rectangles delimiting each sign face module, together with any frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. 
b.  The computation of the area of a sign face shall not include the structure, supports or uprights on which the sign face is placed or any portions of a sign structure that are not intended to contain any message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature, other than those ports contained within the rectangle that delimits the sign face or a sign face module. 
c.  For any sign on which the words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements routinely change or are intended to be changed from time to time, the sign face area shall include the entire area within which any words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements may be placed, together with any frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. 
    Sign area (for monument signs): The computation of the sign area of a monument sign shall include only the surface area upon which any word, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors or other design elements occur as measured from the top to bottom and side to side (sign face). 
    Sign face: That portion of the surface of a sign structure where words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements are or may be located in order to convey the message, idea, or intent for which the sign has been erected or placed. The sign face may be composed of two or more modules on the same surface that are separated or surrounded by portions of a sign structure not intended to contain any advertising message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature. 
    Sign height: The vertical distance to the highest point of a sign structure. The height is measured from the surface of the nearest adjacent street at a point on the roadway centerline nearest the sign. 
    Sign plaza: A kiosk placed by the city on the right-of-way at intersections of the municipal street system to direct the traveling public to places and events. 
    Special event sign: A temporary sign utilized in conjunction with and for the same time period as a valid special event permit. 
    Spectacular sign or device: Spectacular sign or device includes, but is not limited to, (i) any piece or strip of cloth, paper, canvas, plastic or similar material, including banners, but excluding flags, on which a message, slogan or emblem is painted, drawn or otherwise projected, colored or shaped for the purpose of advertising or drawing public attention; (ii) any advertising display, sign or copy that is animated; (iii) balloons, air and gas filled devices; (iv) streamers; or (v) other similar attention-getting devices. 
    Standard informational sign: A sign with an area not more than 16 square feet, containing no reflective elements, flags or projections, and which, when erected, stands at a height not greater than 48 inches, and with a thickness or diameter not greater than one and one-half inches. 
    Temporary sign: A sign with an area not greater than six square feet made for short-term use, containing no reflective elements, flags or projections, and which, when erected, stands at a height not greater than 30 inches, and is mounted on a stake or metal frame with a thickness or diameter not greater than one-half inch. 
( Ord. No. 15-15, § 1, 10-27-2015 ) 
1204. - APPLICABILITY. 
1204 A. 
The requirements of this article shall apply to all private properties in the City of Griffin. 
1204 B. 
The requirements of this article shall apply to all signs on private property that are visible from a street or public right-of-way. Except for those special event signs and devices authorized by Section 1215 of this article, no sign shall be installed within a building in such a manner that is intentionally visible from a street or public right-of-way. 
1204 C. 
No provision of this article shall be intended to regulate the posting on private property of official signs and notices required by law, such as notices of zoning hearings, condemnations of land, etc. 
( Ord. No. 15-15, § 1, 10-27-2015 ) 
1205. - PROHIBITED SIGNS. 
    The following types of signs are prohibited: 
1.  Signs imitating warning signals; signs displaying lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance, or rescue vehicles; signs using words, slogans, dimensional shape or size, or colors of governmental traffic signs in such a manner as to be confused with official traffic signs. 
2.  Signs with lights flashing in series, lines, or rows, or otherwise animated; other than fixed changeable copy signs permitted by this article. 
3.  Beacons, flashing, blinking, or fluctuating signs; other than fixed changeable copy sign permitted by this article. 
4.  Signs painted on or attached to trees, rocks or other natural objects within the public right-of-way, or affixed to utility poles or utility boxes within the right-of-way; and signs painted or attached to fences at or facing public right-of-way. 
5.  Signs emitting or utilizing in any manner any sound capable of being detected on a public road by a person of normal hearing. 
6.  Signs which obstruct any fire escape, any means of egress or ventilation, or prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof; signs attached in any manner to any fire escape. 
7.  Signs which obstruct the sight of motorists or pedestrians so as to create safety hazards. 
8.  Banners, feather banners, fringe, pennants, twirling, A-frame, easel, sandwich-type, sidewalk or curb-type signs, balloons, tethered balloons, streamers, portable signs (as defined herein), air or gas filled figures, awning/canopy signs, trailer signs, and other similar signs and devices, except as expressly permitted in this article. 
9.  Roof signs. 
10.  Signs displaying any statement, word, character or illustration of an obscene nature, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80. 
11.  Illuminated signs from or to which direct rays of light are projected onto a lot other than on the lot where the illumination occurs. 
12.  Portable changeable copy signs which are designed to display messages that can be changed electronically (LED) or manually. 
13.  Any signage erected on public property other than official signs and notices, as defined herein, and/or posted without official authorization or consent. 
( Ord. No. 15-15, § 1, 10-27-2015 ) 
1206. - PERMITS; PROCEDURES. 
1206 A. 
Unless specifically exempted from obtaining a permit under provisions of this article, no person shall erect, construct, replace, relocate or structurally alter any sign within the city without first obtaining a sign permit from the building official. No permit shall be required to repaint or change the lettering of an existing conforming sign, provided that no change of ownership of the entity displaying the message thereon has been made. 
1206 B. 
Applications for permits shall be made upon forms provided by the city and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
1.  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
2.  Address of building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the sign is to be attached or erected. 
3.  One accurate drawing showing the position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures, including other signs, driveways, parking areas, and any other limiting site features (survey not required). 
4.  One accurate drawing of the plans, specifications and method of construction and attachment of the sign to the building or ground. Such drawings shall include the size of the sign area, overall height of the sign, location of the sign installation and its relation to existing rights-of-way and all driveways, and, if a freestanding or monument sign, any protective devices or landscaping around the base of the sign. 
5.  Name, address and telephone numbers of person erecting the sign. 
6.  Written consent of the owner, manager, leasing agent or lessee of the building or land to which or upon which the sign is to be erected. 
7.  The location and size of all other signs on the parcel upon which the sign is to be erected. 
8.  The size of the parcel on which the sign is to be erected and the length of the street frontage for the street to which the sign is oriented. 
9.  If the sign is to be lighted, an application for electrical permit meeting all standards of the city's electrical code. 
10.  Such other information as the city shall require, showing full compliance with this and other requirements of the city. 
1206 C. 
For signs shared by more than one person or entity, the property owner or sign contractor shall secure a permit for the sign structure and the property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the structure as well as for removal of individual sign panels identifying users which no longer exist within the building or buildings covered by the shared sign. In addition to the permit required for a shared sign structure, a separate permit shall be required for each panel, which shall be obtained by the owner, his tenant, an authorized agent, or the sign contractor. 
1206 D. 
Fees for permits shall be as fixed from time to time by resolution of the board of commissioners. 
1206 E. 
Upon the filing of an application for a permit and the payment of all necessary fees, the building official shall promptly examine all plans and specifications submitted, including electrical wiring and connections, and the premises upon which the sign is proposed to be erected. Such review shall be completed as expediently as possible, which in no case should exceed 30 days of submission of a completed sign application, unless specific circumstances arise requiring additional time to process the application (which shall be made known immediately to the applicant by the best means possible). If such additional time is needed by the building official, the person or entity submitting the application will be notified in writing of the reason for the delay and the anticipated processing date. If it appears from review of the permit application and the site that the proposed sign is in compliance with the requirements of this article and all other codes of the city, the building official shall issue a permit no later than 30 days from receipt of the completed application. 
1206 F. 
The city shall deny permits to applicants who submit applications for signs that do not comply with the provisions of this article, are incomplete, or contain any material false statements. Violation of any provision of this article will be grounds for terminating a permit granted by the city for the erection of a sign. Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this article, the building official shall revoke the permit. Should the building official deny a permit, the reasons for denial shall be stated in writing and mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application on or before 30 business days after the city received the application. Alternatively, the city may personally serve the sign applicant with a copy of the written notice of denial within 30 business days after the city's receipt of the application. Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, instead of the date of the original submission. 
1206 G. 
No properly issued permit shall be revoked except for due cause as hereinafter defined, and after the applicant is given ten business days written notice containing a statement of the reasons for the revocation of a permit. "Due cause" is the violation of any provision of this article or other applicable codes and regulations, state or federal law. 
1206 H. 
An individual whose permit application has been denied or a permittee whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision to the board of commissioners, provided such appellant files a written notice of appeal with the city manager within ten business days of the building official's notice. Such appeal shall be considered by the commission at the next commission meeting held after the city's receipt of the written notice of appeal, provided that such notice of appeal is received a minimum of five business days before the next meeting. Appeal notices received less than five business days prior to a scheduled commission meeting shall be heard at the next available meeting more than five business days following receipt of appeal. The board of commissioners shall issue a written decision to the applicant no later than 30 calendar days following the close of the appeal hearing. Decisions of the board of commissioners to affirm the decision of the building official or to overrule the decision of the building official and grant or continue the permit for which appeal is taken shall be reduced to writing and served upon the applicant in the same manner as the original notice to deny or notice of revocation. Such decision shall constitute a final determination by the City of Griffin. 
1206 I. 
Any person commencing work on a sign before securing the necessary permit(s) from the building official shall be cited to appear before the Municipal Court and, upon conviction, subject to a fine equal to double permit fees under the permit fee schedule, plus court costs. 
( Ord. No. 15-15, § 1, 10-27-2015 ) 
1207. - PERMIT EXPIRATION. 
    A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed and installed within three months after the date of issuance. No refunds will be made of permit fees for permits that expire due to failure to erect a permitted sign; provided that where an applicant can demonstrate that a commercial entity was timely engaged to construct the permitted sign but the fabrication has not yet been completed, one 90-day extension may be granted by the building official on the duration of the permit. Where a permit has expired for failure to erect the sign, if an individual later desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule in effect at the time of resubmission. 
( Ord. No. 15-15, § 1, 10-27-2015 ) 
1208. - DISPLAY OF PERMIT. 
    The owner of the sign shall be responsible for maintaining the permit for every sign constructed, erected or maintained for which a permit is required by this article. Such permit shall be kept on the premises served by the sign and shall be exhibited promptly upon request of city officers and employees. 
( Ord. No. 15-15, § 1, 10-27-2015 ) 
1209. - COMPLIANCE WITH TECHNICAL CODES; ZONING. 
    All signs hereafter erected, replaced, reconstructed, altered, relocated or modified within the city shall conform with all applicable requirements of the statewide minimum construction codes and any permissive building codes adopted by the city. Where the provisions of the Code of Griffin, Georgia, other articles of the Unified Development Code of Griffin, Georgia (including zoning), and this article conflict or overlap, the requirements of this article shall prevail and be controlling. 
( Ord. No. 15-15, § 1, 10-27-2015 ) 
1210. - REGULATION OF SIGNS BY LAND USE: DEVELOPED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. 
1210 A. 
This section governs any developed residential property other than residential property developed for multi-family. 
1210 B. 
Owners of property governed by this section may post only such signs as are authorized by this section and shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Standard informational sign. Such property may contain one standard informational sign, located entirely on private property and no closer than five feet from the back of the right-of-way. Signs shall not project over property lines. 
2.  Temporary signs. Developed residential properties may have an unlimited number of temporary signs, without obtaining a permit or payment of any fees, provided however, the total square footage of all temporary signs shall not exceed 30 square feet. Temporary signs should be removed when they become weathered or the function or event advertised has ended. Temporary signs placed on public right-of-way shall be subject to confiscation. 
1210 C. 
Permanent subdivision signs. In addition to any other signs authorized by this section, if such property is located at the entrance to any residential subdivision, then said subdivision may contain no more than two monument signs per entrance; such signs shall conform to the specifications in Section 1211 D. 
( Ord. No. 15-15, § 1, 10-27-2015 ) 
1211. - REGULATION OF SIGNS BY LAND USE: OTHER DEVELOPED PROPERTY. 
    This section governs properties which are developed for multi-family residential, and other properties which are developed for commercial, office or industrial use, other than properties located within the Downtown Commercial Historic District or on an Emerging Commercial Corridor. All such properties may post only such signs as are authorized by this section. All signs not expressly authorized by this section are prohibited on such properties. Authorized signs shall comply with the following requirements: 
1211 A. - Freestanding signs. 
Such property may contain one or more freestanding signs in accordance with the following: 
1.  No freestanding signs shall be constructed, erected or maintained closer than five feet from back of the right-of-way and shall be installed completely on private property. No free standing sign shall be erected within ten feet of the nearest point of the public right-of-way at the intersection of two or more streets. 
2.  Where signs are erected at the same elevation as electrical power lines, the minimal horizontal distance from such power lines to the sign shall be ten feet. 
3.  Only one freestanding sign per platted lot shall be allowed along the right-of-way, provided that for business premises fronting on more than one street, one freestanding sign shall be allowed along no more than two right-of-way frontages. 
4.  All freestanding signs shall be surrounded by protective concrete curbing if in a paved area or shall be placed in a landscaped area. No freestanding sign shall be permitted to encroach in a parking area to such extent that the remaining parking spaces fail to meet the minimum standards of the zoning article for off-street parking. 
5.  Freestanding signs shall be erected to a height of no more than 24 feet, provided that planned centers (including both shopping centers and business parks) covering ten acres or more may erect one freestanding sign to a height of 30 feet. All sign heights shall be measured from the grade level of the nearest adjacent street from which the sign is visible. The level of the ground shall not be altered in any way so as to provide additional sign height. All freestanding signs shall have an unobstructed visual clearance exclusive of supports of not less than eight feet. 
6.  The maximum sign area of any sign, inclusive of any border and trim but excluding the base, apron, supports and other structural members shall be: 
a.  Freestanding signs, including shared signs, on parcels of ten acres or more in size, 240 square feet in sign area. 
b.  Shared freestanding signs on parcels of three acres or more but less than ten acres, 200 square feet in sign area. 
c.  Shared freestanding signs on parcels less than three acres, 160 square feet in sign area. 
d.  Freestanding signs for single business premises on parcels of three acres or more but less than ten acres in size, 140 square feet in sign area. 
e.  Freestanding signs for single business premises on parcels of less than three acres in size, 80 square feet in sign area, which may be increased to 120 square feet on divided highways. 
7.  Exceptions. Exceptions to the size restrictions for shared signs may be made by the city manager upon petition by the property owner where it is determined that the number of tenants to be served by the sign are such that individual sign panels would measure less than four and one-half square feet each. Exception to the size limits shall be limited to the maximum relief necessary to allow such individual sign panels at a size of four and one-half square feet. 
8.  Drive thru menu boards. In addition to any other freestanding signs authorized by this section, if such property contains a business premises where materials are delivered at a drive thru delivery point other than on the front side of the building, then one additional freestanding sign per delivery point shall be allowed to be located on the property in the side or rear yard; no such sign shall exceed 32 square feet in sign area nor eight feet in height at the highest point. 
1211 B. - Building signs. 
Fifteen percent of the square footage of the business premises façade (including signage on glass windows and doors) may have building signs affixed thereto, provided that any business premises may erect one building sign of at least six square feet. Business premises may use a combination of signs as building signs. No individual building sign or combination of building signs shall exceed 220 square feet per business premises. Projecting signs attached to a building may extend over pedestrian portions of a public right-of-way not more than 18 inches from the surface of the building; provided that such signs shall not extend over paved portions of the roadway. 
1211 C. - Changeable copy signs. 
Changeable copy signs are permitted as an integral part of freestanding and wall signs on properties used for commercial, office-institutional, and industrial purposes, subject to the following: 
1.  The changeable copy portion of the sign shall not exceed 30 percent of the overall area of the sign of which it is an integral part. Total sign area shall be governed by the maximum size limitations of this article. It is not the intent of the city to regulate the content of signs, but only to regulate by reasonable limitations as to size, height, location and placement. 
2.  Manual or mechanically-changeable signs may apply for a variance from the board of commissioners to increase the total sign area by no more than 30 percent, for a total of 130 percent of the maximum size and height limitations established by this article. There is no distance requirement imposed on freestanding or wall signs with manual or mechanically-changeable copy portions. 
3.  No electronic multiple message sign may be placed or located closer than 100 feet from an existing electronic multiple message sign on same side of the street or highway; provided, however, such sign may be located within 100 feet of another electronic multiple message sign when the signs are separated by buildings or other obstructions so that only one sign is visible from the street or highway at any one time. The message displayed on each multiple message sign shall remain fixed for at least ten seconds, with a transition between messages not to exceed two seconds. All electronic multiple message signs shall be equipped with a fully operational light sensor that automatically adjusts the intensity of the sign so that it does not operate at an intensity level of more than 0.3 foot-candles over ambient light as measured at a distance of 150 feet from the sign face. All electronic multiple message signs shall be programmed with a default that will freeze the display in one static position, display a full black screen, or turn off the display, if a malfunction occurs. 
4.  If the building official finds an electronic sign or any display, or any effect thereon, causes excessive glare or impairs the vision of the drivers of any motor vehicles, or otherwise serves to distract or interfere with the safe operation of motor vehicles, then, upon the building official's written notification of his or her finding, the owner of the sign shall promptly and within not more than 48 hours of receipt of such notice produce evidence acceptable to the building official that the sign is operating in accordance with this section and best industry practices for digital signs. 
1211 D. - Monument signs. 
Monument signs may be erected in lieu of freestanding signs at the option of the property owner. Such monument signs shall conform to all setback requirements for freestanding signs. The maximum sign area of any monument sign, inclusive of any border and trim but excluding the base, apron, supports and other structural members shall be: 
1.  Shared monument signs as part of a planned center (including both shopping centers and business parks) on parcels ten acres or more in size, 125 square feet in sign area, 15 feet in height. 
2.  Shared monument signs on parcels three acres or more but less than ten acres, 100 square feet in sign area, 12 feet in height. 
3.  Shared monument signs on parcels less than three acres, 90 square feet in sign area, ten feet in height. 
4.  Monument signs for single business premises on parcels of three acres or more, 80 square feet in sign area, ten feet in height. 
5.  Monument signs for single business premises on parcels of less than three acres in size, 60 square feet in sign area, eight feet in height. 
6.  Monument sign structures shall not exceed one and one-half times the sign area for all monument signs. 
1211 E. - Standard informational signs. 
In addition to any other sign authorized by this section, such property may contain no more than two standard informational signs, without a permit or fee, located so that the sign is located completely on private property and the support is no closer than five feet from the back of right-of-way. 
1211 F. - Permanent development signs. 
In addition to any other signs authorized by this section, at the entrance to any development, such as a shopping center, business park, or mixed use subdivision, that parcel may contain not more than two permanent development signs at each entrance. 
1211 G. - Billboards. 
In lieu of any freestanding signs authorized by this Code, such property may contain one billboard which complies with the following: 
1.  Billboards are allowed on parcels fronting federal or state highways on properties on which industrial or commercial activities are conducted, as defined herein. Such billboards are limited to 504 square feet in sign area with dimensions not exceeding 12 feet in height or 42 feet in width. 
2.  Billboards are allowed on parcels fronting municipal streets other than federal or state highways, on which industrial or commercial activities are conducted, as defined herein. Such billboards are limited to 300 square feet in sign area, with dimensions not exceeding 12 feet in height and 25 feet in width. 
3.  Billboards shall be erected to a height of no more than 50 feet when located adjacent to state and federal highways and no more than 30 feet when located adjacent to other streets. 
4.  All portions of a sign face and support members of any billboard shall be setback from all buildings, structures and property lines at least 75 feet. 
5.  Illumination. All illuminated billboards shall use base mounted fluorescent or mercury vapor lights and shall be activated by photoelectric cells. Additional lighting, including but not limited to, neon, animation and running lights, is prohibited. 
6.  Extrusions prohibited. Extrusions beyond the face of any billboard, excluding aprons, are prohibited. 
7.  Location and number of signs. Only one billboard shall be allowed per platted lot. Billboards shall be no less than 1,000 feet apart on the same side of a street or road, measuring from the two closest existing billboards. Only one sign face shall be allowed to face the same direction per location; back to back or "V" formation signs are allowed, but two sign faces side by side or over and under, facing the same direction are prohibited. 
8.  A digital billboard shall meet all criteria for an electronic multiple message sign under Section 1211 C. 
( Ord. No. 15-15, § 1, 10-27-2015 ) 
1212. - REGULATION OF SIGNS BY LAND USE: VACANT AND UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY OUTSIDE THE DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL HISTORIC DISTRICT. 
    Any property located outside the Downtown Commercial Historic District, which is vacant and not developed with improvements, even if in common ownership with and attached to developed property, may contain only those signs authorized by this section: 
1212 A. - Standard informational signs. 
Such property may contain one standard informational sign, without a permit or fee, located so that the signs are erected entirely on private property and are not closer than five feet from the back of right-of-way. 
1212 B. - Billboards. 
Such property may contain one billboard which complies with the following: 
1.  Billboards are allowed on parcels fronting federal or state highways on properties on which industrial or commercial activities are conducted, as defined herein. Such billboards are limited to 504 square feet in sign area with dimensions not exceeding 12 feet in height or 42 feet in width. 
2.  Billboards are allowed on parcels fronting municipal streets other than federal or state highways, on which industrial or commercial activities are conducted, as defined herein. Such billboards are limited to 300 square feet in sign area, with dimensions not exceeding 12 feet in height and 25 feet in width. 
3.  Billboards shall be erected to a height of no more than 50 feet when located adjacent to state and federal highways and no more than 30 feet when located adjacent to other streets. 
4.  All portions of a sign face and support members of any billboard shall be setback from all buildings, structures and property lines at least 75 feet. 
5.  Illumination. All illuminated billboards shall use base mounted fluorescent or mercury vapor lights and shall be activated by photoelectric cells. Additional lighting, including but not limited to, neon, animation and running lights, is prohibited. 
6.  Extrusions prohibited. Extrusions beyond the face of any billboard, excluding aprons, are prohibited. 
7.  Location and number of signs. Only one billboard shall be allowed per platted lot. Billboards shall be no less than 1,000 feet apart on the same side of a street or road, measuring from the two closest existing billboards. Only one sign face shall be allowed to face the same direction per location; back to back or "V" formation signs are allowed, but two sign faces side by side or over and under, facing the same direction are prohibited. 
8.  A digital billboard shall meet all criteria for an electronic multiple message sign under Section 1211 C. 
( Ord. No. 15-15, § 1, 10-27-2015 ) 
1213. - REGULATION OF SIGNS BY LAND USE: DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL HISTORIC DISTRICT. 
1213 A. 
The Downtown Commercial Historic District is identified as that area designated on the National Register of Historic Places and bounded on the north by Broad Street, on the east by Sixth Street, on the south by Poplar Street, and on the west by Eighth Street. 
1213 B. - Signs authorized. 
Any property located in the Downtown Commercial Historic District may post only such signs as are authorized by this section: 
1.  Historic pole signs. Such property may contain one or more historic pole signs in accordance with the following. 
a.  Number of signs; sign area. One historic pole sign limited to 16 square feet of sign area or one square foot per linear foot of lot frontage, whichever is less, shall be allowed for each street frontage only to the extent that such property includes sufficient land that the freestanding sign can be erected free and clear of the public right-of-way and no closer than ten feet to said right-of-way. Any planned commercial center may have one freestanding sign limited to 100 square feet of sign area for each street frontage. No separate freestanding sign other than that permitted in this subsection will be allowed for an individual business in a planned commercial center. No freestanding sign shall be closer than 250 feet to any other freestanding sign on any property, as measured from the closest point of each side. Provided however, that an unlimited number of freestanding signs with signs faces of 20 square feet or less and six feet in height or shorter are allowed during an election cycle and no permit shall be required for the same. 
b.  Encroachment, required setbacks. Freestanding signs may encroach into front and side yards provided that they are located entirely on private property and are located no closer than ten feet from the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement of a street with no curbing. Signs shall not project over property lines. 
c.  Height restrictions. The height of all freestanding signs at their highest point shall not exceed 22 feet above the grade of the adjacent street. 
2.  Building signs. In addition to any other signs authorized by this section, such property may contain no more than two building signs per building façade for each occupancy, provided that the total area for all building signs on any building façade shall not exceed 25 percent of the total area of the wall on that frontage. Such property may contain not more than one wall sign that includes a reader board of not more than six square feet in area. No wall sign may project more than four inches from the wall adjacent to a public sidewalk. No protruding wall sign shall be placed closer than 12 inches to any other protruding wall sign. 
3.  Standard informational signs. In addition to any other sign authorized by this section, such property may contain one standard informational sign, without a permit or fee, so long as the sign area is less than 16 square feet, and located so that the sign is at least five feet from back of the right-of-way and entirely on private property. 
4.  Canopy signs. In lieu of other building signs authorized by this article, any such property may contain no more than one canopy sign. No canopy sign shall be greater than 16 square feet in sign area. No canopy sign shall hang lower than seven feet or 84 inches from the ground at its lowest point. No canopy sign shall be installed without adequate mounting and assembly approved by the building official. All canopy signs shall be required to meet the standards of ANSI and ADA. 
5.  A-frame or easel signs. Any such property that is not served by a freestanding sign may utilize not more than one A-frame or easel sign per street frontage, each face of which shall have an area of not more than ten square feet. No A-frame or easel sign shall be placed on any public sidewalk so as to leave less than five feet of clearance for pedestrians. No A-frame or easel sign shall remain on any public sidewalk adjacent to any premises at any time when the premises are closed to the public. All A-frame and easel signs shall be adequately weighted or anchored to prevent accidental movement of the sign and obstruction of any public street. 
6.  Historic character signs. The following signs have historically been associated with the downtown area and are in keeping with its character as an historic district: 
i.  Barber poles; 
ii.  Time and temperature displays; 
iii.  Chalkboard; 
iv.  Historic preservation plaques. 
7.  Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited within the Downtown Commercial Historic District, unless specifically permitted as a temporary sign: 
a.  Billboards. 
b.  Drive-thru menu boards. 
c.  Permanent subdivision or development signs. 
d.  Banners, pennants and streamers along or across road rights-of-way, except banners erected by a governmental authority. 
e.  Folding signs, portable display signs or similar moveable signs other than A-frame or easel signs as permitted in subsection 7. above. 
f.  Signs erected on or located on any street or public right-of-way, curbs, curbstone, hydrant, lamp post, trees, barricade, temporary walk, or public utility poles, except signs erected by or at the direction of a governmental authority. 
g.  Signs with revolving or rotating beams of light. 
h.  Rotating signs. 
i.  Signs placed upon a structure in any manner so as to disfigure or conceal any window opening, door or significant architectural feature or detail of any building. 
1213 C. 
Any property located within the Downtown Commercial Historic District, which is vacant and not developed with improvements, even if in common ownership with and attached to developed property, may contain one standard informational sign, without a permit or fee, located so that the signs are erected entirely on private property and are not closer than five feet from the back of right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 15-15, § 1, 10-27-2015 ) 
1214. - REGULATION OF SIGNS BY LAND USE: EMERGING COMMERCIAL CORRIDORS. 
1214 A. 
The City of Griffin contains a number of Emerging Commercial Corridors. Most of the structures along these streets were once occupied as residential properties but are in the process of conversion to office or professional use. Due to the proximity of these nonresidential structures to existing residential areas and the residential character of their original construction, as well as the potential for pockets of blight (as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-61-2) to develop if signage is not strictly controlled, unique regulation of signage is appropriate for protection of remaining residential properties. 
1214 B. 
The Emerging Commercial Corridors are defined as follows: 
1.  Solomon Street, from 18th Street in the west to 1st Street in the east; 
2.  Poplar Street, from 18th Street in the west to 3rd Street in the east; 
3.  College Street, from 12th Street in the west to 5th Street in the east; 
4.  South 8th Street, from Taylor Street in the north to South Hill Street in the south; 
5.  North Hill Street, from Georgia Avenue in the north to East Broadway Street in the south; 
6.  South Hill Street, from Taylor Street in the north to Oak Street in the south. 
1214 C. - Signs authorized. 
Any property located in an Emerging Commercial Corridor may post only such signs as are authorized by this section and shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Ground signs only. Each property may contain one ground sign in accordance with the following: 
a.  Number of signs, sign area. One ground sign limited to 12 square feet of sign area shall be allowed for each street frontage only to the extent that such property includes sufficient land that the freestanding sign can be erected free and clear of the public right-of-way. If a commercial structure is constructed or existing and is 5,000 square feet or larger then, reference Article 1211A or 1211D. 
b.  Encroachment, required setbacks. Ground signs may encroach into front and side yards provided that they are located entirely on private property and are located no closer than five feet from the back of the right-of-way. Signs shall not project over property lines. 
c.  Height restrictions. The height of all ground signs at their highest point shall not exceed six feet above the grade of the adjacent street. 
2.  Building signs. In addition to any other signs authorized by this section, such property may contain no more than one building signs per building façade, limited to no more than six square feet in sign area. No reader boards shall be permitted. No wall sign may project more than four inches from the wall. If a commercial structure is constructed or existing and is 5,000 square feet or larger then, reference Article 1211B. 
3.  Standard informational signs. In addition to any other sign authorized by this Section, such property may contain one standard information sign, without a permit or fee, located so that the sign is located entirely on private property and no sign is closer than five feet to the back of right-of-way. 
4.  Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited within the Emerging Commercial Corridors: 
a.  Billboards. 
b.  Drive-thru menu boards. 
c.  Permanent subdivision signs. 
d.  Banners, pennants and streamers along or across road rights-of-way, except banners erected by governmental authority. 
e.  Folding signs, portable display signs or similar moveable signs. 
f.  Signs erected on or located on any street or public right-of-way, curbs, curbstone, hydrant, lamp post, trees, barricade, temporary walk, or public utility poles, except signs erected by or at the direction of the governmental authority. 
g.  Signs with revolving or rotating beams of light. 
h.  Rotating signs. 
i.  Signs placed upon a structure in any manner so as to disfigure or conceal any window opening, door or significant architectural feature or detail or any building. 
( Ord. No. 15-15, § 1, 10-27-2015 ) 
1215. - SPECIAL EVENT SIGNS. 
    Properties in the Downtown Historic, Emerging Commercial Corridors, or used for commercial and industrial activities may erect window signs and spectacular signs and devices inside the building housing the premises without first obtaining a permit; provided that when such sign or device is erected inside a window visible from outside the building, the display area of the sign shall not exceed 30 percent of the total window surface, and the sign shall not remain in place longer than 30 days. 
    All other special event signage, including portable signs (as defined by this article) and spectacular signs and devices shall be displayed only by permit under the following conditions and requirements: 
1215 A. 
Prior to display of a special event sign, an application for a permit shall be filed with the building official. One permit shall be issued to cover all signs and devices during the period of permit coverage. Handling of permit requests shall conform to section 1206. All signs and devices to be covered by the permit shall be specifically described as to their construction and/or composition and location on the business premises. 
1215 B. 
The maximum size allowed for the total of all window signs to be displayed under the permit shall be 150 square feet. 
    The maximum size allowed for the total of all banners to be displayed under the permit shall be 70 square feet. The maximum size allowed for the total of all spectacular signs and devices shall be 300 square feet. 
1215 C. 
Spectacular signs may be attached to the exterior wall or walls of the building or securely attached to the roof, but shall not be placed on or located so as to obstruct the public right-of-way. Portable signs may be located within parking areas of the business premises (but not upon the right-of-way), provided the minimum number of spaces for all off-street parking are maintained. 
1215 D. 
The maximum number of special event sign permits to be issued to a single premises shall be four per year for a period of time not to exceed 30 days for each permit issued. No more than one special event permit shall be issued per calendar quarter per business premises. 
1215 E. 
Except as modified by this section all special event signs or devices must comply with all other applicable regulations and conditions set forth in this article governing their usage. 
( Ord. No. 15-15, § 1, 10-27-2015 ) 
1216. - ERECTING SIGNS WITHOUT PROPER CONSENT. 
1216 A. 
No person shall place, print, nail, tack or otherwise fasten any sign, card, banner, hand built sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind, or cause the same to be done, on public right-of-way, or on any private property without first obtaining the written consent of the owner of such property or its lawfully designated agent. Any person found to have intentionally violated this section shall be subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1-12 of the Code of Griffin, Georgia. 
1216 B. 
No person shall willfully or intentionally construct, erect, operate, use or maintain any sign within the city in violation of this article. A violation of this section, upon conviction before the Municipal Court, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
( Ord. No. 15-15, § 1, 10-27-2015 ) 
1217. - OTHER EXCEPTIONS TO PERMIT PROVISIONS. 
    The permit requirements of this article shall not apply to the following, provided that the signs or devices erected or placed are located on property of the person who erects such signs or on property whose owner has given written permission for such placement. 
1217 A. 
Flags of a size not exceeding four feet by six feet attached to a pole mounted directly onto a residence, business or commercial structure, not to exceed three per premises, or three flags not exceeding 48 square feet mounted on an independent flagpole installed directly into the ground. 
1217 B. 
Any sign erected or permitted by or at the direction of any government entity on public property that it owns, controls or maintains. 
1217 C. 
Seasonal, religious, political, ideological, or holiday decorations erected on either public or private property. 
1217 D. 
Identification plates for doors not exceeding four inches by 18 inches in size. 
1217 E. 
Building numerals designating property numbering of a building or premises, as required by Code of Griffin, Georgia, Section 22-113; provided, such numerals not to exceed a height of six inches on residential property or a height not exceeding 12 inches on commercial, office or industrial property. 
( Ord. No. 15-15, § 1, 10-27-2015 ) 
1218. - NON-CONFORMING SIGNS. 
    Signs that were approved and legally erected under previous sign restrictions, and that became or have become non-conforming with respect to the requirements of this article, may continue in existence subject to the remaining provisions of this section. 
1218 A. 
No increase in size of the non-conforming sign shall be permitted. 
1218 B. 
Existing signs which were legally erected but which have become non-conforming and which do not meet the setback requirements of this article due to road widening should be moved to meet the setback requirement of this article but shall not be increased in size, shape or changed in any manner except as to become conforming. 
1218 C. 
On all properties, signs shall be removed which: 
1.  Were illegally erected or maintained with respect to this article or other Code provisions;. 
2.  Are made of paper, cloth or non-durable materials (except standard informational signs); or 
3.  Are located in the public right-of-way, except as permitted by this article. 
It shall be the duty of the property owner to remove any signs illegally erected upon or improperly maintained upon its property in violation of this article. Continued maintenance of an illegal or improperly maintained sign shall constitute a nuisance and be subject to abatement in accordance with the provisions of Code of Griffin, Georgia, Chapter 42, Article II. Upon failure to comply with any requirement of an order entered by the Municipal Court, the building official or his authorized agent may cause the removal of such sign at the expense of the owner. 
4.  A non-conforming sign shall not be replaced by another non-conforming sign, except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards or de-mountable material on non-conforming signs shall be permitted. 
5.  Minor repairs and maintenance of non-conforming signs such as electrical repairs or lettering repair shall be allowed. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of the sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this article. However, signs damaged by fire or act of God must be comply with the city's current signage article at the time of rebuilding unless compliance would prevent the sign from being rebuilt, in which case the sign may be restored to its original condition. 
6.  Each non-conforming sign shall be registered within 90 days of the enactment of this article by the sign owner, and if it is determined that such non-conforming sign was legally erected under a prior article, then a sign permit shall be issued to the sign owner without charge and the sign shall be marked with a permit decal. Should the owner of a non-conforming sign fail to register such sign within 90 days from the enactment of this article, such failure to register shall be deemed a violation of this article, and such person shall be subject to citation in Municipal Court. For purposes of this subsection, publication of an announcement of the enactment of this article as a legal advertisement in The Griffin Daily News shall be deemed sufficient notice to property owners of this requirement. 
7.  Existing signs on the property of newly annexed territory that were legally erected under the county article which would become non-conforming under this article upon annexation by the city shall be allowed to remain, provided such sign shall be registered with the city within 90 days of annexation. 
( Ord. No. 15-15, § 1, 10-27-2015 ) 
1219. - INSPECTIONS. 
    The building official shall periodically inspect each permanent and temporary conforming and non-conforming sign in an attempt to ascertain whether the same is secure or insecure, and whether it is in compliance with the requirements of this article or in need of repair. Responsibility for the safety of signs and security of their attachment or erection remains at all times with the sign owner. 
( Ord. No. 15-15, § 1, 10-27-2015 ) 
1220. - SIGNS REQUIRING REMOVAL. 
1220 A. - Traffic hazards. 
Any sign constituting a traffic hazard or a menace to the motoring public or pedestrians, as determined by the building official in consultation with the chief of police, shall be removed as provided in Section 1221. 
1220 B. - General maintenance. 
Every sign, including those signs for which permits are required and those for which no permits or permit fees are required shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good structural condition at all times. The sign owner shall be responsible for repair or replacement of defective parts, painting, repainting, cleaning and other acts required for the maintenance of the sign. If the sign is not made to comply with adequate safety and maintenance standards, the building official shall require its removal in accordance with Section 1221. 
1220 C. - Abandoned signs. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, any sign that is located on property that becomes vacant and unoccupied for a period of six months or longer, or any sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned. Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of a change of ownership or management of such business shall not be deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a period of six months or more. Sign panels from abandoned signs shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which the sign is located within the time frame specified in this subsection. The supporting structure of an abandoned sign shall be subject to the non-conforming use provisions of Section 1218. 
1220 D. - Dangerous or defective signs. 
No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by that person any sign that is in a dangerous or defective condition. Any such sign shall be removed or repaired by the owner of the premises or owner of the sign. Upon failure of the owner to remove or repair a dangerous or defective sign, the building official shall proceed as described in Section 1221. 
1220 E. - Unlawful signs. 
No person shall erect or permit to be erected any sign that does not comply with the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 15-15, § 1, 10-27-2015 ) 
1221. - REMOVAL PROCEDURE. 
1221 A. 
The building official shall cause to be removed any sign that he determines endangers the public safety, such as an abandoned, dangerous, or electrically or structurally defective sign or a sign for which no permit has been issued or which is otherwise in violation of this article. The building official shall prepare a written notice that shall describe the sign and specify the violation involved. The notice shall state that if the sign is not removed or the violation is not corrected within 20 calendar days, the sign shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
1221 B. 
All notices by the building official shall be personally served or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. Any time periods provided in this section shall be deemed to commence on the date of service as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 9-11-4. 
1221 C. 
The notice shall be mailed to the owner of the property on which the sign is located, the owner of the sign, if known, and the occupant of the property, if any. If any such person is unknown or cannot be found, notice shall be mailed to such person's last known address, if any, and posted on the sign or on the premises. 
1221 D. 
Any person having a financial interest in the sign or the property may appeal the determination of the building official ordering removal or compliance by filing a written notice of appeal with the board of commissioners within 20 calendar days after receipt of the notice. Appeals will be handled as provided in Section 1206. 
1221 E. 
If the person to whom notice is directed pursuant to subsection (b) above fails to take corrective action within the time period prescribed, or if on appeal the board of commissioners affirms the decision of the building official and the person fails to take corrective action or remove the offending sign within the time period prescribed, then the building official shall proceed to have the sign removed or corrected to bring such sign into compliance with this article or to remove any unsafe condition. 
1221 F. 
When it is determined by the building official that the sign would cause imminent danger to the public safety and contact cannot be made with the sign owner or building owner, no written notice shall have to be served prior to removal. In such emergency situation, the building official shall document the unsafe condition and may correct the danger, with all costs being charged to the sign owner or the property owner. 
1221 G. 
If it shall be necessary for the building official to remove the sign pursuant to the provisions of this section, and it should be practicable to sell or salvage any material derived in the removal, the building official may sell or salvage any material derived in the removal. He may sell the same at public or private sale at the best price obtainable and keep an account of the proceeds thereof. Such proceeds, if any, shall be used to offset the cost of removal to be charged to the sign owner or property owner. Any proceeds in excess of the cost of removal shall be returned to the sign owner, if known, or if unknown, shall be deposited in the city treasury and maintained for benefit of the owner for a period of three years. At the end of three years, all unclaimed proceeds shall become the property the city. Where the proceeds derived from such sale are less than the costs of removal, such deficiency shall constitute a lien against the property on which the sign is located. Such lien shall be collectable in the same manner as city property taxes. 
1221 H. 
Any sign removed by the building official pursuant to the provisions of this section shall become the property of the city and may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the city. The cost of removal of the sign by the city shall constitute a lien against the property and shall be recoverable in the same manner as city property taxes. The cost of removable shall include any and all incidental expenses incurred by the city in connection with the sign removal. 
( Ord. No. 15-15, § 1, 10-27-2015 ) 
1222. - VARIANCES. 
1222 A. 
Variances from the regulations of this article shall be limited to the following hardship situations: 
1.  Where the proximity of existing signs on adjoining lots causes the subject property to be ineligible, due to spacing requirements, for a sign of the type sought; or 
2.  Where visibility of a conforming sign from the proposed street and within 50 feet of the proposed sign would be substantially impaired by existing trees, plants, natural features, signs, buildings or structures on a different lot; and 
a.  Placement of the sign elsewhere on the lot would not remedy the visual obstruction; 
b.  Such visibility obstruction was not created by the owner of the subject property; and 
c.  The variance proposed would not create a safety hazard to vehicular traffic or pedestrians. 
1222 B. 
Variances shall be limited to the minimum relief necessary to overcome the hardship. No variances shall be granted to allow a greater number of signs than would be allowed if the hardship did not exist. 
1222 C. 
Relief from the application of the provisions of this article by use of variances granted by the board of commissioners shall be granted only upon a finding of hardship as previously defined. Hearing on such variances shall be noticed using this same time frames and notice requirements as for variances from zoning decisions. 
( Ord. No. 15-15, § 1, 10-27-2015 ) 
ARTICLE 13. - THE SUBDIVISION AND SITE DEVELOPMENT PROCESS 

1301. - MANAGEMENT OF LAND DEVELOPMENT PROCESS: OVERVIEW. 
    This chapter is designed to set forth the process that applicants need to follow in order to gain approval of subdivision plans and site development plans and pursue construction of land improvements on a parcel of land in the City of Griffin. 
    The department of development services, department of water/wastewater, department of public works and the department of stormwater share a similar organizational structure and mission. These departments are responsible for various aspects of the site and subdivision review, approval and land permitting process. In general, the department of development services is responsible for application intake; project tracking; plan review coordination; plan review for consistency with the zoning ordinance; plan review for consistency with the non-engineering aspects of these development regulations; plan approval; construction site inspection of land improvements; construction bond and escrow management; and land permit issuance. The department of public works/stormwater is responsible for plan review for consistency with the engineering/technical aspects of stormwater and streets; and field support for bond/escrow actions. The department of water/wastewater is responsible for plan review for consistency with the engineering/technical aspects of water and wastewater; and field support for bond/escrow actions. 
    Various other city and state agencies are also involved in the site and subdivision plan review process. They are the department of solid waste, department of electric, police department, fire department, Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT), and the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service. These agencies are requested, by the department of development services to review plans on an "as-needed" basis, depending on the scope and nature of the individual plan. 
    It is the stated mission of the City of Griffin, through the department of development services, department of water/wastewater, department of public works and the department of stormwater, to foster superior development through the provision of quality plan reviews and expeditious approvals. This is accomplished, in part, through a "one-stop" method of plan intake, review, approval, land permitting, and the project review team concept. 
1302. - GENERAL DEVELOPMENT REVIEW POLICY. 
    It is the policy of the City of Griffin to consider the approval of site plans and subdivision plans and plans as part of a plan for the orderly, efficient and economical growth and development of the city. 
1303. - LOT STANDARDS AND RESTRICTIONS. 
1303 A. - Easements. 
No permanent structures or improvements shall be placed within any officially designated and recorded easement area. 
1303 B. - Substandard lots. 
1.  Lots of record. Any lot of record existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall not be reduced, divided or changed so as to produce a tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this ordinance for the district in which it is located. 
2.  Adjoining lots. When two or more adjoining lots with continuous frontage are in one ownership upon adoption of this ordinance and such lots individually are less than the minimum square footage and/or have less than the minimum width required in the district in which they are located, then such lots shall be considered as a single lot. When such combination of lots would create a single lot having a width of one and one-half times or more than the width and area required by this ordinance, then such lot may be divided into two lots of equal width and be used as conforming lots. 
3.  Lots not meeting minimum lot size requirements. Any lot of record existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance which has an area or a width which is less than required by this ordinance may be used as a building site for a structure or other use permitted in that zone; provided the yards, setbacks, open space and other requirements are met that would be required for a standard lot of required size in that zoning district. These requirements may be adjusted as provided in Section 410.2. 
1303 C. - Every lot shall abut a street. 
No building shall be erected, constructed, moved or relocated on a lot which does not have immediate frontage on at least one public street for a distance of not less than the minimum allowed frontage for said lot as described in the physical requirements standards section of the applicable zoning district. 
1303 D. - Use of two or more lots to satisfy zoning requirements. 
1.  Two or more contiguous lots under the same ownership may be used to satisfy zoning requirements (i.e. lot size, setbacks, yards, lot coverage, parking, etc.) only after either a consolidation or boundary adjustment plat has been approved and recorded eliminating the common, internal lot line(s), provided that this provision shall not operate to conflict with section 2. below. 
2.  For shopping malls, shopping centers, office parks, mixed-use condominiums and industrial parks developed as a single project, but that include lots under separate ownership subsequent to, or in conjunction with the development of the project, the physical requirements and design standards of the City of Griffin such as parking, setbacks, yards, lot coverage, open space, utilities and access that are not met by each lot shall be satisfied by all of the property included in the project, as a whole. In such event, permanent easement(s) or the specific development standard(s) not met by each lot shall be noted on the approved site plan and properly granted and recorded providing for the joint use and maintenance for such items as necessary so that the development standard(s) are met by the project as a whole. 
Following review by the city attorney, the city shall approve the document granting the required easements to determine that easements can be properly granted and cause the project and the individual lot(s) to comply with the development standards. The approved easement document shall be recorded in the records of the Clerk of Superior Court of Spalding County. In addition, the city attorney shall review any future amendments to the easement document to ensure compliance with the City of Griffin Development Standards. 
1304. - PROCESS DETAILS AND CHARACTERISTICS. 
1304 A. - Project review committee. 
The project review committee concept, as stated above, is an integral part of the "one-stop" method of site and subdivision plan review. The committee concept is designed to provide an applicant with clear, consistent, concise and timely plan reviews. In addition, the committee provides a continuity of reviewer via the utilization of a "case manager" to insure that issues are resolved at their proper level and time in the process, and are not revisited once resolved. 
1.  Membership and composition. The case manager shall be the director of the department of development services or their designee. He or she will remain continually involved with the project throughout the entire development process, until all relevant land development permits have been issued. Other committee members shall consist of a representative from: 
a.  The department of public works; 
b.  The department of development services; 
c.  The department of stormwater; 
d.  The department of water/wastewater; 
e.  The department of solid waste; and 
f.  Consultant engineer. 
Other departments and agencies traditionally involved in the review process will function on an "as-needed" basis. 
2.  Committee meetings. The committee meets at designated critical points throughout the site development plan review process. These meetings are kept to a minimum in order to save staff time. 
3.  Responsibilities of the committee members. 
a.  The case manager shall coordinate the overall review and processing of an application, and ensure that department comments do not conflict. 
b.  The department of public works is responsible for the engineering review of the street aspects of the plan. This includes a review for conformity with this ordinance's technical standards, other city and state technical regulations, and other generally accepted engineering and safe design standards. 
c.  The department of stormwater is responsible for the stormwater aspects of the plan. This includes a review for conformity with this ordinance's technical standards, stormwater design ordinance, and other city and state technical regulations, and other generally accepted engineering and safe design standards. 
d.  The department of water/wastewater is responsible for the engineering review of the water and sewer aspects of the plan. This includes a review for conformity with this ordinance's technical standards, other city and state technical regulations, and other generally accepted engineering and safe design standards. 
e.  The department of solid waste is responsible for the engineering review of the solid waste aspects of the plan. This includes a review for conformity with this ordinance's technical standards, other city and state technical regulations, and other generally accepted engineering and safe design standards. 
1304 B. - Required plan types. 
1.  Preliminary site plans. These initial plan types are required for all projects resulting in the creation of three or more lots or any new development involving 1.1 acres or more. Preliminary plans are meant to show the general design of a site development or subdivision project and its public improvements so the city can indicate its approval or disapproval of the project prior to the time the final plans and plats are designed. The city shall review the practicability of the preliminary plan and its general design. Attention shall be given to the arrangement, location, and width of streets and travelways, arrangement, placement, and size of structures, their general relationship to the topography of the land, feasibility of water supply and sewage disposal, general handling of site drainage, lot sizes and arrangement, the future development of adjoining lands as yet undeveloped, the relationship of adjoining developed lands, and the requirements/guidelines of the comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, and this ordinance. Preliminary plans are not meant to either depict, or be reviewed for, final engineering design and details. 
2.  Minor site plans. This plan type may be submitted when the proposed improvements are being requested to a site of less than 1.1 acres on which the city either has not previously approved a final site plan, or on which there is an existing approved plan that has been closed (built). In addition, the proposed improvements must be minor in nature and generally, (1) not change either the internal or external traffic flow patterns; (2) not increase the number of dwelling units; (3) not increase the nonresidential building size by more than 2,500 square feet, or 75 percent of the gross building area, whichever is less; and (4) generally, the proposed disturbed area should not exceed 5,000 square feet. The applicant must provide the department of stormwater an impervious site change form noting the limits of additional impervious area on the site. 
3.  Final site and subdivision plans (construction drawings). These plan types, and any necessary supporting documents, for a proposed project, constitute the complete application for construction approval. They shall include complete and detailed engineering and layout drawings for all the public and private improvements and utilities, in addition to any necessary ancillary calculations, required for review. Upon approval, the final plans and plats form the basis for the construction of the project and the inspection services of the department of development services. The final site plan shall be recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court. An unrecorded plan is not a valid basis for site improvements or other commitments that depend on its design characteristics. 
1304 C. - Development plan review. 
1.  Once a complete application for a development plan has been submitted to the department of development services, and the appropriate fees paid, copies will be transmitted to a number of government agencies for their review and comment. Some of these reviews are necessary to meet city objectives. Other reviews are done to accommodate the applicant and expedite the process of development through coordination with state agencies. 
2.  Review of the aspects of the development plans, beyond the auspices of internal city agencies, are circulated by the department of development services to appropriate agencies such as the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT), Spalding County Planning Department (for plans on lots that abut the city/county boundary line) and the USDA Soil Conservation Service for review. 
3.  The basic review of a site development plan and subdivision plan is an analysis of the physical layout including the dimensions, the topography, the natural features of the site, proper erosion and sediment control provisions, and a determination of the use proposed in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. 
4.  Although the erosion and sedimentation control plan review is performed separately from the site development plan review, the city administers this review jointly with the site development plan review and site inspections. 
5.  All comments made by the review agencies must be satisfactorily addressed before the department of development services approves the plan. All approvals or denials shall be made in writing, stating the specific reasons therefore. The department of development services' approval in no way affects the authority of external agencies to issue their own permits for any aspect of the land development process which are within their respective jurisdiction. 
6.  Generally, the city shall make every effort to review development plans as expeditiously as possible. Once a completed application and required number of site plans are received by the department of development services, they are distributed to the applicable agencies. The first review period is ten working days. Comments are returned to the department of development services and if necessary, they are forwarded to the applicant's engineer, along with a set of "redlined" site plans for revisions. The second and third (if necessary) review periods, following receipt of required revisions, are five business days. These procedures are designed and intended to allow the city to review and approve minor site plans within 15 working days, preliminary residential plans within 30 days, and final subdivision and site plans within 45 days. 
7.  Following approval of the minor plan or final residential site and subdivision plan and/or the approval of an erosion and sedimentation control plan, the applicant may obtain land disturbance permits. 
8.  All applications for revisions to approved preliminary and final plans and plats shall be submitted to department of development services. Before being accepted, the application shall be reviewed for conformance with the appropriate minimum requirements and determination of the appropriate review time frames. The time frames and fee, if applicable, will be determined based on the complexity of the proposed revision. 
1304 D. - Plan validity periods. 
1.  Preliminary site plan validity. 
a.  All preliminary site plan approvals are valid for 12 months from their date of approval. 
b.  During that period, the following steps must be taken to maintain the validity (a) final plans are accepted for review, and are diligently pursued for approval, (b) final plans are approved, or (c) final plans are approved and permit issuance is being diligently pursued as demonstrated by bonding the plans and recording the plans. If a preliminary plan approval expires, no additional action shall be taken on the plan, or its subsequent final plans, without the submission of new preliminary plans and payment of all applicable fees. 
2.  Final site plan validity. All final site and subdivision plans and plans are valid for two years from their date of approval, subject to the following: 
a.  Requirements to be completed immediately following receipt of final approval. The applicant shall complete the items listed below subsequent to the receipt of final approval: 
i.  For site plans, record all related plans with the Spalding County Superior Court Clerk immediately following final approval (within ten days) without posting a performance bond and agreement. 
ii.  For subdivisions, record all related off-site plans immediately following approval (within ten days) without posting a performance bond and agreement. All remaining related plans (on-site plans) shall not be recorded until a performance bond and agreement has been posted. 
b.  Posting of a construction performance bond in accordance with this ordinance, if applicable. This is a prerequisite to the release of plans and deeds for recordation; issuance of site development permits, building permits, occupancy permits, etc. 
c.  Payment of any monetary and/or proffered contributions and/or obligations as established during the plan approval process, and referenced in the plan approval letter. This is a prerequisite to the release of the plans for recordation, or the issuance of site development permits, building permits, and/or occupancy permits. 
d.  Recordation of all plans. The applicant will return following recordation of the plans and deeds, a copy of the recording receipt, a reproducible Mylar copy of the plans, and a copy of the deeds, to the department of development services. This is a prerequisite to the issuance of site development permits, site preparation permits, building permits, and/or occupancy permits. 
e.  Completion of any other special items, agreements and/or post any other escrows enumerated in the plan approval letter. This is a prerequisite to the issuance of site development permits, building permits, and/or occupancy permits. 
f.  Provide department of development services with evidence of possession of all required permits. 
g.  Obtain a land disturbance permit. This is a prerequisite to the issuance of building permits. 
h.  Following the completion of the above-enumerated items, the department of development services shall issue, upon request, a building permit. 
i.  Schedule and hold a pre-construction conference with the departments of public works, stormwater and water/wastewater prior to initial commencement of land disturbance activities. 
j.  Failure to complete all the items enumerated in this section during the final plan validity period shall cause the approval to expire and void the final plans. If the final approval is voided, further consideration of the final plan will require a new plan submission, and payment of applicable fees. 
1304 E. - General plan and plan submission requirements. 
1.  Fees. The application and review fees for all plans are established by resolution of the board of commissioners. As such, the director of development services can waive no fees. The applicable fees shall accompany all application submissions. Development applications are not deemed complete until all applicable fees have been paid. 
2.  Number of plans to be submitted. Minor, preliminary and final site plan review. The design professional shall initially submit one complete set of plans. Following completion of a preliminary review, the department of development services will notify the applicant with the number of additional plan sets to be submitted. This number will be based on the number of established and required review agencies. Following the notification, the additional plan sets should be submitted to the department of development services within five business days. 
1304 F. - Minor site plan submission requirements. 
The following items shall be included with all minor site plans in order to have them accepted for review: 
1.  Administrative items. 
a.  A City of Griffin Department of Development Services Development Application Form completed in its entirety. If the property owner does not sign the form, a limited power of attorney form must accompany the application form. 
2.  Plan details. 
a.  The sheet size shall not exceed 36" × 48". Plans consisting of more than two sheets shall be indexed and match lines, if required, shall follow property lines. 
b.  A scale of no less than 1" = 200'; this shall be displayed on all plan sheets. 
c.  Topographic contours with intervals no greater than five feet, referred to USGS datum. 
d.  Date of plan, north arrow, match lines, and sheet numbers. 
e.  A vicinity map, preferably at a scale of 1" = 2,000', but no smaller than 1" = 3,000'. 
f.  The present zoning of the project parcel(s), and all adjacent parcels, within 50 feet of project site, along with their present use. 
g.  The project site's current tax map, block and lot number(s). 
h.  Total project site acreage. 
i.  The proposed generalized pattern of lots and/or buildings (including the number and size), street and/or travelway layout, off-street parking layout, recreation areas, open space, and improvements to existing streets and rights-of-way, buffer, estimated traffic counts (vehicles per day) and storm water management facilities. 
j.  Setbacks, open space calculations, buffer dimensions and other zoning requirements related to site design 
k.  All existing restrictions on the use of the land including easements and covenants. 
l.  Existing drainage facilities; including major culverts, ponds, and streams. 
m.  Location of any existing buildings on the site, and within 50 feet of the property lines. 
3.  Other minor site plans. All applications for approval of minor subdivisions [i.e., one lot into two lots], consolidation and boundary line adjustment plans shall be submitted to the department of development services. Before being accepted, the application shall be reviewed for conformance with the appropriate minimum requirements, fee verification, and determination of the appropriate review time frames. 
a.  If submission is found to be complete, it shall be stamped with the date and time of acceptance and the plan shall be reviewed and approved by the director of development services. 
b.  Review time frames will be tailored to the nature of the specific application. 
1304 G. - Preliminary site and subdivision plans minimum submission requirements. 
The following items shall be included with all preliminary residential plan site and subdivision plan application submissions in order to have them accepted for review: 
1.  Administrative items. 
a.  A City of Griffin Department of Development Services Development Application Form completed in its entirety. If the property owner does not sign the form, a limited power of attorney form must accompany the application form. 
2.  Plan details. 
a.  The sheet size shall not exceed 36" × 48". Plans consisting of more than two sheets shall be indexed and indicate match lines for lots of five acres or less in size. The match lines shall follow property lines. 
b.  A scale of no less than 1" = 100'; this shall be displayed on all plan sheets. 
c.  Topographic contours with intervals no greater than five feet, referred to USGS datum, extending 50 feet beyond the parcel's property lines, or additional distance as may be necessary in order to show major features or conditions that may affect the project. 
d.  Date of plan, north arrow, and sheet numbers. 
e.  A vicinity map preferably at a scale of 1" = 2,000', but no smaller than 1" = 3,000'. 
f.  The present zoning of the project parcel(s), and present zoning of all property within 50 feet of project site and use of all adjacent parcels. 
g.  The project site's tax map, block & lot number(s). 
h.  Total project site acreage. 
i.  Street rights-of-way; including name, number, and widths. 
j.  All existing easements; including type, width and use restrictions, if any. All zoning or prior plat conditions and/or variance approvals and conditions. 
k.  Existing storm drainage structures on the project parcel(s), and within 50 feet of the property lines, or additional distance as may be necessary in order to show major features or conditions that may affect the project; including type of pipe, sizes, and direction of flow. 
l.  Storm water management facilities on the project parcel(s), and within 50 feet of the property lines, or additional distance as may be necessary in order to show major features or conditions that may affect the project. 
m.  Stormwater management plan, stormwater design manual and schedule. 
n.  Streams, ponds, marshes, approximate boundaries of wetland areas, including names, if applicable, on the project parcel(s), and within 50 feet of the property lines, or additional distance as may be necessary in order to show major drainage features or conditions that may affect the project downstream of the site within the drainage basin. 
o.  The approximate 100-year flood area boundary and the source of the information. 
p.  Municipal or other publicly owned land within 50 feet of the property lines, or additional distance as may be necessary in order to show major features or conditions that may affect the project, including the distance to the nearest school or school site. 
q.  Existing utility lines and structures, such as water, sewer, gas, electric, telephone, wells, and drainfields (if any) on the project parcel(s), including size or capacity, and within 50 feet of the property lines, or additional distance as may be necessary in order to show major features or conditions that may affect the project. 
r.  Density tabulation provided by section and overall total number of proposed lots and/or dwelling units, and lot/unit numbers. 
s.  Streets, roads, travelways, improvements to existing streets and other rights-of-way, including widths, street classification, and preliminary anticipated traffic counts (vehicles per day). 
t.  Existing and proposed pedestrian systems and bike trails. 
u.  Proposed lot layout, if applicable. 
v.  Off-street parking layout, if applicable; including typical size, number of spaces by location, and a tabulation. 
w.  Proposed buildings, including use, height, and for site plans only, distance to property lines, building restriction (setback) lines and buffer dimensions (if applicable), and any existing buildings or structures on the property and within 50 feet of the property line, or additional distance as may be necessary in order to show major features or conditions that may affect the project. 
x.  Schematic storm drainage system and water and sewer systems. 
y.  Parcels to be dedicated to public use, including size and purpose. 
z.  The seal and signature of the design professional that prepared the plan shall be on each plan sheet. 
1304 H. - Final site and subdivision plans minimum submission requirements. 
The following items shall be included with all final site and subdivision plan application submissions in order to have them accepted for review: 
1.  Administrative items. 
a.  A City of Griffin Department of Development Services Development Application Form completed in its entirety. If the property owner does not sign the form, a limited power of attorney form must accompany the application form. 
b.  Traffic impact analysis, if applicable. 
2.  Plan details. 
a.  The sheet size shall not exceed 24" × 36". Plans consisting of more than two sheets shall be indexed and indicate match lines for lots of five acres (2.02 hectares) or less in size. The match lines shall follow property lines. 
b.  A scale of no less than 1" = 50' for subdivisions, and 1" = 30' for all other site plans; the scale shall be displayed on all plan sheets. 
c.  Topographic contours with intervals no greater than two feet, referred to USGS datum, extending 50 feet beyond the parcel's property lines, or additional distance as may be necessary in order to show major features or conditions that may affect the project. 
d.  Date of plan, north arrow with designation, and sheet numbers annotated in consonance with any required subdivision plans, or meridian of record, if subdivision plans are not required. 
e.  A vicinity map preferably at a scale of 1" = 2,000', but no smaller than 1" = 3,000'. 
f.  The seal and signature of the design professional that prepared the plan shall be on each plan sheet. 
g.  The present zoning of the project parcel(s), and all adjacent parcels, within 50 feet of project site, along with their present use. 
h.  The project site's tax map, block and lot number(s). 
i.  Total project site acreage. 
j.  Street rights-of-way; including name, number, and widths. 
k.  Revisions to an approved plan shall have a completed revision block on each sheet identifying the revisions. All revisions shall be circled in red on the initial submission. The project and plan number(s) for any previously approved plan shall also be referenced on the revision. 
l.  Street rights-of-way; including names, route numbers, and widths. 
m.  Boundary survey, including area tabulation, meeting minimum standards of Georgia Law. 
n.  All existing and proposed easements; including type, width, deed book and page reference, and use restrictions, if any. If any proposed improvements are located within the easements of these utilities, documentation shall be provided from the appropriate companies acknowledging permission to make the improvements, prior to final plan approval. For ingress/egress easements, a note shall be provided certifying that the applicant has been granted the right to use, and make improvements, within the easements. 
o.  Streams, ponds, marshes, wetland areas on the project parcel(s), and within 100 feet of the property lines, including names, if applicable. 
p.  The 100-year flood area boundary and the source of the information. 
q.  Permanent open spaces (tabulated in acreage), including buffers, parks, and recreation areas, identifying proposed ownership and type of use. 
r.  Municipal or other publicly-owned land within 50 feet of the property lines, or additional distance as may be necessary in order to show major features or conditions that may affect the project, including the distance to the nearest school or school site. 
s.  Utility lines and structures, such as water, sewer, gas, electric, telephone, wells, and drainfields on the project parcel(s), including size and/or capacity, and within 50 feet of the property lines, or additional distance as may be necessary in order to show major features or conditions that may affect the project. 
t.  Buildings and other structures on the project parcel(s) and within 50 feet of the property lines, or additional distance as may be necessary in order to show major features or conditions that may affect the project. 
u.  Traffic counts (vehicles per day). 
v.  Percent of grade noted at all driveway entrances. 
w.  A subdivision, easement, and/or dedication plan(s), if applicable. 
x.  Floodplain study, if applicable. 
y.  Lot layout; including lot numbers, area of each lot, and street dedication area. All resultant areas of recorded parcels, less than ten acres in size, shall be shown on the plans, and indicated in the area tabulation. 
z.  Density tabulation (provide by section and overall), total number of proposed lots and/or dwelling units. 
aa.  Streets, roads, travelways, and other rights-of-way, including deed book and page number, street classification, widths, rates of roadway super-elevation, when applicable, vertical curves with the sight distance noted, vertical and horizontal sight distances verified at all intersections, and improvements within the right-of-way. Guardrail and paved ditches shall be shown as required. Handicapped access curb ramps shall be provided at all street intersections. 
bb.  Off-street parking (including handicap) and loading layout, if applicable, including typical size, number of spaces by location, and tabulation by use type. 
cc.  Existing and proposed buildings and structures; including use, height, square footage, distance to property lines and between buildings, and any applicable building restriction lines (site plans only). 
dd.  Utility lines and structures, including sewer, water, gas, with sizes, types of pipe, plan and profile views, location of fire hydrants, control valves, pump stations, and anticipated flows and calculations (three copies of fire flow calculations submitted separately). 
ee.  Utility easements, including gas, electric, telephone and cable television, with the width and type indicated. 
ff.  Storm drainage system, including all required computations on the project parcel and within 50 feet of the property line, or additional distance as may be necessary in order to show major features or conditions that may affect the project, with sizes, type of pipe, gradients, invert elevations, direction of flow, drainage divides and areas for each structure. 
gg.  Storm water management facilities; including ten, 25, and 100 year water surface elevations and all required computations, access and maintenance easements. 
hh.  Final grading plan. 
ii.  Limits of clearing and grading; clearly labeled. 
jj.  Erosion and sediment control devices, their design and locations. 
kk.  Location of street name signs, traffic control signs, streetlights, stub-outs, and their easements, if applicable. 
ll.  Buffer areas, screening and landscaping including number, species and size. 
mm.  Tree save areas, if applicable. 
nn.  The seal and signature of the licensed professional engineer that prepared the plan shall be on each plan sheet. 
1304 I. - Subdivision and easement plat minimum submission requirements. 
The following items shall be included with all required plans, including those for simple subdivisions, resubdivisions, consolidations, right-of-way dedications, easements, abandonments, vacations, and revisions to approved plans, in order to be accepted for review: 
1.  Administrative items. 
a.  A City of Griffin Department of Development Services Development Application Form completed in its entirety. If the property owner does not sign the form, a limited power of attorney form must accompany the application form. 
2.  Plan details. 
a.  The sheet size shall not exceed 17" × 22," nor be smaller than 81/2" × 11". All copies shall be reproduced on black or blue line paper. Plans consisting of two or more sheets shall be indexed and indicate match lines. For lots of five acres in size or less, any necessary match lines shall follow property lines. 
b.  A graphic scale of not less than 1" = 100', which shall be displayed on all plan sheets. Also, all plans shall use only one uniform scale. 
c.  Each sheet shall contain a title block which shall include: subdivision name, or owner's name, in accordance with the instruments of record; name and address of the engineering or surveying firm that prepared the plans; date of preparation, description of the plan's purpose, and the City of Griffin project and plan numbers and names (if applicable). 
d.  All plans shall contain a north arrow annotated with, and be referenced to: 
i.  True north for subdivisions or resubdivisions; or 
ii.  North of record may be used for minor resubdivisions, consolidations, off-site easements and off-site right-of-way dedications. 
e.  A vicinity map, preferably at a scale of 1' = 2,000'. 
f.  Seal and signature of the land surveyor or professional engineer that prepared the plan shall be on each plan sheet. 
g.  A surveyor's certificate containing the following elements: 
i.  The name of the current owner and the recordation reference of the most recent instrument in the chain of title; 
ii.  For subdivisions and consolidations, the recordation reference of any previous plan of subdivision or resubdivision, whichever is the case. 
iii.  A statement that the boundary of this subdivision, or resubdivision, is based on a current field survey (in this case it is expected and understood that the seal and signature of the land surveyor evidences that the boundary shown complies with the minimum field practices for such surveys, as set forth in the Rules and Regulations of the State Board of Architects, Professional Engineers, Land Surveyors, and Landscape Architects), or that the boundary shown is the result of compilation from deeds and/or plans of record. 
h.  Area tabulation indicating (where applicable) the total site area, number of new lots and/or parcels, number of recorded lots and/or parcels, new right-of-way dedications, and vacated rights-of-way. 
i.  Subdivision, parcel, and lot boundaries with bearings and distances and/or complete curve data. Internal lots shall be geometrically related to the boundary of the subdivision, or section thereof. Curve data shall be shown on the same sheet as the curve it describes. 
j.  All existing structures shown on the plan. 
k.  Street addresses (assigned during the review process as necessary). 
l.  Proposed and existing easements annotated with the following: type, purpose and width; bearings and distances and/or curve data for centerlines, or limits, with ties to property lines and corners (new easements only); deed book and page references for existing easements. 
m.  Proposed and existing streets within and/or adjacent to the subdivision, and provided with the following: name, route number, centerlines, bearings and distances and curve data for the rights-of-way. 
n.  Vacated streets and parcels with the area vacated and those areas reverting to appropriate abutting parcel(s). 
1305. - REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES GOVERNING THE CONVEYANCE OF REAL PROPERTY AND EASEMENTS TO THE CITY OF GRIFFIN. 
    Whenever an applicant proposes, or is legally required, to convey interests in real property to the city, conveyance of such interests shall be made by appropriate deed to the City of Griffin. The city may then further convey the interest, as it shall deem proper. The city attorney or his designee, which approval shall be evidenced by appropriate notation and signature on the face of the instrument, shall approve all deeds prior to recording. 
1305 A. 
In order to insure that the property rights dedicated to the city may be used for the purpose intended, all conveyances of fee simple title shall be free of conditions, restrictions, and encumbrances affecting marketability of title. 
1305 B. 
Conveyance of real property may be made subject to easements, rights-of-way, and other restrictions which properly appear in the lawful chain of title to the property but only if a title opinion has been provided to, and approved by, the city attorney. Such report shall be prepared at the applicant's expense by an attorney approved by the city attorney. Such title report shall identify the nature and extent of such easements, rights-of-way, and other conveyances of title subject to any conditions, restrictions, and encumbrances that the city attorney determines does not adversely affect the use for which the interest in land is to be dedicated. 
1305 C. 
All deeds and title opinions required hereby shall be submitted to the department of development services for review no later than when the final plans are submitted for approval. They shall be forwarded to the city attorney who shall note his approval or disapproval, specifically noting his reasons for disapproval, if any. 
1305 D. 
Upon approval of deeds and title opinions by the city attorney, the deed shall be presented to the board of commissioners at a duty-convened meeting for acceptance of dedication. The signature of the chairman on the face of the deed shall be prima facie evidence of formal acceptance by the City of Griffin of all interests conveyed. 
1305 E. 
The applicant shall be responsible for assuring all deeds and plans are properly recorded in the land records of Spalding County and shall submit a copy of the recorded document, with the appropriate deed book and page numbers, for the project records. 
1306. - SUBDIVISION NAMES AND SITE PLAN NAMES. 
1306 A. 
Names of subdivisions and site plans shall not duplicate or closely approximate names already in use or approved by the department of development services. All site plan and subdivision names are subject to approval by the department of development services. 
1306 B. 
Lot or unit numbers within a subdivision section shall be consecutive whole numbers starting with the number one. There shall be no prefix or suffix attached to the number, except in the case of resubdivision of lots. 
1306 C. 
Site plans submitted for property that is a recorded or proposed subdivision under review shall use the same name as the subdivision for identification. 
1306 D. 
Site plan and subdivision names shall not be changed subsequent to approval of the name during review. 
1307. - VIOLATIONS AND STOP WORK NOTICES AND PROCEDURES. 
1307 A. 
Construction activity on any site shall be conducted in strict accordance with the limits of clearing and grading as shown on final plans approved by the director of development services. Construction activity shall also be conducted only on those items for which a permit has been obtained. Failure to obtain required permits, or develop the site in accordance with approved plans, will necessitate the city taking any and all necessary actions required to correct the situation. Such actions may include, but shall not be limited to the following: 
1.  Posting of a stop work (construction) notice. Such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the site in violation by a representative of the agency responsible for the inspection of the improvements being made, and also forwarded, by certified mail, to the developer. 
2.  Issuing a written notice to the owner or responsible agent, from the agency responsible for the inspection of the improvements, outlining the nature of the violation and requiring on-site activity to cease and desist immediately. A copy of the notice shall be sent to all other agencies responsible for inspections on that site. 
a.  This notice will instruct all other agencies to revoke all permits which may have been issued, cease making any further inspections on that site and cease processing any plans for that site, if the directors of development services, public works, stormwater or water/wastewater deems the violation to be of such a serious nature. 
b.  If cooperation is not received from the owner or responsible agent and work is not stopped immediately upon notice, a court injunction to stop work (construction) will be sought. 
3.  [Criminal process.] The directors of development services, public works, stormwater or water/wastewater may, if necessary or appropriate, seek criminal process against any person who violates any provisions of this ordinance. The issuance of a violation notice and correction order shall not be deemed a precondition to the issuance of a warrant or summons for such violation. In addition, the director of public works may seek immediate civil relief, regardless of what other action has been or will be taken. 
1308. - SITE PROTECTION. 
1308 A. 
The following kinds of construction sites shall be deemed readily accessible to the public and shall require special safety measures: 
1.  Sites within 500 feet of residential properties. 
2.  Sites within 500 feet of public use areas such as schools, parks, churches, commercial areas. 
3.  Any other sites which in the determination of the director of development services are readily accessible to the public due to prolonged time of construction, close proximity to public or private streets, or any other characteristics or conditions making the site particularly attractive to children. 
1308 B. 
The following safety measures shall apply to insure protection to the general public whenever construction areas are readily accessible: 
1.  Danger signs on construction, excavation, demolition projects shall be posted in a conspicuous manner. 
2.  Excavations shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of the Southern Building Code Congress International (SBCCI) and the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA). 
1309. - PERFORMANCE BONDING POLICY. 
1309 A. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this section to assure that infrastructure associated with development projects that is to be publicly dedicated is actually constructed to minimum design standards, acceptable to the city, and, once officially accepted, protected by an enforceable maintenance agreement for a period of two years. 
1309 B. - Performance agreements and guarantees. 
1.  A performance agreement, supported by an acceptable form of guarantee, shall be required on all projects that require public infrastructure including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, water, sewer, drainage facilities and improvements, parks and open space, and any other improvements that become the property of the City of Griffin for future maintenance purposes. This agreement and guarantee shall obligate the applicant to construct all required improvements, in accordance with approved plans, in a timely manner. Public agencies seeking site development plan approval may supply a letter of intent to comply with this requirement, provided that a performance agreement is secured from the contractor performing the construction, guaranteeing the construction will be completed in accordance with the approved site development plans and requirements. 
2.  A separate soil erosion and sedimentation control bond may be required on projects subject to the city's soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance as a condition for issuance of any land disturbing activity permits to assure the timely installation and maintenance of required erosion control measures during the construction period. Requirements for such bond may be found in the city's soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance. 
3.  The department of public works may also require, if applicable, an acceptable form of guarantee, to assure the timely construction and completion of required site improvements such as amenities, in accordance with approved plans including, but not limited to, recreational facilities, storm water facilities, parking, driveways, landscaping, and other improvements not intended for public dedication but which serve a common benefit to users and occupants of the development. 
4.  The term of the agreement shall correspond to the estimated length of the project construction period, as agreed upon between the applicant and the director of development services. Thereafter extensions may be permitted if requested in advance of the current expiration date. All agreements and any extension thereof shall be in writing. 
5.  The aggregate amount of all forms of guarantee posted on a project shall not exceed the total of the estimated cost of construction, as agreed upon between the applicant and the director of development services. In the event of a dispute, the amount reasonably determined by the director of development services shall be conclusive. 
1309 C. - Extensions and rebonding of agreements. 
1.  When a developer enters into an agreement with the City of Griffin, it is understood that all the necessary physical improvements must be completed in the specified period of time. If all the noted improvements are not completed within this time period, and no extension has been obtained, or a replacement agreement and bond have not been submitted and approved with a new expiration date, the agreement shall be deemed in default. 
2.  Approximately 60 days prior to the expiration of the agreement, the city shall notify the developer in writing of the expiration date. The notification shall advise the developer that he will be in default unless the work is completed in accordance with the agreement and approved plans, or an extension of time is obtained in accordance with the requirements of this policy. 
3.  The developer shall make a written request to the director of development services for an extension of the performance agreement's expiration date. 
a.  The first request may be for a period not to exceed one year. In order to receive the maximum extension, the developer must demonstrate that the extension would be in the best interest of the city. 
b.  If subsequent extensions are required, they will be for maximum periods of six months each. All requests shall be made at least 14 calendar days prior to the expiration date. 
c.  The developer must indicate the reasons and conditions that have precluded him from completing the required physical improvements. The developer must also present written consent to the request from all sureties involved, including corporate surety companies. In addition, the request shall contain a detailed cost estimate of the work remaining, together with a projected timetable for completion. 
d.  An additional fee to cover any necessary inspection and administrative costs shall be paid in accordance with the fee schedule for such inspections. 
4.  The director of development services, upon receipt of the extension request, will review the project particulars and may either deny or condition the extension granted. The factors to be considered by the director shall include the following: 
a.  Percentage of the project that has been completed. This shall be viewed as the percentage of the bonded improvements completed. Generally, this should be at least 50 percent for the first extension request and 85 percent for the second request. 
b.  Number of homes/units completed, occupied, and served by public facilities, if applicable. Generally, this should be at least ten percent of the project for each year (or prorated portion thereof) the project has been under construction. 
c.  Developer's performance history on prior projects in the City of Griffin. This shall be based on the developer's previous number of defaults. 
d.  The collective number, type, and validity of complaints lodged against the developer. 
e.  Whether the project provides access and/or infrastructure necessary for other projects that are either under construction or approved and no site development permits have been issued. 
5.  In the event the developer does not respond to the letter sent by the city cautioning him of impending default, and the project is not completed by the expiration date, the matter shall be reviewed by the director of development services for appropriate action including referral to the city attorney for action. 
1309 D. - Performance bond reductions. 
1.  Any form of guarantee may be partially released periodically (i.e., reduced) to an amount not less than either 25 percent of the project's highest bond value or not less than the actual cost of completion, whichever is higher, plus permitted allowances in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
2.  All reduction requests shall be submitted in writing to the director of development services. No request shall be deemed officially received unless submitted in accordance with the following requirements: 
a.  If an extension of the performance agreement is sought, every requirement for an extension request must be met, including, but not limited to, submission of written consent by the surety to any such request; 
b.  The request shall identify the project, performance agreement, bond, and completion date and must specify the amount of reduction sought. It shall also contain a detailed cost estimate, certified by the project design professional, of the remaining work and a projected timetable for completion. 
c.  A fee, covering any necessary inspection and administrative costs, shall be paid in accordance with the fee schedule. 
3.  Periodic partial bond reductions shall not occur before at least 30 percent of the bonded improvements have been satisfactory completed. 
4.  The city shall not be required to execute more than three reductions in any 12-month period, except as authorized by the director of development services. 
5.  No reduction shall be approved if the performance agreement is in default. However, reduction requests may be considered concurrently with extension requests. 
a.  In such instances as the director of development services deems appropriate, the developer shall furnish a certificate of completion, from a state licensed professional engineer, stating the work described has been performed in strict conformity with either the approved final plans, or as-built plans submitted therewith, and that the work meets all applicable standards. 
b.  The director of development services or his designee shall act upon any reduction request within 30 days of its official receipt. If the request is disapproved, the developer shall be notified in writing of the specific reasons for disapproval. If no action is taken within the time specified, the request shall be deemed approved and a partial release granted. 
1309 E. - Performance bond and agreement final release procedure. 
1.  All final performance bond release requests shall be authorized within 30 days of their official receipt, in writing, by the director of development services, provided the following criteria have been met: 
a.  Acceptance of all public facilities by the state agency, local government department or agency, or other public authority that is responsible for maintaining or operating such facility, and the completion and approval of any other bonded site related improvements. 
b.  Acceptance of as-built plans by the departments of development services, public works, stormwater and water/wastewater. 
c.  Payment by the developer of all required fees, proffers and contributions. 
d.  Posting of a two-year maintenance bond in an amount equal to 25 percent of the initial bond amount posted for water, sewer and streets. 
2.  If a final bond release is not authorized within the 30-day period, the developer may send an additional request, by certified mail, to the director of development services. Within ten business days of the receipt of the request, the director of development services shall either release the bond, or notify the developer of the specific agency approval not received. If no action is taken, the request shall be deemed approved and final release granted. 
1309 F. - Default and evaluation procedures. 
1.  If the developer fails to complete the required site improvements in the period of time specified in the agreement, or any approved extension, the developer is deemed in default. 
2.  The department of development services shall forward a report on the project to the city manager, with the director of development service's recommendation to formally declare the project to be in default. Such recommendation shall also enumerate a recommended course of action in response to default. Such recommendation may include the following, in any combination: 
a.  That the city attorney be authorized to institute such actions as deemed appropriate to enforce the provisions of this policy, the performance agreement and bond, and applicable code provisions. 
b.  That demand be made of the surety on the developer's bond for payment of the funds secured thereby, for application to completion of the project, or for performance of its principal's obligations. 
c.  That the city contract for completion of unfinished infrastructure. 
d.  That all or any portion of the project be vacated. 
e.  That any successor in interest to the defaulted developer be required to post an adequate replacement performance agreement. 
f.  That no additional building permits be issued for the project subject to the bond until an adequate right of entry permit bond is posted with the city. Such a bond shall bind and hold the applicant responsible for any and all damages to any public improvements already in place caused by work covered by the resulting right of entry permit and building permit. 
3.  The developer and surety will be mailed copies of the department of development service's report and recommendation. They also will be advised of their opportunity to be heard on the matter at the scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners. Either the developer or the surety, or both, may offer proposals for completion as alternatives to that of the recommendation of the director of development services. Any such proposal must be submitted in written form and signed by someone with the appropriate authority to issue a binding proposal. 
4.  All defaulted projects shall be scheduled for completion in chronological order of their declaration of default. Exceptions to a policy of first in, first out shall be made when the funds associated with a bond or letter of credit are collected by the city and cover the cost to complete the bondable items, and the project is eligible for acceptance. In such cases, the project shall be inserted into the existing project completion schedule as the next project to be handled by the city and/or its contractor. 
1310. - AS-BUILT PLANS. 
1310 A. 
As-built plans shall be required on all completed development projects accept those only requiring minor site plans. The acceptance of as-built plans shall be a prerequisite to final construction acceptance, bond release, and the issuance of a final certificate of use and occupancy. Copies of the as-built plans prepared and certified by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer shall be submitted to the departments of development services, public works and water/wastewater at the time final inspections are conducted. Final inspections will not be made unless the as-built plans are available. 
The following information shall be included on the plans: 
1.  Horizontal locations of all sanitary sewers, storm sewers and waterlines, which include: 
a.  Two ties to all water valves or blow offs. In cases where a group of valves may be located at an intersection, two ties may be provided to one valve and the remaining valves tied to each other; 
b.  One tie to all sanitary sewer manholes and storm sewer structure; 
c.  Two ties to all sanitary sewer cleanouts on laterals which are located within a street right-of-way, and two ties to the first clean out on a lateral connected to a main within a street right-of-way; 
d.  Location of all water meters, detector checks, fire-flow meters, fire hydrants, air release valves, grease traps and any other water or sewer system appurtenances. The size of all meters larger than three-fourths inch is to be noted. All ties shall be affixed to easily locate permanent objects (i.e., building corners). 
2.  Invert elevations on storm sewers and sanitary sewers. 
3.  Length, size, and type of material used for all storm sewer and storm water management systems. 
4.  Top of structure elevations on all sanitary manholes and storm sewer structures. 
5.  As-built topography on storm water detention basins and verification of storage volumes. 
6.  Detailed as-built information for special design drainage and storm water management structures. 
7.  Spot elevations showing inverts of improved channels and swales located in dedicated drainage easements. 
8.  All dedicated easements. The cover sheet shall show, the deed book and page number(s), in which the water and sewer easements and/or subdivision plans are recorded, must be shown. 
9.  A graphic scale. 
10.  Any changes from the approved construction plans must be indicated by circling the change in red. 
11.  A note certifying compliance of the site to approved plans and conformance of any revisions, to all applicable standards. The following certification shall be used: 
a.  "This physical survey has been reviewed, and in my professional opinion, based upon my knowledge, information, and belief, the design elements measured by the physical survey comply with the approved plans. This review does not imply in any way that (i) inspections were made during the construction, (ii) to the quality of the work, or (iii) to any element or structure not visible or depicted on the physical survey." 
In addition to the as-built plans, the professional engineer shall provide the city with a measure of the impervious area of the site. This information shall be shown in a form, and provided in digital format, as detailed by the department of stormwater. The as-built plans and the impervious area information will be reviewed for compliance with the requirements of this section during the final inspections. Any deficiencies with the as-built plans or the impervious area information must be corrected before final construction acceptance is granted. 
1311. - CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY. 
1311 A. 
No new building or an addition to a previously constructed building shall be occupied, nor shall a change of use of a property or any structure be permitted until a certificate of use and occupancy has been issued by the director of development services in accordance with applicable building codes, this ordinance and the provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
1311 B. 
In addition, no certificate of use and occupancy shall be issued for residential uses (other than single-family detached dwellings, commercial, institutional or industrial uses) until all required site improvements are installed in accordance with the approved plans, or in accordance with a written phasing plan approved by the department of development services. 
1311 C. 
A certificate of use and occupancy shall state that the use and/or structures complies with all relevant provisions of this ordinance and the zoning ordinance, and that it has been inspected by appropriate public officials and meets all requirements of applicable building codes, fire codes, and other laws, ordinances, rules and regulations governing the construction and use of structures on property. 
1311 D. 
The director of development services has the authority to issue a temporary certificate of use and occupancy for a period not to exceed six months where factors beyond the applicant's control have kept him from completing the required site improvements. Prior to the issuance of a temporary certificate of use and occupancy, all site improvements (bondable and otherwise) required by this ordinance and the zoning ordinance not yet installed shall be bonded in accordance with Section 1309 of this ordinance. For developments, all non-bonded deficiencies shall be guaranteed by the submission of an irrevocable letter of credit or establishment of a cash escrow account. 
1311 E. 
The director of development services may issue a final certificate of use and occupancy for a portion of a multiphase, multiple section or multi-tenant project. 
1.  Such certificate of use and occupancy shall only be issued, predicated on the following: 
a.  The director's review and approval of a written, phased site development plan; 
b.  Approval of all safety related items (e.g. frontage improvements, ingress and egress, storm water management facilities, street lights, handicap parking signs, etc.); and 
c.  Approval of adequate additional amenities as may be required to serve that portion of the project. 







ARTICLE 14. - ROADS, SITE AND DRAINAGE DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS 

1401. - SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS. 
1401 A. - Traffic analysis. 
New developments that will generate a significant amount of traffic may be required to perform a traffic analysis. The city will review each proposed development on a case-by-case basis to determine if a traffic study is required. If the city deems the size of the project warrants a traffic study, then the developer's design professional who is qualified to do this type of work will be required to perform a traffic study. The study must include traffic impacts on the existing road(s) adjacent to the project, improvements to the existing road(s), entrance requirements, number of entrances, traffic circulation within the project, width of proposed streets, etc. 
1401 B. - Hydrology study. 
Each new development will be required to perform a hydrology study by a qualified professional engineer registered in the State of Georgia. The study shall include a discussion of existing downstream conditions and impacts of the proposed development to downstream properties, measures taken to address increased runoff, concentrated discharges, etc. 
1401 C. - Plans. 
All plans shall have sheet sizes no larger than 24" × 36". 
1.  Subdivisions. 
a.  The preliminary plan shall show land lots, district and north arrow, existing and proposed roads with their names, lot layout. Existing roads shall show existing and proposed right-of-way, pavement widths and signs distances. The preliminary plan shall also show topography with contour lines at two-foot intervals, all existing streams, watercourses and storm sewers, and the discharge points for all existing drainage structures. Floodplain limits, if applicable, shall be shown on the plat. 
b.  The final site and subdivision (construction plans) shall include the preliminary plan and in addition the proposed road system layout in plan and profile. The road layout shall include stations every 100 feet in plan and profile, horizontal and vertical curve data, intersection radii, width and section of proposed roads, entrance design, cul-de-sac dimensions, drainage structures and storm sewer locations, curb and gutter details, utility locations, street signs, etc. The storm sewer system shall be shown in plan (with easements) and profile. The storm sewers shall have proposed inverts at each drainage structure, lengths and slopes of pipes, pipe sizes, types of storm sewers and drainage structures, etc. Detention facilities with proposed grading shall be shown on the plans with the principal and emergency spillways shown in plan, profile and sections. The storm sewer system shall show drainage areas, runoff coefficients, intensity rates, peak flows, pipe capacities, headwater depths, etc. Details of road sections, curb and gutter, drainage structures, etc. shall be shown on the plans. 
c.  The minor site plan shall comply in all aspects with the Georgia State Plat Act. The plan shall note land lots, tax map, block and lot number, building setbacks, current zoning of property, closure error (field and calculated), survey equipment used and private covenants. In addition, the plan shall show lot numbers in consecutive order, street names, 100-year floodplain or note absence, drainage easements, water (if applicable) and sanitary sewer system easements, north arrow, index map and storm sewer pipes and sizes. All lettering shall be legible in accordance with the State Plat Act. Sheet sizes shall not exceed 24" × 36" and the lettering shall be large enough that when the plan is reduced for recording, lettering will still be legible. 
2.  All individual commercial/industrial site plans shall comply in all aspects with the Georgia State Plat Act. The plan shall note land lots, tax map, block and lot number, required building setbacks, proposed building(s), right-of-way, pavement widths and sign distances on existing road(s), entrances, driveways, maneuvering aisles, parking spaces, size with number of justified of parking spaces and proposed grading. road frontage width, current zoning of property, north arrow, topography with existing contour lines at two-foot intervals, existing streams, water courses and storm sewers, closure error (field and calculated), survey equipment used and private covenants. In addition, the plan shall show lot numbers in consecutive order, street names, 100-year floodplain or note absence, drainage easements, water (if applicable) and sanitary sewer system easements, index map, and proposed storm sewer pipes and sizes and profile with inverts, lengths, grades, types of pipes and drainage structures. Detention facilities with proposed grading shall be shown on the plans with the principal and emergency spillways shown in plan, profile and sections. The storm sewer system shall show drainage areas, runoff coefficients, intensity rates, peak flows, pipe capacities, headwater depths, etc. Details of pavement sections, curb and gutter, drainage structures, etc. shall be shown on the plans. All lettering shall be legible in accordance with the State Plat Act. Sheet sizes shall not exceed 24" × 36" and the lettering shall be large enough that when the plan is reduced for recording, lettering will still be legible. 
1401 D. - As-builts. 
1.  Subdivision: As-builts shall include the full set of construction plans with the infrastructure shown as it was actually constructed. The road system shall show actual grades, horizontal and vertical curve data, catch basin locations, etc. The plans shall show the storm sewer system in plan and profile, drainage structure invert elevations, pipe grades, lengths, size of pipes, detention pond outlet works, etc. The detention pond-grading plan shall be shown with a certification that the pond configuration and outlet works were built according to design. The as-builts shall be submitted before approval of the final plan. A reproducible copy of the final plan and two sets of as-builts shall be submitted. A digital copy of the as-built plans shall also be submitted in a format and coordinate system compatible with the city's geographic information system. 
2.  Individual commercial/industrial sites: As-builts shall include the full set of construction plans with the improvements shown as it was actually constructed. Normally the as-builts are the original construction plans modified to reflect the actual construction. The plans shall include grading, entrance locations, pavement layout, striping, curb and gutter, storm sewers in plan and profile, building location(s), etc. Detention facilities grading and outlet works shall be shown with a certification that the pond complies with the original design. A digital copy of the as-built plans shall also be submitted in a format and coordinate system compatible with the city's geographic information system. 
1402. - ACCESS TO PROPERTY. 
    Openings for vehicular access to lots from public streets, referred to as curb cuts or driveways, shall be regulated by the public works and utilities department in accordance with the following requirements: 
1402 A. - Size and spacing. 
In no case shall a curb cut or other access point be less than ten feet or more than 30 feet in width. Except in residential zoning districts no two curb cuts or other access points shall be closer than 50 feet from each other. 
1402 B. - Location. 
At street intersections, no curb cut or other access points shall be located closer than 35 feet from the intersecting point of the street right-of-way lines. 
1402 C. - Visibility. 
At any street intersection or at the intersection of any private driveway with a street, no fence, wall, sign, planting or other structure or object shall be permitted or maintained that will form an impediment to the point of intersection of the driving surfaces. 
1402 D. - Visibility at intersections. 
On corner lots no fence, shrubbery or other obstruction to the traffic sight vision, except utility poles or traffic lights or sign standards shall exceed a height of three feet within a triangular area formed by the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two streets or a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way line and a diagonal line which intersects the right-of-way lines at two points each a minimum of 20 feet distance from the intersection of the right-of-way lines, or in the case of a rounded corner, from the point of intersection of their tangents; provided however, signs, lights or similar objects which are totally located at least ten feet above the finished grade shall be permitted. 
1402 E. - Permit required. 
No person shall be authorized to open any curb cut, grade or otherwise make any improvements upon the public right-of-way of any street, road or highway, except with approval of the public works and utilities department. The city reserves the right to require the applicant to indemnify and hold the city harmless for any injury or damage to public utilities and improvements existing within said right-of-way over which any driveway or other improvement is to be built. The city further reserves the right to require the property owner, at his expense, to remove any permitted improvement or to relocate or repair the same as necessary for the maintenance and future improvement of said right-of-way, including the location, relocation, repair or removal of utilities existing therein. 
1402 F. - New subdivision or developments fronting upon the state highway system. 
Whenever a new subdivision or development is proposed, which fronts the state highway system and requires access therefrom, no final approval of the site plan shall be given by the City of Griffin until the developer has submitted the final plat to the Georgia Department of Transportation, received approval and submitted this approval to the planning and development department. The time limitations for final approval of a final subdivision or development under this ordinance shall not be deemed to begin until such approval has been granted. 
1403. - STREET DESIGN CRITERIA. 
1403 A. - AASHTO standards. 
Road design shall conform to AASHTO (American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials) requirements, unless otherwise noted. 
1403 B. - Minimum design speed and maximum grade. 
Minimum design speeds and maximum grades for proposed streets in the City of Griffin by street classification shall be as follows: 
Table 14.1 Minimum Design Speed and Maximum Grade Street Type Maximum Allowable Grade Minimum Required 
Design Speed Arterial 8% 55 MPH Major Collector 10% 45 MPH Minor Collector 15% 35 MPH Unclassified 18% 25 MPH Alleys Varies Varies  
1403 C. - Minimum street grade. 
Minimum grade on culs-de-sac shall be 1.5 percent to maintain one percent in curb lines. 
1403 D. - Sight distance at entrances to new development. 
1.  The sight distance along existing city roads at proposed entrances for both subdivisions and individual commercial/industrial sites shall be designed according to "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets", most current edition, by AASHTO. The design professional should refer to the chapter entitled "At-Grade Intersections", and the "Sight Distance" section of this chapter. 
2.  A general guide is provided in the Standard Detail SSD-1 for sight distances at entrances. This guide does not relieve the design professional from complying with all aspects of AASHTO sight distance requirements for entrance designs. 
3.  Each traffic movement through the intersection should be checked for vertical and horizontal sight distance. Any object high enough above the roadway to constitute an obstruction should be shown on the plans and noted to be removed or lowered. Such obstructions include signs, ground cover (vegetation), cut slopes, hedges, buildings, etc. 
1403 E. - Minimum length of vertical curves. 
Interior subdivision streets-Crest vertical curves K = 10, sag vertical curves, K = 20. Curve length equals the product of the K valve and the algebraic difference in the road grades. Minimum vertical curve length shall be 100 feet. 
1403 F. - Widening for development entrances. 
1.  The following widening is required for new developments in both subdivision and individual commercial/industrial site development entrances. 
Table 14.2 Widening for Development Entrances Street Classification Street Width (ft.) Required R/W (ft.) Arterial 24+ 50+ Major Collector 24 40 Minor Collector 20 30 Local 12 25  
2.  Street width is measured from centerline to the edge of the pavement. 
3.  Right-of-way is measured from the existing centerline. 
4.  Lane length is measured 150 feet from tangent point of radius to beginning of taper. Tapers are 50 feet. Vertical curb and gutter is required through the radii. The additional lane can be stopped at the projected property line if there is inadequate right-of-way, excessive cut or fills to install the lane. In this case, the tapers would start at the projected property line unless excessive cut or fills would encroach on the right-of-way limits of the abutting property. 
5.  Paving section shall correspond to the street classification of the existing road the entrance connects to: 
a.  Arterial -Industrial paving section. 
b.  Major collector -Industrial paving section. 
c.  Minor collector -Commercial paving section. 
d.  Local -Commercial paving section. 
6.  The cost of any catch basins, which must be constructed when an existing city or county road is required to be modified, will be paid by the developer. 
7.  Existing storm sewers located in the area of the entrance widening shall be extended and connected to the proposed storm sewer system at the developer's expense. 
8.  See standard detail drawings for widening at entrances. 
1403 G. - Residential street section. 
1.  Residential streets shall be a minimum of 22 feet of paved width within the curb and gutter. There shall be a minimum shoulder section behind both curbs as shown in the standard detail drawings and based on the city's sidewalk requirements. 
2.  Pavement width shall be no less than as follows: 
Table 14.3 Residential Street Section Street Types Minimum Pavement Width Arterial As may be required Major Collector 12 ft. lanes + curb & gutter Minor Collector 24 ft. + curb & gutter Local 22 ft. + curb & gutter  
3.  See typical residential curbing detail. 
4.  Cul-de-sac radius shall be as shown in the standard detail drawings. 
1403 H. - Industrial/commercial streets. 
1.  Pavement width for industrial/commercial streets shall be no less than as follows: 
Table 14.4 Industrial/Commercial Streets Type Street Minimum Right-of-Way Minimum Pavement Width Arterial 100 feet 52 ft. + w/13+ foot lane Major Collector 80 feet 52 ft. w/13 foot lane Minor Collector 80 feet 28 ft. w/14 foot lane  
2.  Paving standard shall be as shown in standard detail drawings for industrial/commercial streets. 
3.  See typical industrial curbing detail in standard detail drawings. 
4.  Cul-de-sac radius shall be as shown in the standard detail drawings. 
1403 I. - Dam supporting road. 
No city road shall be designed to cross an existing or proposed dam. 
1403 J. - Curbs and gutter. 
Curb and gutter shall be required on all paved streets: 
1.  Residential curb and gutter: 
a.  Vertical curb and gutter. 
b.  Typical section shall be 6" × 24" × 12". 
2.  Commercial/industrial curb and gutter: 
a.  Vertical curb and gutter. 
b.  Typical section shall be 6" × 24" × 12". 
1404. - SIDEWALKS. 
1404 A. 
Sidewalks shall be required in all residential, commercial and industrial developments along both sides of the proposed streets. Sidewalks shall also be required along the existing streets on the side adjacent to the development. This requirement may be waived for certain residential streets subject to the type of development. 
1404 B. 
Sidewalks shall be located as shown in the standard detail drawings, but not less than one foot from the property line to prevent interference of encroachment by fencing, walls, hedges or other planting or structures placed on the property line at a later date. 
1404 C. 
Concrete sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet wide and four inches thick. 
1404 D. 
Sidewalks shall be located on both sides of proposed streets and on existing streets on the side adjacent to the development. 
1404 E. 
Sidewalks shall have a prepared base where necessary and be backfilled and landscaped. 
1405. - TRAFFIC SIGNS. 
1405 A. 
The design professional shall show the location of all required traffic signs. Unless otherwise noted, design of traffic signs shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
1405 B. 
Stop signs shall be located from the signs edge six feet off the back of curb or edge of gravel at the beginning of the intersection radius. The sign shall be located on the right side of the intersection. The bottom of the sign shall be at least five feet above the edge of pavement or back of curb. This standard applies to typical residential interior street intersections. 
1405 C. 
All other intersections shall have stop signs located according to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
1405 D. 
Stop signs shall be sized so that their overall dimensions are 30" × 30". 
1405 E. 
All other signs shall be sized according to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
1406. - UTILITY LOCATIONS. 
    All utility locations shall correspond to the typical layout shown in the standard detail drawings. 
1407. - BRIDGE PILING. 
    Shall be driven to state highway load standards for loading. Certification of pile load shall be by registered professional engineer. 
1408. - APARTMENTS AND CONDOMINIUMS. 
    Streets shall be constructed to residential street standards as set forth in these specifications. 
1409. - MOBILE HOME PARKS. 
    Streets shall be constructed to residential street standards as set forth in these specifications. 
1410. - SITE DESIGN FOR INDIVIDUAL COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL LOTS. 
1410 A. - Entrance design. 
1.  See above sections "sight distance at entrances to new development", "widening for development entrances" and "individual commercial/industrial sites - development entrances." 
2.  Width of entrances shall be limited to those shown in the standard design drawings. Entrances with several lanes for different traffic movement with concrete or painted islands shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. 
3.  Spacing of entrances and distance of entrances to property lines shall be limited to distances shown in the standard design drawings. 
4.  Entrances shall comply with valley gutter requirements shown in the standard detail drawings (GA DOT Standard 9031U). 
1410 B. - Proposed grading. 
1.  Proposed grading shall have positive drainage. 
2.  Swales lined with grass or stone shall be designed with a minimum 1.0 percent slope. Concrete lined swales shall be designed with a minimum 0.5 percent slope. 
3.  Embankment slopes. The design of embankment slopes is dependent upon the type of soil encountered at each site. A soils engineer must be employed to design slopes and slope stabilization for slopes steeper than the following: 
a.  Maximum cut slopes should be no steeper than 2:1. 
b.  Maximum fill slopes should be no steeper than 2.5:1. 
1410 C. - Automobile parking. 
1.  Automobile parking shall be designed with maneuvering aisles and parking spaces to the minimum dimensions as shown in the standard detail drawings. 
2.  The number of parking spaces required for each development shall be as required in the City of Griffin Zoning Ordinance. 
3.  Paved automobile parking. All off-street automobile parking, accesses and maneuvering aisles shall be paved. 
4.  Parking for the handicapped shall be designed as shown in the standard detail drawings. 
1410 D. - Retaining walls. 
Retaining walls shall be designed by a registered engineer qualified to do structural design. 
1411. - STORM DRAIN DESIGN CRITERIA. 
1411 A. 
This section provides maximum and minimum values, and methodologies accepted by the City of Griffin Stormwater Department in the preparation of stormwater drainage plans. The latest edition of the Stormwater Design Manual, prepared for the City of Griffin Public Works and Stormwater Department shall be consulted for the proper design procedures in meeting the standards of this section. 
1.  Sizing and location of all existing and proposed storm sewers shall be the responsibility of a professional engineer registered in the State of Georgia. 
2.  Storm drainage pipes shall be sloped so as to maintain a minimum velocity of three fps during the two-year storm event so that sediment will not collect. 
3.  The Rational Method shall be used for calculating discharges for storm sewers draining less than or equal to 25 acres. The SCS method or USGS regression equations may be used for calculating discharges for storm sewers draining over 25 acres. 
4.  The 25-year storm event shall be used in sizing storm drains that serve public streets and rights-of-way. Storm sewers and culverts conveying water under public streets shall be sized to carry runoff from the 100-year storm event without overtopping the road. All other storm-sewer systems shall be sized for the 50-year storm event. The storm sewer system shall be designed for subcritical gravity flow such that the system is not flowing under pressure flow during the design storm. The hydraulic grade line shall be delineated on the construction drawings. Storm sewer systems shall not be designed using Manning's Equation alone. A "standard step" procedure must be utilized. 
5.  Storm sewers shall not be less than 18 inches in diameter. No storm drain can be under proposed acceleration/deceleration lanes. The city, upon recommendation, by the city engineer may modify or waive this requirement if unusual circumstances exist such as topography. 
6.  Storm drainage shall be collected in storm sewers at or near the perimeter of the property on the upstream end and piped to an existing storm drainage system. This extension requirement can be waived for collection of storm water upstream of roadways where topographic conditions warrant placing the inlet at the toe of the roadway fill. 
7.  Maximum continuous length of pipe shall be 300 feet for pipes less than 42 inches in diameter. 
8.  Drainage easements shall be at least 20 feet wide along all storm drain systems and around all detention ponds. 
9.  Exit velocities from storm-drain pipes shall not exceed four fps during the 25-year storm event without the design of additional energy dissipaters (not including required rip-rap). 
10.  It is the developer's and/or the contractor's responsibility to ensure that all structures built on individual lots or sites have positive drainage and are built at an elevation to adequately avoid being flooded by the 100-year storm and that runoff from their project does not adversely affect downstream or upstream property. The city is not responsible for damages resulting from improper design or inadequate runoff control. 
11.  Maximum velocity of runoff in swales lined with vegetation shall be 5.0 feet/second during the 25-year storm event. Swales with runoff velocities in excess of 5.0 fps shall be lined with stone, concrete, or approved synthetic matting. 
1411 B. - Drainage structures (excluding pipe or culverts). 
The design professional shall check the hydraulic capacity of each drainage structure designed as an inlet point in the drainage system. The actual storm water flows shall be compared with the structures flow capacity to ensure the capacity is not exceeded. 
1.  Catch basins shall be designed by the design professional to State Highway Standards 1033D and/or 1034D. Alternate catch basins complying with the standards of the Georgia DOT are subject to approval by the city. 
2.  Catch basins shall be located outside of intersection radii unless unusual circumstances cause undue hardship, in which case the city may waive this requirement. 
3.  Catch basin spacing shall be limited to a maximum distance as follows: 
a.  500 feet on grades up to seven percent. 
b.  400 feet on grades from seven percent to ten percent. 
c.  250 feet on grades over ten percent. 
Maximum gutter spread shall be one-half of the travel lane, as measured from the face of curb, for the 25-year storm event. The inlets shall be spaced in order to intercept a minimum of 85 percent of the flow during the 25-year storm event without exceeding the above gutter spread. 
4.  The outlet end of all storm drain pipes (except driveway pipe) shall have either flared-end sections or concrete headwalls, which meet GA DOT Standards 1120 or 1125. This same standard applies to the inlet end of storm sewers where an open pipe is designed to collect the runoff. 
5.  Drop inlets shall be designed to GA DOT Standards 1019A. Weir drop inlets shall be provided in landscape areas. Grated drop inlets shall be provided in paved areas. 
6.  Junction boxes or manholes having access to the pipe shall be constructed to meet the requirements of State Standard 9031U or 1011A. Manholes shall be provided with eccentric cone sections. 
7.  Detention pond riser structures shall be designed to Georgia DOT standards. These structures shall be checked for flotation. 
1411 C. - Storm detention facilities. 
All development plans will require a hydrology study certified by a professional engineer registered in the State of Georgia qualified to do work in the field of hydrology. Permanent detention facilities are required for every development project that has an increase in post-development discharges. 
1.  Detention ponds shall be designed for the two-, five-, ten-, 25-, 50-, and 100-year storm events. The SCS Method is the only acceptable method that can be used for developing hydrographs to be used for detention pond routing. 
2.  An emergency overflow device (which does not include the throttling device) for a detention pond shall be designed to pass the 100-year peak developed inflow without overtopping the dam. There shall be at least 1.0 feet of free board between the 100-year elevation in the emergency spillway and the top of the dam. 
3.  Pond discharge locations shall be in defined drainage ditches. The developer's engineer shall include in the hydrology study a discussion of existing conditions downstream of the detention pond and an explanation of how downstream property owners will not be adversely affected by the "concentrated" runoff. If there is an existing storm drainage system within 150 feet of the discharge point of the outlet pipe for the pond, then the developer shall extend the outlet pipe and tie-in to the existing system. 
4.  The steepest fill slopes shall be 2.5:1, and cut slopes shall be no steeper than 2:1. Vegetated embankments shall be less than 20 feet in height. Riprap-protected embankments shall be no steeper than 2:1. Geotechnical slope stability analysis is recommended for embankments greater than ten feet in height and is mandatory for embankment slopes steeper than those given above. All embankments must be designed to State of Georgia guidelines for dam safety. The maximum depth shall not exceed ten feet. 
5.  If the City of Griffin Stormwater Department determines that the detention pond poses a significant safety hazard, then the detention pond shall be fenced around the 100-year elevation. The fence shall be at least four feet in height with a 14-foot wide gate. Adequate access must be provided for construction equipment and a drainage easement of at least 20 feet in width must be delineated around the pond on the final subdivision plat. 
1411 D. - Subdrainage. 
Will be installed to control the surplus ground water by intercepting sidehill seepage or by lowering or regulating the ground water level where such conditions exist. 
1411 E. - Bridges. 
Bridges shall be designed for a 100-year storm event. 
1411 F. - Lake(s). 
If it is proposed to make a new or existing lake a part of a subdivision, the developer shall be required to submit a breach analysis for affected property within the boundaries of the development and show the dam breach zone on the plans. 
1412. - MATERIALS. 
    All materials shall comply with GA DOT Standard Specifications Construction of Roads and Bridges with Supplemental Specifications and Standard Details current edition, unless noted otherwise. 
1412 A. - Streets. 
1.  Graded aggregate base course. The base course shall consist of mineral aggregate and may be a combination of natural deposit or a blend of the materials specified. All materials are subject to approval by the city engineer. If a blend of materials is used, it shall be blended through a base plant, which meets the latest specifications of the Georgia State Highway Department specification 815. 
2.  Black base. The base course shall consist of asphaltic concrete as approved by the city engineer and shall conform to applicable specifications of the Georgia State Highway Department. 
3.  Prime. After the base has been placed, mixed, compacted, shaped, inspected and accepted, it shall be primed with suitable asphaltic materials as specified in DOT Specification 412. 
4.  Tack. Tack coat shall be applied on a prepared road surface according to the requirements of Georgia DOT Specification 413. 
5.  Roadway surfaces. After the prime has been inspected and accepted, the roadway or street shall be surfaced with an asphaltic concrete wearing surface. No surface treatment pavement as a finished wear surface will be accepted. All asphaltic concrete will be mixed in an asphalt plant meeting the latest requirements of the Georgia State Highway Department. 
1412 B. - Curbs and gutter. 
1.  Residential. Concrete shall be Class "A" as defined by GA DOT and have a minimum compressive strength of 3,000 psi at 28 days. 
2.  Commercial/industrial. Concrete shall be Class "A" as defined by GA DOT and have a minimum compressive strength of 3,000 psi at 28 days. 
1412 C. - Storm sewer pipe. 
1.  State Highway Standard 1030D shall be used in determining class concrete or gauge of pipe under fill. 
2.  A certification by the supplier of the pipe specifications for each pipe shall be required before installation. 
3.  Concrete pipe shall be reinforced. 
4.  Reinforced concrete pipe shall be used under all public streets, where pipe slopes are less than one percent, and for all live streams. Double wall high density polyethylene pipe may be used in all other instances. 
1412 D. - Storm drainage structures (excluding storm sewer pipe). 
The materials used for storm drainage structures shall comply with the standards of the GA DOT. 
1413. - CONSTRUCTION. 
    All construction shall comply with GA DOT Standard Specifications Construction of Road and Bridges, with Supplemental Specifications and Standard Details, current edition, unless noted otherwise. 
1413 A. - Clearing and grubbing. 
The entire area within the typical grading section shall be cleared and grubbed of all trees, bushes, stumps and debris. Such debris shall be disposed of in a lawful manner. There shall be no burial in the road right-of-way. 
1413 B. - Grading. 
1.  Grading shall be accurately done to the lines and grades shown on the plans. Embankments shall be placed in uniform layers not to exceed six inches and compacted to a density of 95 percent of the maximum laboratory dry weight per cubic foot as determined by AASHTO Method T-99. If necessary in order to obtain this compaction, the contractor shall add moisture to the material as it is placed. 
2.  Table 14.5 Grading: 
Depth of Cut or Fill Cut Slopes Fill Slopes 2 feet or less 4 to 1 4 to 1 2 feet to 5 feet 3 to 1 3 to 1 5 feet to 10 feet 2 to 1 2 to 1 Over 10 feet 2 to 1 2 to 1  
The depth of cut referred to above shall be constructed to the maximum cut or fill occurring in any one section of cut or fill. The slope on cut of fill slopes shall be uniform throughout for each section of cut or fill. When a cut is made in rock that requires blasting, the slope may be changed to vertical slope upon the written approval of the subdivision administrator. 
3.  Typical grading section shall be as shown in the standard detail drawings. 
a.  Shoulder section behind curb on typical streets shall be as shown in the standard detail drawings. 
1413 C. - Subgrade. 
1.  After the earth work has been completed, all storm drainage and other underground utilities have been installed under the roadbed and the backfill in all such ditches thoroughly compacted, the subgrade shall be brought to the lines, grades and cross section shown on the plans. 
2.  If any sections of the subgrade are composed of unsuitable or unstable material, such material shall be removed to the depth directed by the authorized representative of the city and replaced with suitable, material and compacted to 90 percent minimum. 
3.  When the street is to be used for construction traffic before the paving work is completed, a layer of #3 stone can be laid as a traffic surface if the developer so desires. 
a.  This material shall not be used as part of the base material. 
b.  It may be worked into the subgrade; or it shall be removed before the base course is set up for paving. 
c.  Provision shall be made to drain low points in road construction when the final paving surface is delayed. 
i.  Provide break in the berm section when the curbing has not been constructed. 
ii.  Use 21/2 inch or six-inch pipe sections to provide drainage under curb to side slopes. 
1413 D. - Curbs and gutter. 
1.  Line and grade shall be set by developer's engineer, landscape architect, or surveyor. 
2.  One-half inch expansion joints or pre-molded bitumastic expansion joint material shall be provided at all radius points and at intervals not to exceed 50 feet in the remainder of the curb and gutter. 
1413 E. - Street cuts. 
1.  All trenches shall be backfilled and compacted the same day the trench is opened. Backfill in trenches within the right-of-way shall be compacted to 95 percent of the maximum laboratory dry density. In addition, the top one-foot of backfill to be located under pavement and curbs shall be compacted to 100 percent of the maximum laboratory dry density. The top one-foot of backfill is as measured from the bottom of the graded aggregate base to one-foot below that surface. 
2.  The city's policy is no existing city roads can be open cut unless unusual circumstances warrant it. Storm sewers 36 inches or smaller shall be bored. Contact the city for permission to open cut any existing city road. If the city allows open cutting, all trenches under existing paving shall be backfilled and compacted in six-inch lifts and excavated to allow for concrete and asphalt to be placed as shown in the standard detail drawings. The edges of the paving cut shall be saw cut smooth. 
1413 F. - Underground utilities. 
1.  All utilities located within street rights-of-way within the curbs shall be installed and the ditches backfilled and thoroughly compacted as stated in Section 1406 before any pavement or base is installed. All utilities otherwise located within street rights-of-way, shall be installed and ditches backfilled and compacted to 95 percent of the maximum laboratory dry density. 
2.  All utility manholes and valve boxes shall be brought to the finished grade within the roadway section. 
1413 G. - Shoulders and easements. 
All shoulders and easements shall be clear of limbs and debris, graded smooth and established in grass. 
1413 H. - Foreign material on streets. 
1.  The developer, builders, and/or homeowners shall be responsible for keeping dirt, mud, building materials, concrete, etc. off of the pavement and curbing of existing city or county roads during construction of buildings in all developments covered by these regulations. 
2.  Before the streets are accepted by City of Griffin, all litter and trash shall be removed from the dedicated rights-of-way and surrounding areas. 
1413 I. - Storm sewers. 
Pipe installation shall conform to GA DOT Standard Specifications for construction of roads and bridges. 
1.  Before any traffic over a storm drain is allowed, the developer shall provide an adequate depth and width of compacted backfill to protect the structure from damage or displacement. Any debris or silt that constricts the flow through a pipe shall be removed by the developer as often as necessary to maintain drainage. All pipe structures shall be cleaned before the work is conditionally approved. Any damage or displacement that may occur due to traffic or erosion shall be repaired or corrected at the developer's expense. 
2.  Minimum clearances are: 
a.  One foot between the bottom of the base or sub-base, if used, and the exterior crown of the culvert. 
b.  A minimum of 0.5 foot between underground utilities and exterior crown of culverts. 
3.  Trench construction for storm drainage pipe shall be in accordance with State Highway Standard 1030D and current manufacturer's specifications. A typical detail shall be provided on the construction drawings. 
4.  The storm sewer bedding shall be designed according to the latest manufacturer's specifications and a typical detail shall be provided on the construction drawings. 
5.  All pipe joint connections and connections to manholes shall be made according to the latest manufacturer's specifications. At a minimum all connections to manholes shall be grouted with cement. 
1414. - INSPECTION AND TESTS. 
1414 A. - Scope. 
This section pertains to the inspection and testing of road and storm sewer construction. 
1414 B. - Testing. 
1.  All tests shall comply with Standard Specifications Construction of Roads and Bridges by the GDOT, most current edition. 
2.  Compaction testing shall be done on road embankments, trench backfill and road subbase. 
3.  Asphalt testing including coring for pavement thickness and asphalt extraction tests shall be done for roads. 
1414 C. - Contractor qualifications. 
1.  Licensing and safety. All contractors who work on water systems that will be owned by the City of Griffin must be licensed in accordance with State of Georgia Law and local ordinance. Compliance with applicable safety regulations is the responsibility of each company engaged in the work; the city assumes no responsibility for the actions of others on the job site. It is the responsibility of those installing water mains and related appurtenances to conform to OSHA regulations, 29 CFR Part 1926, Subpart P, Paragraph 1926.650 through 1926.653. Publications from OSHA can be obtained by contacting OSHA Publications Distribution, Washington, D.C. 
2.  Contractors performing road and storm sewer construction must be approved by the city and should be completely familiar with the procedures and contract requirements associated with this type project. 
3.  Unsatisfactory work may result in the loss of privilege to obtain a permit for future work in the City of Griffin. 
1414 D. - Construction inspection. 
1.  Responsibility for inspection. The developer's contractor will be responsible for the quality, accuracy and workmanship of his completed work. In addition, the developer shall employ a qualified professional (this shall normally be the same design professional who prepared the plans for the work) to review the quality of work as required during construction and to oversee the various tests and inspection points that are specified herein. 
City personnel will visit the job site on a periodic basis and will make spot checks, as they deem appropriate. The City of Griffin shall have the right to review and inspect all construction and may reject any work that does not meet quality control standards. 
2.  Access to project. Authorized representatives of the City of Griffin, which may include city employees, the city engineering consultant, state or federal agencies, shall have access to the site for inspection at any time. 
3.  Communications during construction. All written communications regarding road and storm sewer construction will be to: 
Director of Public Works and Utilities 
City of Griffin 
P.O. Box T 
Griffin, GA 30224 
Phone No. 770-229-6424 or Fax No. 770-229-6439 
The developer, contractor(s) and the developer's professional responsible for inspection will be required to attend a pre-construction conference with the city. At the pre-construction conference, the contractor will submit to the city, in writing, the date they propose to begin construction. The contractor will provide notification by phone any time the work is to be vacated and will provide notice by phone prior to resuming work. 
The applicable city departments may have informal verbal communications with the contractor foreman or superintendent at any time during construction. The city will not direct the actions of contractor's workmen. 
4.  Concealed work. The contractor shall notify the city and receive inspection approval prior to concealing certain work such as storm sewers and bedding, storm drainage structures, road fill, etc. 
5.  Minimum inspection by developer's professional. The following minimum inspections and tests will be performed and certified by the professional who is employed by the developer to perform quality control checking on the construction work. 
a.  Roadway embankment compaction testing. Frequency of testing shall be determined by project conditions. Testing schedule and locations subject to approval by the city. Areas failing compaction test shall be reworked as necessary until compaction is achieved. 
b.  Storm sewer trench backfill compaction testing. At least two tests per road crossing. Random testing for storm sewers in road shoulders. Any areas failing the compaction tests shall be reworked as necessary to achieve compaction. 
c.  Sub-base compaction testing and test rolling. Compaction tests of the sub-base should be done randomly not exceeding 500 feet apart. In addition, the road sub-base shall be test rolled with the city inspector present. Areas failing compaction testing shall be reworked until compaction is achieved. 
d.  Asphalt pavement. The asphalt shall be cored for thickness at random locations not exceeding 500 feet apart. Extraction testing shall be done on the asphalt to ensure compliance with GA DOT Specifications for the asphalt section required. Areas with failing asphalt tests shall be corrected by a method approved by the city. 
e.  Concrete. Testing for concrete shall be done where concrete is used on the project for retaining walls, culverts and headwalls and bridges. Testing shall include slump tests, compressive strength tests and air entrainment tests. Testing shall comply with GA DOT testing standards for concrete. 
1414 E. - Final inspections and conditional acceptance. 
The developer's professional responsible for inspection of construction will provide the city with an affidavit after he completes his inspection, testing and submittal of as-built drawings and easements. This affidavit must certify that all specified inspections and tests have been made and successfully passed and that the work has been completed in substantial accordance with the approved plans and specifications. After receipt of this affidavit, the city will schedule a final inspection. A representative of the developer's professional and the contractor will be present during this final inspection. This final inspection will generally include spot checks of storm sewers, drainage system, drainage easements, roads and a complete overview of the project. 
After any discrepancies are corrected, the city will issue a letter certifying conditional acceptance of the water system. This letter shall commence the start of the 24-month warranty period, which is required of the contractor. 
On projects having phased development, this letter will allow the developer to apply for a permit for the next phase of development. 
At the end of 24 months, the city will re-inspect the entire development. When any discrepancies have been corrected, the city will issue an acceptance letter and will begin perpetual maintenance and operation of the roads and storm sewer system within the right-of-way. 

14.1: Typical Concrete Sidewalk

14.2: Cul-de-sac Minimum Lengths

14.3: "T" Intersection-Collector/Arterial

14.4: Intersection-Collector/Arterial Street

14.5: Standard Typical Section for Residential and Local Streets
With Curb and Gutter

14.6: Standard Typical Section for Residential Minor Collector Streets
With Curb and Gutter

14.7: Standard Typical Section for Major Collector Streets
(4-Lane Divided With Curb and Gutter)

14.8: Standard Typical Section for Minor Arterial Streets
(6-Lane Divided With Curb and Gutter)

14.9: Standard Residential Culs-de-sac

14.6: Standard Residential Culs-de-sac

14.7: Landing Requirements for Residential Street Intersections

14.8: Standard Typical Section for Townhouse, Condominium, Mobile Home and Apartment Streets With No Residential Frontage

14.9: Residential Private Street Standards

14.10: Standard Typical Street Section With Curb and Gutter
in Commercial and Industrial Developments

14.15: Cul-de-sac (Industrial/Commercial)

14.16: Curb and Gutter

14.17: Commercial Driveway on Existing Street

14.18: Intersection Sight Distance Requirements

14.19: Subdivision Entrance Sight Distance

14.20: Residential Street Utility Location

14.21: Typical Street Cut Repair

14.11: Handicapped Parking Space Standard

14.12: Handicapped Parking Standard for Two Adjacent Parking Spaces

14.134: Public Street Name Sign Standard

14.25: Private Street Sign Standard

14.26: Wheelchair Ramp
ARTICLE 15. - FIRE SAFETY SYSTEMS 

1501. - GENERAL POLICY AND REQUIREMENTS. 
1501 A. - Fire lanes. 
1.  The city shall designate fire lands on public streets and private property used for townhouse, multi-family, commercial, institutional and industrial developments. 
2.  The purpose of the fire lanes shall be to prevent parking and standing adjacent to fire hydrants and also to provide clear access to buildings and fire protection equipment. 
1501 B. - Water supply systems. 
Water supply systems shall be provided in accordance with this Code. 
1501 C. - Fire protection lines. 
All fire protection lines shall be privately owned and maintained. 
1502. - FIRE SAFETY SYSTEM-PLANNING AND DESIGN. 
1502 A. - Fire lanes. 
1.  Fire lanes in residential, commercial, institutional and industrial developments shall be designated by the city and shall be a minimum of 18 feet in width. This dimension shall be measured perpendicularly from the painted curb or perimeter line. 
2.  A minimum of two signs shall designate fire lanes, one at each end of the lane. Additional signs shall be provided at minimum intervals of 200 feet. Fire lanes may be painted in parking areas where no curb and gutter exists and where posting of a metal sign is not feasible. See construction standards for fire lanes in this manual. 
1502 B. - Emergency access in general. 
1.  Emergency access shall have an all weather surface capable of supporting heavy equipment. 
2.  Emergency access driveways, excluding parking, shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide. The minimum turning radii shall be 32 feet. 
3.  Reasonable accessibility shall be provided to and around all buildings for firefighting equipment, including ladder trucks on multiple-story buildings. A minimum of 20 feet on all sides of buildings and a radius of 50 feet at all building corners shall be maintained. 
4.  Where the number of dwelling units in a project exceeds 100, there shall be two entrances to the project where road frontage is adequate for two entrances, as determined by the rules and regulations for the control and protection of state highway rights-of-way. 
5.  Accessibility for firefighting equipment shall be maintained throughout all stages of construction and occupancy. 
1502 C. - Emergency access to the front of buildings. 
1.  An unobstructed emergency space of at least nine feet in width shall be provided in front of the main entrance of buildings where vehicle parking is adjacent to the building and not separated by a fire lane. 
2.  A series of nine-foot wide unobstructed emergency spaces shall be provided in front of a strip shopping center where parking is adjacent to the building and not separated from it by a fire lane. The spaces shall be provided at 100-foot intervals along the front of the building. 
1502 D. - Emergency access to the rear and side of buildings. 
Each building with a rear dimension exceeding 100 feet in length shall have an access capable of handling emergency equipment if the building is not accessible from a street, driveway, service area, or parking area. The access used exclusively for emergency purposes shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide. 
1502 E. - Emergency access limits. 
1.  Emergency access limits are defined as the maximum distance between a building and the closest point of emergency vehicle access. These limits shall be measured from the main building entrance to the edge of pavement, curb line or emergency access point. An emergency access point is defined as the closest point to the main entrance of a building that an emergency vehicle can reach on all weather surface capable of supporting such a vehicle. 
2.  In townhouse developments, the maximum distance from the curb line (or the emergency access point) to the building entrance may not exceed 75 feet. 
3.  In multi-family developments, the maximum distance from the curb line (or the emergency access point) to the building entrance shall be 50 feet. 
4.  In buildings over three stories in height, the maximum distance from the curb (or the emergency access point) shall conform to the guidelines listed in Table 15-1. For purposes of this section, the building height measured in feet is the distance between the lowest level of fire department access to the finish floor level of the topmost habitable floor. 
Table 15.1 Building Height Distance From the Curb or Emergency Access Point Building Height (feet) Distance (feet) 30 to 45 50 40 to 60 40 61 to 75 30 Greater than 75 20  
1502 F. - Fire main size. 
1.  Single family. Single-family residential developments shall use a minimum of six-inch mains; larger size mains dependent on demand, fire flow requirements and the city's master water plan. 
2.  Multi-family. Multi-family residential developments shall use a minimum of eight-inch mains. 
3.  Commercial areas with less than 200,000 square feet shall use fire mains a minimum of eight inches in size. 
4.  Large shopping centers, strip-malls, etc. shall use fire mains a minimum of eight inches in size. 
5.  Motels, light industrial & schools shall use fire mains a minimum of eight inches in size. 
6.  Heavy industry, warehouses and office buildings greater than 200,000 square feet shall use fire mains a minimum of ten inches in size. 
7.  The city or its designated representative shall have the authority to waive the above minimum fire main sizes provided the following conditions have been met: 
a.  Note on plans: "I have designed the water service installation for this facility in accordance with all applicable city water specifications in regards to fire flows and these conditions have been met". This note is to be signed and stamped by the engineer providing the calculations. 
b.  Provide the city with the calculations stamped and certified as required in the procedures section of this manual. 
1503. - FIRE HYDRANTS. 
1503 A. 
All fire hydrants shall be designed and manufactured to comply with the latest specifications of the AWWA. They shall be designed for 150 pounds working pressure. The hydrants shall be of simple design, easy to operate, effectively and positively drained and protected from damage by freezing and convenient for repairing and replacing parts. 
1503 B. 
Hydrants shall be equipped with one 41/2-inch diameter pumper nozzle and two 21/2-inch diameter hose connections. The hydrants shall have threads meeting the latest requirements of the State Fire Insurance Commission. Hydrants shall also have a safety flange on the barrel and a safety coupling on the valve stem, to prevent damage to barrel and stem in case of traffic accident. Hydrants shall be either Mueller Company's Centurion Traffic Model, or M & H Style 129 Traffic Model. 
1503 C. - Fire hydrant locations. 
1.  The 41/2-inch pumper connection on the hydrant shall face the street, travel lane or service drive. 
2.  The bottom of the 41/2-inch nozzle shall be 24 inches above the elevation of the edge of the shoulder on streets without curb and gutter and 24 inches above the elevation of the curb on streets with curb and gutter. 
3.  The 21/2-inch hose connections shall have a minimum of four feet of clearance on all sides. 
4.  No fire hydrant shall be obscured from view by plantings, fences, etc. 
1503 D. - Spacing. 
Fire hydrants shall be spaced as follows: 
1.  Single family. Fire hydrants shall be spaced not more than 300 feet apart. Fire hydrants shall be located at all intersections and shall be located at the end of the line of all culs-de-sac. 
2.  Multi-family, condominiums and townhouses. Fire hydrants shall be spaced at the fire department's discretion. 
3.  Shopping centers, malls, etc. Fire hydrants shall be spaced at the fire department's discretion. 
4.  Motels, light industry and schools. Fire hydrants shall be spaced at the fire department's discretion. 
5.  Heavy industry/tall buildings. Fire hydrants shall be spaced at the fire department's discretion. 
1503 E. - Fire hydrants in relation to streets and parking lots. 
1.  Fire hydrants shall be located along the right-of-way at street intersections and at intermediate locations where necessary, as determined by the city fire chief or his designee in cooperation with the director of the water and wastewater department. All distance measurements are to be made along with the centerline of streets, travelways or other unobstructed path that may be used by the fire department. 
2.  In areas with curb and gutter, the center of the fire hydrant shall be located no less than 18 inches nor more than 36 inches from the face of the curb. No part of a fire hydrant shall conflict with or overhand a sidewalk, trail or vehicular travelway. 
3.  On streets without curb and gutter, fire hydrants shall be located behind the ditch. 
4.  Traffic bollards or other protective measures shall be provided in areas, such as parking lots where the proposed site improvements will not provide adequate protection of the fire hydrant from vehicles. 
5.  When installed in parking areas, clear access shall be provided to the front of the hydrant (that portion with the large pumper connection at the center) and 15 feet to each side. This clear access area shall be marked as fire lane. 
6.  Plantings and other obstructions shall be kept clear of fire hydrants for a minimum of 41/2 feet around the hydrant. 
1503 F. - Fire hydrants in relation to buildings. 
1.  Fire hydrants shall be located to serve remote areas of buildings. Those hydrants used to meet fire flow requirements shall be located within 500 feet of the building to be protected. 
2.  Fire hydrants shall be required along the perimeter of the building for use groups in accordance with Table 15.2. The remote distance shall be measured to the most remote distance the hydrant will serve. 
Table 15.2 Use Group and Fire Hydrant Remote Distance Use Group Remote Distance 
(feet) Heavy industrial & warehouse buildings 250 School and institutional buildings 300 Commercial, church and office buildings 300 Motels, multi-family, condominium and townhouse buildings 250 Single-family detached dwellings 400  
3.  Fire hydrants shall be a minimum of 50 feet away from all buildings, except single-family dwellings. 
1503 G. - Fire hydrants in relation to sprinklers/standpipes. 
Fire hydrants shall be located within 100 feet of any fire department sprinkler connection or standpipes where those systems are required/provided in buildings. 
1503 H. - Sprinkler/standpipe fire department connections. 
1.  Fire department connections shall be located to be visible from a street. If a visible location from a street is not possible, the fire chief or his designee shall approve alternate locations. Such connections shall be located to provide immediate access to the fire department. Generally, walls, fences, trees, shrubs and other obstructions shall not be placed to prevent access. 
2.  Fire department connections shall be arranged to allow the use of any one water sprinkler connection to serve all the sprinklers within the building and to allow the use of any one standpipe connection to serve all the standpipes within the building. 
3.  Fire department connections shall not be less than 18 inches nor more than 42 inches in elevation measured from ground level to the centerline of the inlets. 
4.  In buildings classified as high-rise by the building code, the fire department connections shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from the building. The fire chief or his designee and the director of water and wastewater shall approve the location of this yard connection. 
1504. - FIRE FLOW REQUIREMENTS. 
1504 A. - Flow requirements. 
1.  Water systems shall be designed to provide fire flows in accordance with Table 15-3, plus the domestic demand required by the department of water and wastewater. A residual pressure of not less than 20 pounds per square inch (psi) to at least one point within 500 feet of each building proposed to be served shall be provided. 
2.  The fire flows in Table 15-3 apply to new development. Where the size and the scope of the development exceed these requirements, additional flow shall be provided in accordance with Insurance Services Office (ISO) requirements. 
3.  Fire flow requirements may be met in single-family residential and two-family developments with a single hydrant within 500 feet of a structure in accordance with Table 15-3. 
4.  In areas of multi-use development, the higher flow rates listed in Table 15-3 shall be provided for each hydrant. 
5.  Other residential (i.e., multi-family, condominium, townhouse), commercial, institutional, and industrial developments shall provide a fire flow of 2,500 gallons per minutes. 
Table 15.3 Fire Flow Requirements for Single-Family 
Detached and Two-Family Dwellings Unit to Unit 
Exposure Distance 
(feet) Flow Requirements 
per Hydrant 
(gpm) Flow Requirements 
for a Hydrant Within 
500 feet of a Structure 
(gpm) 0 to 10 1,500 2,000 10 to 30 1,000 1,500 Greater than 30 1,000 1,000  
1504 B. - Fire flow calculations. 
1.  Fire flow calculations shall include assumptions about the existing system. The calculations shall indicate available flows at the proposed hydrants and the pressure throughout the proposed system. 
2.  Fire flow calculations for projects to be developed in sections or phases shall indicate the available fire flows during each section or phase of the project. 
3.  For small sites that propose no major waterline extensions, an evaluation of the existing fire flow available may be substituted for existing fire flow calculations. 
4.  In the event that minimum fire flows cannot be achieved, the developer of a property shall design additional fire protection measures into every building not covered by adequate flows. Any deviation from the minimum fire flow requirements shall require a site development plan waiver application, for condition fire flow requirements. See site development plan requirements in this manual. 
5.  Flow calculations shall be prepared using a program that is acceptable to the city, such as the "K Pipe" program developed by the University of Kentucky. 
6.  Flow calculations shall utilize a pipe roughness factor, c=120 for pipes that are 12 inches in diameter and greater. For pipes smaller than 12 inches a roughness factor of c=100 shall be utilized. Since a conservation "c" factor is utilized in the calculations, no allowance is required for the losses in valves and other fittings. 
7.  The line velocity shall not exceed ten feet per second under any flow condition. Consideration shall be given to the line size used in areas where a domestic service line extends from a dead end line. In this instance, the line velocity may be permitted to exceed ten feet per second to avoid stale water problems. 
1504 C. - Water storage systems. 
Water storage systems utilized to maintain fire flow shall have capacity to sustain the required flow for a minimum of four hours in duration. 
1505. - FIRE SAFETY SYSTEMS-PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS. 
1505 A. - Plan elements in general. 
The site development and subdivision plans shall include the following: 
1.  Fire lanes. 
2.  Emergency access. 
3.  Existing and proposed fire hydrants. 
4.  Fire protection lines. 
5.  Water storage supplies, where applicable. 
1505 B. - Fire flow calculations. 
1.  Fire flow calculations shall be included with the site and subdivision development plans. 
2.  Deviations from the minimum fire flow requirements in Section 504.2 of this manual shall require a conditional fire flow waiver with the site and subdivision development plan application. The waiver shall address current fire flow available and provide a system analysis to determine measures for bringing deficiencies up to minimum standards. 
3.  The department of water and wastewater, after coordinating with the fire chief and fire marshal, shall approve additional fire protection measures proposed for every building not covered by adequate fire flows, prior to the approval of the site and subdivision development plans. 
1506. - FIRE LINE ORDINANCE. 
1506 A. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to require the installation of an underwriter approved detector meter or a factory mutual fire meter on all unmetered fire service systems having fire hydrant(s), hand hose connection(s), or sprinkler head(s) on private property. 
1506 B. - Effective date. 
1.  Upon adoption of this ordinance, all persons making applications for new fire service connections with private fire hydrant(s), hand hose connection(s), or sprinkler head(s) attached thereto shall be required to have an underwriter approved detector meter or factory mutual fire line meter. However, if consumption of unmetered water from fire service systems is discovered, the two-year grace period will be forfeited and immediate installation of an approved detector meter or factor mutual fire line meter will be required. 
2.  Within two years after adoption of this ordinance, all existing unmetered fire service systems with private fire hydrant(s), hand hose connection(s), or sprinkler head(s) attached thereto shall be required to have an underwriter approved detector meter or factory mutual fire line meter. However, if consumption of unmetered water from fire service systems is discovered, the two-year grace period will be forfeited and immediate installation of an approved detector meter or factory mutual fire line meter will be required. 
3.  When unauthorized water is used through a detector meter in three or more billing periods in one calendar year, it shall be replaced with a factory mutual fire line meter. Unauthorized use of water is defined as non-fire fighting water and/or water use without prior notification and approval of the city. 
4.  All domestic water supply must be metered with a proper meter. 
5.  Work to be performed by developer. Installation of detector meters or factory mutual billing periods in one calendar year it shall be handled by the developer under supervision of the city's inspectors. The cost of installation will be at a rate established for each individual site. 
6.  The city shall have the authority to cut off water service to buildings whose owners refuse to comply with the provisions of this ordinance upon proper notification of 60 days. 
7.  The regular monthly fire service standby charge shall be continued for fire service installation having a detector or mutual fire line meter. The water that is measured by the detector meter will be billed at five times normal water charge. If the services of legal counsel are required to collect bills, the cost of counsel shall be added to the billing. 
1506 C. - Other items. 
1507. - FIRE SAFETY SYSTEMS-CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS. 
1507 A. - Fire lane signs and painting. 
1.  Fire lane signs shall be constructed of metal with a dimension of approximately 12 inches by 15 inches. 
2.  The sign shall be painted with red letters on a white background with a three-eighths inch red trim strip around the entire outer edge of the sign. The lettering on the sign shall read, "NO PARKING OR STANDING FIRE LANE", which shall be spaced on the sign face uniformly. Solid arrows shall be painted on the signs to point to and indicate the designated fire lane. The lettering and arrow on the sign shall be in accordance with Table 15-4. 
3.  Signs for fire lanes shall be posted at intervals of 100 feet with the bottom of the sign no less than six feet from the ground, and the top no more than eight feet from the ground, unless otherwise directed by the fire chief or his designee. 
4.  Letters at least two feet in height may be painted on the pavement where a fire lane runs through a parking area without curbing adjacent to the fire lane, and where the posting of a metal sign(s) is impractical. The lettering shall read "NO PARKING OR STANDING FIRE LANE." 
Table 15.4 Fire Lane Sign Lettering Lettering 
(words) Letter Height 
(inches) NO PARKING 2 OR 1 STANDING 2 FIRE LANE 21/2 Arrows 1  
5.  When curbing is provided adjacent to the fire lane, it shall be painted yellow within the limits of the fire lane. 
6.  When curbing is not provided adjacent to the fire lane, a yellow line shall be painted on the pavement along the perimeter and within the limits of the fire lane with two-foot long intersecting lines and painted at three-foot intervals on the fire lane side of the perimeter. 
1507 B. - Fire hydrants. 
1.  All fire hydrants shall be designed and manufactured to comply with the latest specifications of the AWWA. They shall be designed for 150 pounds working pressure. The hydrants shall be of simple design, easy to operate, effectively and positively drained and protected from damage by freezing and convenient for repairing and replacing parts. 
2.  Hydrants shall be equipped with one 41/2-inch diameter pumper nozzle and two 21/2-inch diameter hose connections. The hydrants shall have threads meeting the latest requirements of the State Fire Insurance Commission. Hydrants shall also have a safety flange on the barrel and a safety coupling on the valve stem, to prevent damage to barrel and stem in case of traffic accident. Hydrants shall be either Mueller Company's Centurion Traffic Model, or M & H Style 129 Traffic Model. 
3.  The construction to the main line shall be with mechanical joint locked hydrant tee equal to American Cast Iron Pipe Company A-10180. Wherever possible the fire hydrant shall be connected to the gate valve by using a locked hydrant adapter equal to American A-10895. The connection at the base of the hydrant shall be mechanical joint with ductile iron retainer gland, for Class 150, centrifugally case, six-inch ductile iron pipe. The valve opening shall meet the requirements of the AWWA Specifications for 51/4-inch hydrants. The valve, valve seat and inner working parts shall be easily accessible. The distance from the ground to the hose nozzle shall not be less than 24 inches. Each hydrant shall be neatly painted with a red reflecting paint. 
4.  Each hydrant shall be tested to 200 psi. The first test shall be made with the valve closed. The second test shall be made with the main valve open but all nozzles closed. While this test is being carried on, the hydrant shall be subjected to a hammer test. Any hydrant showing defects by leakage, sweating or otherwise shall be rejected. The barrel and all parts shall withstand these tests. These tests shall be made in the field after the hydrants are installed. 
1507 C. - Setting fire hydrants. 
1.  Fire hydrants shall be placed at the locations shown on the plans or as directed by the design professional. Gate valves for fire hydrants shall be connected directly to the main by means of a locked hydrant tee. All other connections between the main and the fire hydrant shall be mechanical joint with ductile iron retainer glands with setscrews. Fittings shall be restrained by a locked hydrant adapter whenever the fire hydrant is located close enough to the main to allow their use. Care shall be exercised that setscrews and retainer glands are tightened sufficiently to secure the hydrants before pressure is put on the main. Not less than four cubic feet of coarse, broken stone shall be placed around the base of the hydrants, as shown in the standard detail drawings. Before placing the hydrants, care shall be taken to see that all foreign material is removed from within the body. The stuffing boxes shall be tightened and the hydrant valve opened and closed to see that all parts are in first class working condition. All hydrant openings shall be kept capped, except when hydrant is being worked on. 
2.  When a fire hydrant has been constructed but is not yet placed in service, the contractor shall provide and attach to the fire hydrant, flags or collars indicating that the fire hydrant is not in service. Said flags or collars shall remain on the fire hydrant until it is put into service. 
3.  Whenever an existing fire hydrant is taken out of service, whether temporarily or permanently, it shall be equipped with a flag or collar indicating that it is not in service. The contractor shall provide and install flags or collars as required and shall notify the city fire department whenever the operating status of any fire hydrant changes. 
4.  Fire hydrants shall not be operated with any tool except a specifically designed fire hydrant wrench. If the contractor observes any other contractor or person operating a fire hydrant with an unapproved fire hydrant wrench, he shall report that fact to the city fire department or water and wastewater department immediately. It is the contractor's responsibility to insure that all new facilities are maintained in new condition until final completion of the project and acceptance by the city. Fire hydrants with damaged operating nuts shall not be accepted. 
1507 D. - Fire detection check valves. 
1.  Approved detection check valves shall be required on all fire service mains in buildings served by a "wet pipe" type sprinkler system. 
2.  The detection check valve shall be equipped with a bypass meter assembly. An appropriately sized gate valve shall be installed on either side of the check valve. 
3.  The vault housing the detector check valve should be sized in accordance with the standard details drawings in this manual. 
1507 E. - Sprinkler standpipe connections. 
All fire department connections shall be fitted with National Standard threads. 

15.1: Fire Line Detail

15.2: Typical Fire Hydrant Installation

15.3: Typical Fire Hydrant Location

15.4: Typical Fire Hydrant Island-Parking Area

15.5: Typical Fire Hydrant Post Protection

15.6: Emergency Access Space Consolidated with 2 Adjacent Parking Spaces Reserved for the Handicapped

15.7: Typical Emergency Access Space
ARTICLE 16. - WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS 

1601. - PURPOSE. 
1601 A. 
The purpose of this section is to address the minimum requirements for design and construction of public water systems. 
1601 B. 
The authority for discretionary provisions for design and construction of water systems shall vest with the Director of the City of Griffin Water and Wastewater Department. 
1601 C. 
This chapter is subject to periodic revision to meet changing requirements for materials, environmental regulations, etc. At the beginning of a project the user should verify that he has the latest edition. 
1601 D. 
This document is intended to convey the general design and construction requirements for a typical project. It also lists specific requirements relating to inspection, testing and acceptance of facilities. It is not intended as a substitute for site-specific engineering and construction techniques. Individual project conditions may require waivers from the provisions in this document. 
1602. - GENERAL POLICY AND REQUIREMENTS. 
1602 A. 
Water systems shall be designed in accordance with the densities and intensities reflected in the long range future land use plan and map of the adopted City of Griffin Comprehensive Plan. 
1602 B. 
The approximate location and character of proposed public water facilities shall correspond with the existing and proposed water system map, as amended. 
1602 C. 
Water systems shall be designed for the estimated future population from all contributing points under consideration. The estimated future population shall be based on the adopted comprehensive plan and/or the existing zoning of the land to be served, whichever is greater. 
1602 D. 
Except as provided below, all future buildings within the city's corporate limits that are to be utilized for human occupancy or any other use such as commercial or industrial purposes that requires water facilities shall be connected to the public water system. 
1602 E. 
Water connections. All water service connections from the meter to the building, except when within a dedicated easement, are regulated by the Standard Plumbing Code (SBCCI) and shall be privately maintained. 
1602 F. 
Water supply interconnections. There shall be no physical connections between a drinking water supply and a sanitary or storm sewer, or appurtenance thereof. All facilities furnished with a public drinking water supply will have no physical connection with private wells or other private water supply systems, or any other source of contamination. 
1603. - FIRE SAFETY SYSTEMS. 
    Fire safety systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Article 16 of this manual. 
1604. - PLANS AND SUBMITTALS. 
1604 A. - General. 
All projects which involve construction of lateral water lines, main water lines, or trunk lines shall have detailed construction plans and specifications prepared by a registered professional engineer licensed in the State of Georgia or a design professional who meets state licensure requirements applicable to the profession or practice he is engaged in. Developments that only involve building water lines may have plans and specifications prepared by the project architect. 
1.  Water flow test. A water flow test shall be performed on the existing water line to determine the adequacy of the existing water supply line for the project. The test shall consist of a fire hydrant flow test and a 24-hour pressure test. The city will perform the tests at the developer's expense. 
2.  Test information shall consist of: 
a.  Static pressure and flow in gallons per minute (gpm). 
b.  Residual pressure and flow in gpm. 
c.  Available flow at highest point in the development in gpm with residual pressure of 20 psi. 
d.  Twenty-four hour pressure chart. 
3.  An adequate supply of water for the proposed project shall be available prior to final approval of the plans. Flow tests shall be valid for one year. 
4.  All projects that have flow test results with static pressure less than 36 psi will require a special design study to be accomplished and submitted to the city for approval to insure no problems are encountered during peak demands. 
1604 B. 
All site development plans involving water systems shall be submitted to the department of development services. The department of development services shall coordinate the review and approval of all elements of the plan in accordance with this manual. 
1604 C. - Preliminary plan review. 
Preliminary plans will be prepared and submitted for review as described in these development regulations. Questions relating to availability of sanitary sewers and proposed location of connection should be resolved at this stage before proceeding with final planning. A submittal for preliminary plan review must include all land to be developed even though the land is to be developed in several phases or units. Availability determinations will be made for the total project. 
1604 D. - Final plan review. 
All final plans for public sanitary sewer facilities shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements described in these development regulations and as requested in regulations promulgated by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD). The developer shall be responsible for submitting all necessary plans and other data to EPD for required approvals and for obtaining other permits, such as DOT, railroad, etc. 
1604 E. - Plan elements. 
In addition to the information to be provided in these development regulations, the following information shall be provided on all site development plans: 
1.  All proposed water lines and the location and size of all valves, fittings, air relief valves, meters, discharge lines, blow-off chambers and other appurtenances. 
2.  On industrial and commercial developments the water meter and service line size and location. 
1605. - AS-BUILT DRAWINGS. 
    All as-built or record drawings must be submitted in a digital computer file format, as well as with paper copies, with specifications as follows and submitted to the City of Griffin Public Works/Stormwater Department for acceptance. 
    Acceptable formats for digital as-builts include: 
AutoCAD .dwg or .dxf files 
ESRI GIS "shape" files 
ESRI GIS "geodatabase" files 
    As-built data must be in the City of Griffin's Coordinate System, which is the West Georgia State Plane Coordinate System (NAD83), and the vertical datum must be NAVD88. 
    The City of Griffin has a survey monument system for reference in the above coordinate system available for contractors to tie in to. Any information regarding the City of Griffin's monuments can be accessed by visiting www.griffinstorm.com and accessing the appropriate link for the control point network. 
    As-builts must include all data regarding the project including but not limited to water, sewer, stormwater and parcel data. This data needs to be submitted on separate layers and/or files under the aforementioned names. Detention ponds, pipe sizes, types, elevations, and inverts must be shown including impervious areas. 
    If you have any computer file format questions please feel free to call the City of Griffin GIS Department at 770-412-9950 Ext. 2. 
    GUIDELINES FOR PREPARATION OF AS-BUILTS: 
1.  As-built drawings will be same format as the original construction plans. 
2.  Road names and lot numbers should be on plans. 
3.  "As-Builts" or "Record Drawing" is to be stamped in large clear print on plans. 
4.  Sheet should be no larger than 24" × 36". 
5.  Mains including size and type of meter should be shown. 
6.  Service and meter locations should be shown. 
7.  Fire hydrants, gate valves, air release valves should be shown. 
8.  Plan of fire meters or detector meters should be shown if applicable. 
1606. - EASEMENTS. 
1606 A. 
All easements shall allow adequate room to construct the water line and appurtenances. Permanent easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide; except that when the depth of the water line exceeds ten feet the required easement width shall increase such that the easement width is at least twice the depth from the ground surface to bottom of the pipe. Easements with dual utilities are to be a minimum of 35 feet in width. 
1606 B. 
To provide for maximum utilization of public water systems, appropriate easements shall be provided to adjacent properties for access to, or extension of, said utilities. Such easements shall be dedicated to the City of Griffin. 
1606 C. 
It shall be the responsibility of the developer to obtain any off-site easements required to connect the project to existing public water system. Easements will be conveyed to the City of Griffin for all facilities that are to be conveyed to the city. Final plans cannot be approved until all necessary off-site easements have been submitted, approved and recorded. 
1607. - WATER SYSTEM DESIGN CRITERIA. 
1607 A. - General. 
The criteria listed herein is not intended to cover all aspects of design, but rather to mention the basic guidelines and those particulars that are required by the City of Griffin. 
1607 B. - Water lines in public right-of-way. 
1.  Water lines will be allowed within the right-of-way of any roadway unless as determined by the city or GDOT there are compelling design or safety issues which would demand consideration of an alternate location. 
2.  Water lines will be allowed under pavement five feet from the outside edge of pavement or seven feet from the face of curb of undivided roadways unless there are compelling design and safety issues which would demand consideration of an alternate location. 
3.  Water lines greater than 24 inches in diameter, while permitted in most instances to cross any roadway, except a "limited access" right-of-way, shall not be permitted under the pavement parallel with the roadway alignment due to the necessity for structures, vaults, etc. 
4.  GDOT should be contacted at the preliminary plan stage to determine the acceptability of locating water lines under the pavement and/or within the right-of-way of state roadways, especially if, from preliminary review, it appears their guidelines will be difficult or impossible to meet. 
1607 C. - Surface water crossings. 
1.  Water lines crossing surface waters, both above and below the watercourse, present special problems and should be discussed with the department of water and wastewater before plans are prepared for submission. 
2.  Crossing of surface waters above the watercourse shall only be made when other methods are impractical. 
3.  When crossings are permitted, they shall be as close to a right angle to the stream as possible. No more area shall be disturbed than is necessary to provide for the construction of the water line at that location. 
1607 D. - Design calculations. 
1.  Residential water supply for domestic use shall be in accordance with Table 16-1 and at a minimum residual pressure of 20 psi. 
Table 16.1 Instantaneous Water Demands for Residential Areas Total Number of Residences Served GPM Per Residence 5 8.0 10 5.0 20 4.3 30 3.8 40 3.4 50 3.0 60 2.7 70 2.5 80 2.2 90 2.1 100 2.0 150 1.6 200 1.3 300 1.2 400 0.9 500 0.8 750 0.7 1,000 0.6  
2.  The city may require the following minimum flow/duration quantities prior to development of the property. 
a.  Multi-family: 750 GPM for 30 minutes. 
b.  Shopping centers: 750 GPM for 30 minutes. 
c.  Motels, light industry and schools: 750 GPM for 30 minutes. 
d.  Heavy industry, warehouse and office buildings greater than 300,000 square foot: Minimum 1000 GPM for 45 minutes. 
e.  Single-family residential: 500 GPM for 30 minutes. 
1607 E. - Water mains and appurtenances. 
1.  Water mains. 
a.  Either ductile iron pipe (DIP) or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) shall be used for water mains (see later section for material specifications). Water mains shall be DIP under pavement, at stream crossings and where mains cross under storm sewers, sanitary sewer lines or other utilities. 
b.  Existing streets. On existing roads, water lines shall be located on the north and west side of the road, within five feet of the right-of-way line with a minimum cover of 48 inches below the level of the roadbed or with 48 inches of cover, whichever is more restrictive. Permission must be obtained by the city to vary from this requirement. Fire hydrants on existing roads shall be located between the waterline and the street right-of-way. 
c.  New streets. All curbing must be installed before any after lines are installed. Water lines on new streets shall be located on the north and west side of the street, as shown in the standard drawings. Fire hydrants shall be located between the water main and the street right-of-way. Mains shall be located in accordance with the utility location detail (see standard details). 
2.  Service laterals. 
d.  Service laterals shall be located with a minimum cover of 48 inches within the right-of-way and rise to a buried depth of 18 inches at the water meter location. There shall be no splices of copper pipe under any pavement. 
e.  Service laterals crossing all roads shall be placed inside a minimum of a 21/2-inch diameter PVC casing. 
f.  A "W" shall be sawed into the curb where each service tap is made to indicate its permanent location. 
g.  Copper tubing shall be used for all services laterals. 
h.  Lateral shall be left exposed vertically as much as possible until all remaining utilities are installed. 
i.  Services for subdivision shall be sized and located as shown on the standard detail drawings. 
3.  Water meters shall be located at the limits of the street right-of-way. 
4.  Backflow preventer. All water meters shall be provided with a backflow preventer. 
5.  Fire line meters shall be designed to meet site-specific conditions, see standard details for conceptual layout of meter. 
6.  Detector meters shall be designed to meet site-specific conditions, see standard details for conceptual layout. 
7.  Water valves. 
j.  At intersections. Valves on water mains at intersections shall be located behind the curb. Generally, the number of valves shall equal the number of streets in the intersection minus one. The city may require valves in excess of this requirement if the water system layout warrants additional valves. 
k.  At end of line. A water valve and a minimum of 36 feet of pipe shall be provided at the end of all lines for phased developments, and at locations where the water main may be extended in the future for water system improvements. The end of the line shall be provided with a temporary plug and thrust collar. A three-quarter-inch tap for chlorination/dechlorination purposes shall be provided. 
l.  Along mains. Maximum spacing of water valves along water mains shall be 1,000 feet. In addition, a hydrant lead valve shall be located at every fire hydrant. 
m.  All valves shall have a concrete pad. 
8.  Valve markers. One concrete valve marker shall be furnished and set at each line valve. 
9.  Air and vacuum (A & V) release valves. Air and vacuum release valves shall be located where appropriate as determined by the design professional responsible for the project design. All A & V release valve locations are subject to approval of the city. In general, within subdivision A & V release valves are not necessary as long as services are located at the water main high points. 
10.  Polyethylene encasement. DIP water mains shall be provided with polyethylene encasement where the water main either crosses, or is in close proximity to, a steel gas main. 
1607 F. - Water line extension requirements. 
1.  Developers shall extend all water mains along their entire property frontage if the existing main is adjacent to the proposed development. The size of the extension shall be at least the size of the existing main and may be required to be larger according to the city's water plan. 
1608. - MATERIAL SPECIFICATIONS. 
1608 A. 
All materials used in the work including equipment shall be new and unused materials of a reputable U.S. manufacturer conforming to the applicable requirements of the specifications. No materials shall be used in the work until the city has approved them. 
1608 B. - Ductile iron pipe. 
1.  DIP shall be designed in accordance with ANSI A21.50 (AWWA C150), latest revision, and manufactured in accordance with ANSI A21.51 (AWWA C151), latest revision. Wall thickness class shall be Class 50, unless specified otherwise. 
2.  The pipe shall have an outside asphaltic coating in accordance with ANSI A21.51 (AWWA C151), latest revision, and shall also have standard cement lining inside with asphaltic seal coat per ANSI A21.4 (AWWA C104), latest revision. 
3.  Pipe joints. Except where restrained or flange joints are specified, shall be pushed-on or mechanical joint type joints conforming to ANSI A21.11 (AWWA C111), latest revision. The pipe shall be in 18- to 20-foot nominal lengths with standard deflection pipe sockets. Where restrained joints are shown or specified on pipe large than 12-inch diameter, the joints shall be "Lok-Fast", "Lok-Ring", or equal. 
4.  Where river-crossing pipe is shown or specified, the pipe shall be "Flex Lok Boltless Ball Joint Pipe" as manufactured by American Pipe or approval equal. 
5.  Where specified, flanged pipe shall meet ANSI A21.51 and be used with fittings meeting ANSI A21.10 (AWWA C110) latest revision. 
1608 C. - Copper tubing for water service. 
House service pipe shall be copper service pipe, type K, soft temper, seamless copper tubing, conforming to Federal Specification WW-T-T00. Compression joints shall be used. No joints shall be allowed under paved roadway. 
1608 D. - Steel casing pipe. 
Steel casing pipe shall conform to A.S.T.M. Designation A-139, Grade B, electric fusion welded steel pipe. The pipe shall have a minimum tensile strength of 35,000 psi; both the exterior and interior of the pipe shall have a coal tar varnish coating. 
1608 E. - Pipe fittings. 
All fittings shall be ductile iron furnished in accordance with ANSI Specifications A21.10 (AWWA C100), latest revision, and have a minimum of 250 psi pressure class rating. Joints shall be mechanical joints with ductile iron retainer glands conforming to ANSI Specification A21.11 (AWWA C111), latest revision. Ductile iron retainer gland shall be equal to EBAA Mega-Lug. All fittings shall be furnished with a cement mortar lining. 
1608 F. - Butterfly valves. 
1.  All butterfly valves shall be bubble-tight closing at the rated pressure with flow in either direction, and shall be satisfactory for applications involving throttling service and frequent operations or operations after long periods of inactivity. Valves shall meet the full requirements of AWWA Standard C504, latest revision for 150-psi working pressure and shall be suitable for above ground or buried service. 
2.  All interior ferrous surfaces of valves larger than 12 inches shall have a special epoxy coating meeting the requirements of AWWA C550. 
3.  Valve bodies shall be equipped with integrally cast mechanical joint ends meeting ANSI Specification A21.11 (AWWA C111). Mechanical joints shall be fitted with retainer glands with setscrews on ductile iron pipe. 
4.  Butterfly valves installed underground shall come equipped with the following manual operator. The required manual operators shall be of the traveling nut, self-locking type, designed to hold the valve in any intermediate position between fully open and fully closed without creeping or fluttering. Operators shall be equipped with mechanical stop-limiting devices to prevent over travel of the disc in the open and closed positions. Valves shall close with a clockwise rotation. Operators shall be fully enclosed and designed for buried operation. 
1608 G. - Gate valves. 
Valves 12 inches and smaller shall be gate valves. These valves shall be non-rising stem design, iron body, bronze mounted with a compression, resilient seat manufactured in accordance with AWWA Standard C509, latest revision. Valves shall be designed for a minimum working pressure of 200 psi and shall have two-inch square operating nuts, except in meter vaults where hand wheels shall be installed. Valves shall have non-rising stems, shall open when turned counter-clockwise and shall meet AWWA Specifications for Class C valves. Valves with flanged connections shall conform to ANSI B16.1. valves. Valves with flanged connections shall conform to ANSI B16.1. Mechanical joints shall be fitted with retainer glands and set screws on ductile iron pipe. Retainer glands shall be equal to EBAA Mega-Lug. Gate valve shall be as manufactured by American Darling, or equal. 
1608 H. - Valve boxes. 
Each valve shall be provided with a valve box. Valve boxes shall be approved standard cast iron, adjustable-shaft boxes having a minimum shaft diameter of 51/2 inches. The casting shall be coated with two coats of coal tar pitch varnish. The lids of all boxes shall bear the word "Water" or the letter "W". Boxes shall be equal to Vulcan Pattern VVB-4. 
1608 I. - Air and vacuum relief valve assemblies. 
1.  Air and vacuum relief valves shall be cast iron body and covers with bronze trim, stainless steel float, Buna-N-Seal, and shall be designed for a minimum working pressure of 150 psi. 
2.  The valve shall be designed to exhaust large quantities of air during the filling period and small quantities of air that collect in the line while operating under pressure. The valves shall be equal in all respects to Empire No. 950 combination air release valves. 
3.  Gate valves between water main and air relieve valve shall be bronze, solid wedge with screw connection equal to Grinnel Company's Figure 103 or Jenkins Company Figure 370. 
1608 J. - Service saddles. 
Service saddles shall be Smith Blair double strap or approved equal. 
1608 K. - Pipe couplings. 
Pipe couplings shall be mechanical joint solid sleeve conforming to ANSI/AWWA C153/A21.53.88 as manufactured by American Pipe or approved equal. Spacer rings shall be used with all solid sleeves. Field joints shall be made to insure permanent tight joints under all reasonable conditions of expansion, contraction, shifting, etc. 
1608 L. - Curb stops. 
All metal parts of curb stops shall be made of bronze. The 3/4-inch and one-inch stops shall be FIPT X compression McDonald 6102 WT, full port, or approved equal. The cock shall be operated with a combined cap and tee and shall open when turned counter-clockwise. 
1608 M. - Corporation cocks. 
Corporation cocks shall have quarter bend. The 3/4-inch and one-inch corporation cocks shall be McDonald 4701T or approved equal. All metal parts of the cock assembly shall be made of bronze. The cock shall be operated with a tee head and shall open when turned counter-clockwise. 
1608 N. - PVC casing pipe. 
PVC cashing pipe used for long-side services shall be schedule 40, a minimum of one inch larger in diameter than the service line, but no less than 21/2 inches in diameter. 
1608 O. - Meter boxes. 
The meter box and lid shall be cast iron of the standard size, 191/2-inch × 121/2-inch × 12-inch Schofield. 
1608 P. - Tapping valves. 
Tapping valves shall be Mueller, M.J. Type, 200 psi, H-667, or equal. 
1608 Q. - Tapping sleeves. 
Tapping sleeves shall be power seal 3490 stainless or equal. 
1608 R. - Water meters. 
Nominal 3/4-inch size meters shall be Neptune Trident 10; 5/8 -inch × 3/4-inch meters, one-inch meters shall be Neptune Trident 10; 11/2-inch meters shall be Neptune Trident 10, FIPT outlet threads; two-inch meters shall be Neptune Trident or two-inch Compound TRU/FLO Meter, FIPT outlet threads. Three-inch and large meters shall be approved Neptune equal to the application of use. All meters shall read in gallons. 
1608 S. - Unions and adapters. 
All 3/4-inch adapters shall be CTS plastic nonflare X Male IPT adapter Hays 5605 CF. One-inch adapter for plastic to galvanized male shall be Hays 5605 DF, or Mueller H-15428. All 3/4-inch and one-inch plastic unions shall be CTS plastic X CTS plastic three-part nonflare union, Hays 5615 DR or Mueller H-15403. Y connections (yokes) shall be McDonald #08yst, full port. 
1608 T. - Backflow prevention. 
All new water service connections shall be equipped with a backflow prevention device on the customer side of the meter as shown on Standard Drawings No. 600-4, 600-5 and 600-6 of this chapter. Certain customers may also be required to install additional cross-connection and backflow prevention devices in accordance with Article VI, Water, of Chapter 94, Utilities, of the Code of Griffin, Georgia. 
1608 U. - Valve markers. 
Valve markers shall be made of 3,000 psi concrete and shall be four feet long and four inches on each side, with four No. 4 reinforcing bars. The markers shall be set with an even number of feet between the centerline of the valve and the centerline of the aluminum disc in the top of the marker and the distance in feet between the valve and marker shall be stamped in the marker at the time of setting. 
1608 V. - Polyethylene encasement. 
Polyethylene film shall be manufactured of virgin polyethylene material conforming to ASTM standard specifications D-1248-78 Type I, Class A or C, Grade E-1. The polyethylene film shall have a minimum thickness of eight mil. The polyethylene encasement material shall be provided in tube sizes adequate for the various size pipes. 
1608 W. - Insulators for DIP in steel casing. 
Insulators shall be as manufactured by Cascade Waterworks Manufacturing Company, or approved equal. Insulators for 24-inch DIP carrier pipe shall be CCS-2580 and eight inches wide. Insulators for 12-inch DIP carrier pipe shall be CCS-1320 and eight inches wide. Insulators for eight-inch DIP carrier pipe shall be CCS-905 and eight inches wide. Insulators for six-inch DIP carrier pipe shall be CCS-690 and eight inches wide. All insulators shall have a stainless steel shell. Insulators shall be located within five feet of each end of the casing and there shall be two insulators per joint of pipe within the casing. The positioning of the casing insulators shall be centered for water mains. 
1609. - WATER SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION. 
1609 A. - General. 
1.  It shall be expressly understood that these specifications are for installation of all underground water mains and appurtenances. 
2.  All work shall conform to the applicable provisions of the AWWA Specifications of latest revision except as otherwise specified herein. 
1609 B. - Trench excavation. 
1.  Trenches shall have a minimum width of 12 inches plus the diameter of the outside of the bell of the water main and the depth thereof shall be such that there shall be a minimum of 48 inches of cover measured below the roadway surface, natural ground, or proposed grade to the top of the pipe. Maximum trench width at the top of the pipe shall not be more than the outside diameter of the bell plus two feet. In cases where water lines cross above sanitary sewers, there shall be a minimum of 18 inches vertical separation between the water and sewer mains. In cases where a sanitary sewer crosses above water main, the sanitary sewer shall be DIP and incased in concrete. In cases where water mains parallel sewer mains there shall be a minimum of ten feet horizontal separation maintained between the mains. 
2.  Trenches shall be dug so the pipe can be laid to the alignment and depth required and the trench shall be of such width and shall be braced and drained so the workmen may work therein safely and efficiently. No chocking under the pipe will be permitted. All joints shall be as specified herein. Excavation must be made under the bell of each pipe so the entire length of the pipe will lie uniformly on the bottom of the trench and the pipe weight shall not rest on the bells. Trenches shall be free of water during the work. 
3.  Water lines shall have a minimum cover of 48 inches. All changes in grade shall be made gradually. At points of interference with storm sewers and cross drains, pipe will be run under the conflicting utility if the minimum cover cannot be maintained by going over the top of the pipe. Where the water main crosses beneath a storm sewer, there shall be a minimum of 12 inches clearance between the main and the storm sewer. The water main shall be DIP at all such crossings. 
4.  When laying pipe across watercourses, railroad crossings, or depressions of any kind, the minimum depth specified above shall be maintained at the bottom of the depression. 
5.  Where necessary, the line shall be lowered at valves so the top of the valve stem is approximately one foot below the finished grade. The trench shall be deepened to provide a gradual approach to all low points of the line. 
6.  Wherever rock is encountered in the excavation, it shall be removed by suitable means. If blasting is used for removal of rock, the contractor shall obtain all required state and local permits and take all proper safety precautions. He shall comply with all rules and regulations for the protection of life and property that may be imposed by any public agency having jurisdiction relative to the handling, storing and use of explosives. Before blasting, the contractor shall cover the excavation with heavy timbers and mats to protect the adjacent property owners from damage. All rock encountered shall be removed six inches below the bottom grade of the trench and the trench built back to the correct grade with suitable material tamped into place. Sides of the trench shall be trimmed of projecting rock that will interfere with backfilling operations. When blasting, the blast shall be covered with heavy timber mats and such other precautions taken as to prevent damage to persons or property. The contractor shall be totally responsible for any damage resulting from blasting. Rock excavation by blasting shall be at least 75 feet in advance of pipe laying. 
7.  After the pipe has been laid, backfilling shall be done in two distinct operations. In general, all backfill beneath, around and to a depth of 12 inches above the top of the pipe shall be placed by hand in four-inch layers for the full width of the trench and thoroughly compacted by hand with vibrating equipment. Care shall be taken so the pipe is not laterally displaced during backfilling operations. The backfill lifts shall be placed by an approved method in accordance with that hereinafter specified. Backfill materials shall be the excavated materials without bricks, stone, foreign matter or corrosive materials, where not otherwise specified or indicated on the plans. 
8.  Backfill under permanent concrete or bituminous pavement or floors and as elsewhere specified or indicated on the plans shall be approved bank-run sand or gravel or crushed stone, free from large stones and containing no more than ten percent by weight of loam or clay. This backfill shall be compacted to 100 percent as determined by the modified Proctor Test for the top two feet of trench and 95 percent by the modified Proctor Test from pipe bedding to two feet below trench top. Mechanical vibrating equipment shall be used to achieve the required compaction. 
9.  Backfill under gravel or crushed stone surfaced roadways and low-type bituminous surfaced roadways shall be the approved suitable excavated material placed in six-inch layers thoroughly compacted for the full depth and width of the trench, conforming to the compacting, density compaction method and materials as specified in H above. 
10.  Backfill in unpaved areas shall be compacted with mechanical vibrating equipment to 90 percent as determined by the modified Proctor Test. Backfill material from pipe bedding to ground surface by shall be excavated earth free from large stones and other debris. 
11.  The contractor shall fully restore and replace all pavement, surface structures, etc., removed or disturbed as part of the work to a condition equal to that before the work began. 
12.  Where sheeting is used in connection with the work, it is in no case to be withdrawn before the trench is sufficiently filled to prevent damage to banks, road surfaces, adjacent pipes, adjacent structures or adjacent property, public or private. 
1609 C. - Laying of pipe. 
1.  All pipes shall be laid straight, true to line and grade. Bell and coupling holes shall be dug in the trench and the pipe shall have a continuous bearing with the trench bottom between bell or coupling holes. No shimming or blocking up of the pipe shall be allowed. When the work is not going on, all pipe openings shall be securely closed by the insertion of the proper size plug and caulking so dirt and debris will not be washed into the pipe in case of rain. 
2.  [Reserved.] 
3.  In making the joints with ductile iron pipe, the spigot end of the pipe and the inside of the bell shall be thoroughly cleaned and the gasket inspected to see that it is properly placed. Lubricant shall be applied to the spigot end of the pipe and it shall be inserted into the bell of the adjoining pipe to the stop mark on the pipe. 
1609 D. - Thrust restraint for pressure lines. 
1.  Reaction blocking. 
a.  Underground pipe laid around curves, at all unsupported changes of direction, and all tees, wyes, crosses, plugs and other similar fittings shall be solidly and property blocked with concrete against solid earth. This blocking is designed to take the reaction of the main pressure and to prevent lateral movement of the pipe or fittings under pressure. Reaction blocking shall be installed at all locations requiring it and where tie rods and clamps are not called for in the plans. Concrete for reaction blocking shall have a minimum compressive strength of 3,000 psi at 28 days. The blocking, unless otherwise shown, shall be placed so the pipe and fitting joints will be accessible for repair. 
b.  Reaction blocking shall be constructed as per AWWA Standard C600 Section 3.8, latest revision. It shall be constructed in conformance with the Standard Detail Drawings for Reaction Blocking. 
2.  Retainer glands. Mechanical joint fittings on ductile iron pipe shall be installed with retainer glands in compliance with the requirements of AWWA C600. 
1609 E. - Setting valves and fittings. 
1.  Valves shall be set plumb, and shall have cast iron valve boxes. The valve boxes shall be placed directly over the valve and set plumb, the top of the box being brought to the surface of the ground. After the boxes are in place, earth shall be filled in the trench and thoroughly tamped around the box. After all settlement has taken place, a concrete collar shall be constructed for each valve box. 
2.  Fittings shall be properly braced to insure they will not be blown off or broken loose under the greatest possible working pressure. All fittings shall be mechanical joints unless specified otherwise. In situations where there is insufficient undisturbed earth to act as a bearing surface or where otherwise directed by the city, fittings shall be restrained by the use of threaded rods or other method acceptable to the city. 
3.  Prior to blocking any joint or fitting with concrete, the joint or fitting shall be wrapped with polyethylene film in such a manner that the concrete will not stick directly to the pipe but so the load bearing capacity of the blocking will not be affected. Polyethylene film shall be installed at other points along the water main where directed by the city. 
1609 F. - Placing steel casing pipe. 
Unless directed otherwise, the installation of steel casing pipe shall be by the dry bore method. The hole is to be mechanically bored and cased through the soil by a cutting head on a continuous auger mounted inside the casing pipe. The installation of the casing and boring of the hold shall be done simultaneously by jacking. Lengths of pipe are to be adequately welded to the preceding section installed. Excavation material shall be removed and placed at the top of the working pit. Backfill material and methods of backfilling and tamping shall be as required under Section 1609 E. above. Carrier pipe shall be inserted within the casing by use of stainless steel casing spacers. Intervals shall be as recommended by the manufacturer. 
1609 G. - Marking of valve locations. 
1.  Each main line water valve shall be marked by cutting a letter "V" in the curb. The "V" shall be turned to point toward the valve that may be either in the street or in the grass behind the curb. The letter height shall be four to six inches. 
2.  Concrete valve markers shall be set for main line water valves with an even number of feet between the center line of the valve and the center line of the aluminum disc in the top of the marker and the distance in feet between the valve and marker shall be stamped in the marker at the time of setting. 
1609 H. - Dewatering trenches. 
The contractor shall do all necessary pumping or bailing, build all drains and do all other work necessary at his own expense to keep the trenches clear of water during the progress of the work. 
1609 I. - Bracing, sheeting and/or shoring. 
Whenever the condition of the ground is such that it is necessary to protect the work, the street, the roadway or the workmen, the sides of the trench shall be supported with suitable bracing, sheeting and/or shoring to be furnished by the contractor at his own expense. 
1609 J. - Rock excavation. 
1.  Drilling and blasting operations shall be conducted with due regard for the safety of persons and property in the vicinity and in strict conformity with requirements of all ordinances, laws and regulations governing blasting and the use of explosives. Rock excavation near existing pipelines or other structures shall be conducted with the utmost care to avoid damage. The contractor, to the satisfaction of the city and property owner, shall promptly repair injury or damage to other structures and properties. 
2.  Rock in trenches shall be excavated over the horizontal limits of excavation and to depths as shown in Table 16-2 below. 
Table 16.2 Rock Excavation Depths Size of Pipeline 
(inches) Depth of Excavation 
Below Bottom of Pipe 
(inches) 4 and less 4 4 to 6 6 8 to 18 8 18 to 30 10 Over 30 12  
3.  The undercut space shall then be brought up to grade by backfilling with Size #57 crushed stone material or approved equal. 
1609 K. - Locations and protection of existing underground utilities. 
It is the responsibility of the contractor to locate and protect the underground utilities. The contractor shall repair utility lines or services he damages at his own expense. 
1609 L. - Connection to existing city water system. 
1.  Requirements for fire line connections. All persons desiring a tap must make application at the city prior to the tap being made. The contractor shall furnish the following information when making application: 
a.  Approved plans for the project. 
b.  Copy of street or highway permit, if applicable. 
c.  Meter size including detector meter, if applicable (city may require installation of a master meter at the point of tie-in if it is determined that a substantial water loss in the development may occur). 
d.  Billing address and purchase order, if required. 
e.  Plan and profile of meter installation larger than two inches. 
2.  City makes the connection: 
a.  The contractor shall furnish the following at the site: 
i.  Tapping sleeve and valve installed on the line and ready for tapping. 
ii.  Proper traffic control devices and person(s) to direct traffic if required. 
iii.  Backhoe or lift capable of handling the tapping machine. 
iv.  Minimum of three men to assist with the work. 
b.  The contractor will be billed for the tap plus an hourly rate, plus overhead costs, for the city's operator, his helper, truck and any other equipment used if made by city forces. 
3.  Private contractor makes the connection: 
a.  City personnel shall supervise the tap and associated work by private licensed utility contractor. 
b.  All taps shall be made on wet line. 
c.  All taps to be made with saddles or tapping sleeves. 
1609 M. - Street cuts. 
1.  All paved roads will be bored and cased. A bore must be attempted before consideration will be given to cutting the street. 
2.  One lane of traffic shall be maintained open at all times. Construction work shall be limited to time between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
3.  The contractor shall furnish traffic control devices and person(s) to direct traffic, if required. 
4.  The above requirements may be altered with the written approval of the city in extenuating circumstances. 
1609 N. - Standard drawings. 
Installation of fire hydrants, water valves, valve boxes, meters, long side services water lines, etc. shall be made in accordance with the applicable standard design drawings in this manual. 
1609 O. - Clean up. 
Prior to requesting the final inspection, the contractor shall do the following: 
1.  Remove and dispose of, in an acceptable manner, all shipping timbers, shipping bands, spacers, excess materials, broken material, crates, boxes and any other material brought to the job site. 
2.  Repair or replace any work damaged by the water line construction. 
3.  Regrade and smooth all shoulder areas disturbed by the construction. 
4.  Pour concrete collars around all valve boxes outside paved areas. 
5.  Insure that all fire hydrants are set to grade and that all valves have been located and are fully open. 
1609 P. - Interruption of water supply during construction. 
A minimum of two hours advance notice shall be given to any occupied building served by a water line that is required to be shut off. Occupants shall be informed of the date, time of cutoff and the duration of stoppage. Failure to do so will make the contractor liable for any damages reported to the city. For outages affecting several customers, notice shall be prepared and placed with local news media and to be coordinated with water and wastewater department. 
1610. - INSPECTION AND TESTS. 
1610 A. - Scope. 
This section pertains to the inspection and testing of installed water lines requiring testing to assure proper operation and service. 
1.  All lines designed to operate under pressure shall be successfully tested. Tests of installed piping shall consist of leakage and disinfection tests. 
2.  All piping to be tested must satisfactorily comply with the pressure tests before being eligible for acceptance. 
3.  Tests shall be conducted in accordance with AWWA Standard C-600 except as otherwise herein specified. 
1610 B. - Leakage testing. 
1.  After all piping has been placed; the contractor in the presence of a city inspector shall test each pipe run. Tests shall be continued until all leaks have been made tight to the satisfaction of the inspector. The contractor shall furnish all necessary meters, pumps, gauges, bulkheads and other materials and appliances necessary to conduct the required tests. Every precaution must be taken to valve-off or otherwise protect control equipment in or attached to the pipeline to prevent damage or injury thereto. 
2.  Before applying the specified test pressure, all air shall be expelled from the pipe. If hydrants, blow-offs or air release valves are not available at the high places, the contractor shall make the necessary taps at points of highest elevation before the test is made and insert plugs after the test has been completed. 
3.  Prior to the pressure test, pipe laid in trenches shall be adequately backfilled to secure the pipe during the test. Any observed leakage shall require corrective measures to pipe lines and/or joints as to the satisfaction of the inspector. 
4.  The city will furnish the necessary water for testing and disinfection of the lines. However, any water lost through breakage of lines, or unnecessary or excessive flushing of lines, will be charged to the contractor at the current residential rate. All lines shall be tested to a pressure of 200 psi for a minimum time of two hours. Test pressure shall not vary by more than five psi for the duration of the test. This may require periodic pumping, in which case the added water will be counted as part of the leakage. Lines shall be tested in sections between the valves. Allowable leakage amounts are found in Table 16-3 below: 
Table 16.3 Allowable Leakage Table (gph/1,000 ft. of pipeline*) Pipe Diameter (inches) 3 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 24 30 36 Maximum Leakage 0.32 0.43 0.64 0.85 1.06 1.28 1.48 1.70 1.91 2.12 2.55 3.19 3.82  
*If the pipeline under test contains sections of various diameters, the allowable leakage will be the sum of the computed leakage of each size. 
5.  Any section of the line not meeting the above test shall have the leaks found and corrected at once and re-tested until the leakage falls within the allowable limits. Leakage testing must be witnessed and approved by the city. 
1610 C. - Disinfection. 
After leakage testing and all necessary repairs have been made, the lines shall be flushed clean and then disinfected in accordance with AWWA Standard for Disinfecting Water Mains, C651-92, subject to the following special conditions: 
1.  The method of disinfection shall be the Continuous-Feed Method in accordance with AWWA C651-92, Section 5.2. The potable water shall be chlorinated so after at 24-hour holding period in the main, there will be a free chlorine residual of not less than ten mg/L. 
2.  The form of chlorine may be either: a one percent solution made from either sodium hypochlorite or calcium hypochlorite. The chlorine shall be pumped and metered into the pipeline. Water must be flowing during the feeding operation and the injection point must be located so the flow of water will disperse the chlorine throughout the pipeline. 
3.  The contractor has the option of discharging the highly chlorinated water flushed from the pipeline to the existing sewers (if available) or dechlorinating prior to discharge. 
4.  After 24 hours, the line shall be flushed until the chlorine content is not more than two parts per million, and samples taken at various points along the line. The contractor has the option of delivering the samples to the water and wastewater department for testing or to an independent laboratory. The laboratory must be pre-approved by the owner and hold appropriate certification from Georgia environmental protection division. 
5.  The city must witness all flushing, disinfection, sampling and dechlorination work. The contractor shall outline his planned procedures for these tasks and obtain approval of the owner before commencing this work. 
6.  Dechlorination. 
a.  After the disinfection process has been completed and the contractor elects to dechlorinate, the heavily chlorinated water shall be flushed from the main until measurements show that the chlorine concentration in the water leaving the main is no higher than that generally prevailing in the distribution system or is acceptable for domestic use. The area where the chlorinated water is to be discharged shall be inspected. If there is any possibility that the chlorinated discharge will cause damage to the environment, then a neutralizing chemical shall be applied to the water to be wasted to neutralize thoroughly the chlorine residual remaining in the water. 
b.  The chlorine residual of water being disposed may be neutralized by treating the water with one of the chemicals listed in Table 16-4 below: 
Table 16.4 Water Neutralizing Chemicals Residual Chlorine Concentrations Sulfur 
Dioxide 
(SO2) Sodium 
Bisulfite 
(NaHSO3) Sodium 
Sulfite 
(Na2SO3) Sodium 
Thiosulfate 
(Na2S2O3H20) (mg/L) lb kg lb Kg lb kg lb kg Chemical Amounts 1 0.8 0.36 1.2 0.54 1.4 0.64 1.2 0.54 2 1.7 0.77 2.5 1.13 2.9 1.32 2.4 1.09 10 8.3 3.76 12.5 5.67 14.6 6.62 12.0 5.44 50 41.7 18.91 62.6 28.39 73.0 33.11 60.0 27.22  
Note:  Amounts of chemicals required to neutralize various residual chlorine concentrations in 100,000 gal. (378.5 m3) of water. 
1610 D. - Contractor qualifications. 
1.  Licensing and safety. All contractors who work on water systems that will be owned by the city must be licensed in accordance with State of Georgia Law and local ordinance. Compliance with applicable safety regulations is the responsibility of each company engaged in the work. The city shall assume no responsibility for the actions of others on the job site. It is the responsibility of those installing water mains and related appurtenances to conform to OSHA regulations, 29 CFR Part 1926, Subpart P, Paragraph 1926.650 through 1926.653 (publications from OSHA can be obtained by contacting OSHA Publications Distribution, Washington, D.C.). 
2.  Contractors performing water system installations must be approved by the city and shall be completely familiar with the procedures and contract requirements associated with this type project. 
3.  Unsatisfactory work may result in the loss of privilege to obtain a permit for future work in the City of Griffin. 
1610 E. - Construction inspection. 
1.  Responsibility for inspection. The developer's contractor will be responsible for the quality, accuracy and workmanship of his completed work. In addition, the developer shall employ a qualified professional (this shall normally be the same design professional who prepared the plans for the work) to review the quality of work as required during construction and to oversee the various specified tests and inspections. 
2.  City personnel will visit the job site on a periodic basis and make spot checks, as they deem appropriate. The city shall have the right to review and inspect all construction and may reject any work that does not meet quality control standards. 
3.  Project access. Authorized representatives of the city, which may include employees, city engineering consultant, state or federal agencies shall have access to the site for inspection at all times. 
4.  The developer, contractor(s) and the developer's professional responsible for inspection will be required to attend a pre-construction conference with the city. At the pre-construction conference, the contractor will submit to the city, in writing, the date they proposed to begin construction. The contractor shall provide notification by phone any time the work is to be vacated and will provide notice by phone prior to resuming work. 
5.  The developer's professional shall request the final inspection. 
6.  The city inspector may have informal verbal communications with the contractor foreman or superintendent at any time during construction. The city inspector will not direct the actions of contractor's workmen. 
7.  Communications during construction. All written communications regarding construction shall be directed to: 
Director of Water & Wastewater 
City of Griffin 
P.O. Box T 
Griffin, GA 30224 
Phone No. 770-229-6424 or Fax No. 770-229-6439 
8.  Concealed work. The city inspector may direct the contractor to notify the city and receive inspection approval prior to concealing certain work such as valves, tees, fire hydrants, pipe bedding, reaction blocking, lot services, or other appurtenances. 
9.  Minimum inspection. The following minimum inspections and tests will be performed and certified by the professional employed by the developer to perform quality control checking on the construction work: 
a.  Horizontal location. Horizontal location of the mains shall be checked by measuring distance from the back-of-curb to the main. Main sizes, valve, hydrant, service location and reaction blocking shall be checked. 
b.  Compaction of backfill. Compaction testing shall be required for mains constructed in paved areas or where pavement is planned. A minimum of two tests at each road crossing shall be conducted at varying depths. If any of these tests show failing results, then the failing backfill will be removed, re-compacted and re-tested and one additional area will be tested as well. 
c.  [Observation.] Pressure and disinfection tests shall be observed until each test if passed. 
1610 F. - Final inspections and conditional acceptance. 
1.  The developer's professional responsible for inspection of construction will provide the city with a certified statement after he completes his inspection, testing, and submittal of as-built drawings and easements. This statement must certify that all specified inspections and tests have been made and successfully passed, and that the work has been completed in substantial accordance with the approved plans and specifications. After receipt of this statement, the city will schedule a final inspection. A representative of the developer's professional and the contractor will be present during this final inspection. This final inspection will generally include spot checks of hydrants, valves and other appurtenances and a complete overview of the project. All valves shall be operated to insure all valves are in the fully open position. 
2.  Once all discrepancies are corrected, the city will issue a letter certifying conditional acceptance of the water system. This letter shall commence the start of the 24-month warranty period, which is required of the contractor. 
3.  On projects having phased development, this letter will allow the developer to apply for a permit for the next phase of development. 
4.  At the end of 24 months, the subdivision inspection team will reinspect the entire development. When all discrepancies have been corrected, the city will issue an acceptance letter and will begin perpetual maintenance and operation of the water system. 
1610 G. - Maintenance and payment bond. 
The developer shall post a maintenance bond, in accordance with this manual, on the facility for a two-year period after completion and conditional acceptance of the facility by the city. In addition, the developer shall post a payment bond on the facility for all subcontractor and material supplier work. 
1610 H. - Maintenance until final acceptance. 
It shall be the developer's obligation to provide all maintenance for a two-year period after acceptance of the project by the city. At the end of the two-year maintenance period the city shall inspect the water system. Upon correction by the developer of all deficiencies noted by the city, the city will accept the water system for maintenance. 

16.1: Typical Watermain at Cul-de-sac

16.2: 3/4" Water Meter Location for Subdivisions

16.3: Residential Water Meter Installation

16.4: House Service Installation

16.5: Compound Meters and Vault

16.6: Detector/Water Meters and Vault

16.7: Typical Road Crossing

16.8: Air and Vacuum Release Valve Assembly

16.9: Concrete Blocking Detail
ARTICLE 17. - SANITARY SEWER SYSTEMS 

1701. - PURPOSE. 
1701 A. 
The purpose of this section is to address the minimum requirements for design and construction of public sanitary sewer systems and on-site sewage disposal system. 
1701 B. 
The authority for discretionary provisions for design and construction of public sewer systems shall vest with the director of water and wastewater. 
1701 C. 
This chapter is subject to periodic revision to meet changing requirements for materials, environmental regulations, etc. At the beginning of a project the user should verify that he has the latest edition. 
1701 D. 
This document is intended to convey the general design and construction requirements for a typical project. It also lists specific requirements relating to inspection, testing and acceptance of facilities. It is not intended as a substitute for site-specific engineering and construction techniques. Individual project conditions may require waivers from the provisions in this document. 
1701 E. 
Sanitary sewer extensions into unincorporated Spalding County require approval by the board of board of commissioners. If approved, these extensions must meet all regulations and specifications set forth in the City of Griffin Development Ordinance. 
1702. - GENERAL POLICY AND REQUIREMENTS. 
1702 A. 
Sewer systems shall be designed in accordance with the densities and intensities reflected in the long range future land use map of the adopted City of Griffin Comprehensive Plan and the city's wastewater management plan. 
1702 B. 
The approximate location and character of proposed public sewer facilities shall correspond with the existing and proposed sewer system map, as amended. 
1702 C. 
Sewer systems shall be designed for the estimated future population from all contributing points under consideration. The estimated future population shall be based on the adopted comprehensive plan and/or the existing zoning of the land for the watershed to be sewered, whichever is greater. 
1702 D. 
Except as provided below, all future buildings within the city's corporate limits that are to be utilized for human occupancy or any other use such as commercial or industrial purposes that requires sanitary sewerage facilities shall be connected to the public sanitary sewer system. 
1.  Waiver of the requirement to connect to public sanitary sewers will be considered on a case-by-case basis for non-subdivided, single-lot buildings when the nearest connection point to a public sanitary sewer is more than 200 feet from the property line, when such buildings are to be used for single-family dwelling or some other use where the wastewater loading is no more than that of a single-family dwelling. Requests for waiver must be accompanied by appropriate documentation as may be required by local public health officials. 
1702 E. - Sewer connections. 
All sewers and service laterals located outside of dedicated rights-of-way or public easements are regulated by the Standard Plumbing Code (SBCCI), and shall be privately maintained. 
1702 F. - Water supply interconnections. 
There shall be no physical connections between a drinking water supply and a sewer, or appurtenance thereof. 
1703. - PLANS AND SUBMITTALS. 
1703 A. - General. 
All projects which involve construction of lateral sewers, main sewers, trunk sewers, interceptor sewers or pumping facilities shall have detailed construction plans and specifications prepared by a registered professional engineer licensed in the State of Georgia or a design professional who meets state licensure requirements applicable to the profession or practice he is engaged in. Developments that only involve building sanitary sewers may have plans and specifications prepared by the project architect. 
1703 B. - Plan submission. 
All development plans proposing a sewer system shall be submitted to the department of development services. The DODS shall coordinate the review and approval of all elements of the plan in accordance with the development regulations. 
1703 C. - Preliminary plan review. 
Preliminary plans will be prepared and submitted for review as described in these development regulations. Questions relating to availability of sanitary sewers and proposed location of connection should be resolved at this stage before proceeding with final planning. A submittal for preliminary plan review must include all land to be developed even though the land is to be developed in several phases or units. Availability determinations will be made for the total project. 
1703 D. - Final plan review. 
All final plans for public sanitary sewer facilities shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements described in these development regulations and as required in regulations promulgated by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD). The developer shall be responsible for submitting all necessary plans and other data to EPD for required approvals and for obtaining other permits, such as DOT, railroad, wetlands, etc. 
1.  The design of cross-country (undeveloped property) sanitary sewer lines and force mains shall be based on field-run surveys. The site plan for cross-country sanitary sewer lines and force mains need not show contour intervals, but the profiles shall be based on mean sea level elevation. Site plans for lift stations shall show existing and proposed contours. 
2.  In the event the subdivision is developed in phases, the final construction plans for sanitary sewers may be submitted in phases. 
3.  Profiles should have a horizontal scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch for cross-country lines and 50 feet to the inch for (existing and proposed) developed areas, and a vertical scale of not more than ten feet to the inch. The plan view should be drawn to a corresponding horizontal scale. The plan view should normally be shown on the same sheet as the profile. In any case both the plan and profile view should have line designations, station numbers, manhole numbers and any other indexing necessary to easily correlate the plan and profile view. The vertical datum used should be the elevation above mean sea level with benchmarks shown on the plans. Plans and profile shall show location of streets, storm sewer, water lines and their easements. 
4.  The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation has taken provisions of Act 599 and published a Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, 1992 Edition (or any more current edition as they are published). Final plans and specifications shall include appropriate segments of this manual. 
a.  Developers, design professionals and contractors performing work in the City of Griffin are responsible for acquiring a copy of this manual and using the best practical methods contained therein to control the erosion and sedimentation of the construction site on conformance with the intent of ACT 599. 
b.  Copies may be purchased from the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, P. O. Box 8024, Athens, GA 30603. For additional information, call the commission at 706-542-3065. 
1703 E. - Sanitary sewer details. 
Special detail drawings made to a scale to clearly show the nature of the design shall be furnished to show the following particulars: 
1.  All stream crossings and storm drain outlets with elevations of the stream bed and of normal and extreme high and low water levels. 
2.  Details of special sanitary sewer joints and cross sections. 
3.  Details of special sanitary sewer appurtenances such as manholes, service connections, elevated sanitary sewers, piers, pipe bedding, special highway crossings, railroad crossings, drop manhole connections, etc. 
4.  Easement drawings shall be furnished for work outside the development prior to approval of the sanitary sewer plans. The drawings shall be of a size suitable for legal recording and shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor. The drawings shall be draw in accordance with this manual. 
The title block for these easement plats shall read as follows: 
CITY OF GRIFFIN NAME OF OUTFALL OR SUBDIVISION EASEMENT FOR PROPOSED SANITARY SEWER CROSSING PROPERTY OF John Doe Tax Map, Block & Lot No./Zoning District/Date and/or Revised Date:       
5.  The developer's design professional shall furnish appropriate drawings for submittal by the owner to any state or federal highways, railroads, power lines, water lines, gas lines, petroleum lines or any other utility lines on which the sanitary sewer construction will encroach. 
a.  The drawings shall be 81/2" × 11" or 81/2" × 14" and shall show a plan view and profile view. The drawing shall show the same information required for easement drawings. 
b.  The drawing shall also show the right-of-way of the existing street or utility, the owner's designation of the line, the name or number of the nearest intersection or milepost or tower number and the distance to that appurtenance; clearance distance between the street surface, or the bottom of the rail, or the utility and the sanitary sewer; the type of material to be used for the sanitary sewer and the method of construction to be used; any other special information required by the owner of the facility on which the sanitary sewer is encroaching. 
c.  Five copies of the utility encroachment drawing will be furnished with the plans when they are submitted for approval. 
d.  The developer's design professional shall prepare and handle the submittal. 
e.  Construction permits shall not be issued until the utility encroachment permit has been obtained and until any special conditions such as insurance requirements have been complied with. 
f.  Sanitary sewer design calculations shall be submitted for all proposed mains as part of the development plans along with a sewer-shed map. 
g.  Deviations from the flow rates of Table 17-1 shall be included in the submission of the development plan, with a description of the procedure used for the calculations and must be approved by the director of water and wastewater. 
h.  Sanitary sewer design calculations shall be submitted for all proposed mains as part of the development plans along with a sewer-shed map. 
i.  Deviations from the flow rates of Table 17-1 shall be included in the submission of the development plan, with a description of the procedure used for the calculations and must be approved by the director of water and wastewater. 
1703 F. - As-built drawings. 
At the completion of construction (and preferably prior to the final field inspection), "as-built" drawings of the project shall be submitted to the city to serve as a permanent record of the project and shall be furnished in the form of one set of Mylar sepias (or other suitable form of reproducible drawings), two sets of blue line copies and one CAD 14 disk. Acceptance by the city will be made only after satisfactory as-built drawings have been submitted. As-built drawings will be in the same format as the original construction plans and normally will be an updated version of the construction plans. Each sheet of these drawings shall bear words "as-built" or "record drawings". 
GUIDELINES FOR PREPARATION OF AS-BUILTS 
1.  As-built drawings will be same format as the original construction plans. 
2.  Contour lines are not required. 
3.  Road names and lot numbers should be on plan. 
4.  "As-built" or "record drawing" is to be stamped in large clear print on plans. 
5.  Sheet should be no larger than 24" × 36". 
6.  Lateral wye locations must show distance from the downstream manhole. Ends of lateral lines must show distance from downstream manhole and offset distance from the main line. Approximate depth of end of lateral should be shown. 
7.  Show elevations of manhole inverts and tops. 
8.  Show field-measured distance between manholes. 
9.  For all sanitary sewers, show the field-measured azimuth or bearing of the line from manhole to manhole. 
10.  Show actual slope of pipe. 
11.  When a phase of a subdivision is completed, a location sketch of entire subdivision with said phase outlines shall appear on plans. 
12.  Maximum error of as-built measurements shall be: 
a.  [Manhole inverts:] Manhole inverts measure to 0.01 feet with maximum vertical error of 0.50 feet per 1,000 feet of horizontal traverse. 
b.  Manhole tops: Measure to 0.10 feet with maximum vertical error of 0.50 feet per 1,000 feet of horizontal traverse. 
c.  Horizontal locations: Measure to nearest 1.0 foot with allowable error of 1.0 foot per 1,000 feet of traverse. 
1704. - EASEMENTS. 
1704 A. 
All easements shall allow adequate room to construct the sanitary sewer and appurtenances. Permanent easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide, ten feet on each side of the line; except that when the depth of the sanitary sewer exceeds ten feet the required sanitary sewer easement width shall increase such that the easement width is at least twice the depth from the ground surface to bottom of the pipe. Easements with dual utilities shall be a minimum of 35 feet in width. 
1704 B. 
To provide for maximum utilization of public sewer systems, appropriate easements shall be provided to adjacent properties for access to, or extension of, said utilities. Such easements shall be dedicated to the City of Griffin. 
1704 C. 
It shall be the responsibility of the developer to obtain any off-site easements required to connect the project to existing public sanitary sewers. Easements will be conveyed to the City of Griffin for all facilities that are to be conveyed to the city. Final plans cannot be approved until all necessary on-site and off-site sanitary sewer easements have been submitted, approved and recorded. 
1705. - SEWERS IN RELATION TO STREAMS, LAKES AND OTHER WATER BODIES. 
1705 A. 
Sewer lines crossing streams or standing bodies of water, both above and under water, present special problems, and should be discussed with the department of water and wastewater before final plans are prepared. 
1705 B. 
Sewers located along streams shall be located outside of the streambed wherever possible and sufficiently removed there from to protect the natural stream channel. Reasons for requesting sewer lines to be located within streambeds shall be provided in the preliminary plan application. 
1705 C. - Stream buffer. 
Cross-country sanitary sewers adjacent to state waters shall be designed and constructed to comply with the buffer requirements as discussed in the City of Griffin soil and erosion control ordinance (copies are available at the public works department). Sanitary sewers crossing streams shall be kept to a practicable minimum. Where sewers parallel state waters, the sewers and their respective easements shall be located outside the buffer area. 
1705 D. 
Sewers laid on piers across ravines or streams shall be allowed only when it can be demonstrated that no other practical alternative exists. 
1706. - SEWER SYSTEMS IN RELATION TO WATERWORKS STRUCTURES. 
1706 A. 
Sewer systems shall meet the requirements of the EPD and the local health department with respect to minimum distances from water supply wells or water supply sources and structures. 
1706 B. 
No sewer line shall pass within 50 feet of a water supply source or structure unless special construction and/or pipe materials are used to obtain adequate protection. 
1706 C. 
The proposed design shall identify and adequately address the protection of all water supply structures within 100 feet of the proposed project. 
1707. - DESIGN CALCULATIONS. 
1707 A. 
Sewer systems shall be designed to carry the peak flows generated by the estimated future population from all contributing points under consideration. The estimated average daily flow will be computed using the unit flows from Table 17-1. 
1707 B. 
Peak flows will be determined using Table 17-2. 
1707 C. 
Considerations will be given to domestic, commercial, institutional and industrial wastes plus groundwater infiltration in determining the necessary capacity of the sewer system. 
Table 17.1 Average Daily Wastewater Flows By Future Land Use Category Land Use Category Density 
(SU/Ac.) Unit* Flow/Unit 
(gpd/Unit) Residential: Low Density 2 DU 400 Medium Density 5 DU 375 High Density 9 DU 350 Neighborhood Commercial - Acre 2,000 Office/Professional - Acre 2,000 Commercial - Acre 2,000 Light Industrial - Acre 1,500 Office/Distribution/Technology - Acre 1,750 Heavy Industrial - Acre 2,000 Quasi-Public/Institutional/Churches - Acre 2,000 Public Land - Acre **  
 *Acres refer to gross acreage minus the floodplain area as established. 
**Design of sewer facilities to serve these land uses shall be on a case-by-case basis depending on specific uses. 
1708. - SANITARY SEWER DESIGN CRITERIA. 
1708 A. - General. 
The criteria listed herein is not intended to cover all aspects of design, but rather to mention the basic guidelines and those particulars that are required by the City of Griffin. For more detailed criteria, the design should refer to standard references such as "Ten States Standards", Georgia EPD rules, Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. FD-5, and other available literature. 
1708 B. - Types of sanitary sewers. 
All sanitary sewers for the conveyance of wastewater shall be designed as separate sanitary sewers in which groundwater, stormwater or other runoff from roofs, streets, parking lots, foundation drains and any source other than wastewater are excluded. Overflows from sanitary sewers shall not be permitted. 
1708 C. - Design period. 
Gravity sanitary sewer pipelines should be designed in accordance with the city's wastewater management plan and should, as a minimum, be designed with capacity sufficient to handle the estimated tributary population 20 to 40 years into the future. Tributary population is considered to be all areas upstream of the discharge point of the system being designed as well as any anticipated pumped flow from other basins. Sanitary sewers shall be designed and installed to the uppermost property line of the development being served. Consideration should be given to the maximum anticipated capacity of institutions, industrial parks, etc. 
1708 D. - Capacity and size determinations. 
In determining the required capacities of sanitary sewers, the following factors shall be considered: 
1.  Maximum hourly sewage flow; 
2.  Additional maximum sewage or waste flow from industrial plants; 
3.  Groundwater infiltration; 
4.  Topography of the area; and 
5.  Depth of excavation. 
New sanitary sewer systems shall be designed on the basis of an average daily flow of sewage of not less than 400 gallons per household per day. Normally, all sanitary sewers shall be designed for a peak flow of not less than 2.5 times the average flow; this peak factor will be higher for smaller basins. Sanitary sewers shall be designed to carry the peak flow when flowing at a depth of one-half the pipe diameter. 
1708 E. - Slope. 
All sanitary sewers shall be so designed and constructed to give mean velocities, when flowing full of not less than two feet per second based on Manning's formula using an "n" value of 0.013. Table 7-2 below indicates the minimum slopes that should be provided; however, slopes greater than these are desirable: 
Table 17.2 Minimum Required Sewer Pipe Slopes Minimum Sewer Size 
(inches) Minimum Slope 
(ft./100 ft.) 8 0.40 10 0.29 12 0.22 14 0.17 15 0.15 16 0.14 18 0.12 21 0.10 24 0.08 27 0.07 30 0.06 36 0.05  
These minimum slopes shall be used only when sufficient flows are expected to maintain a velocity of two feet per second and maintain a cleaning action in the line. Sanitary sewers shall be laid with uniform slope between manholes. Sanitary sewers on 20 percent slopes or greater shall be ductile iron pipe and shall be anchored securely with concrete anchors (see standard details) to prevent displacement by erosion or shock. The maximum slopes of sanitary sewers shall be 30 percent and sanitary sewers shall be designed at less than 20 percent whenever possible. 
1708 F. - Increasing size. 
When a small sanitary sewer is connected to a larger sewer, the connection shall not be lower than matching the top of both sewers to the same elevation. 
1708 G. - Gravity sanitary sewer pipe. 
The city reserves the right to disallow any manufacturer that does not have a consistent, long-term record of quality control and successful product performance. Gravity sewer pipe up through 15-inch diameter will normally be polyvinyl chloride (PVD), solid wall type SDR26 thickens meeting ASTM D3034. Ductile iron pipe (DIP) shall be used where certain conditions exist (see discussion of DIP). For 18-inch diameter pipe and larger, the contractor may have the option of using either high density polyethylene (HDPE), PVC, reinforced concrete pipe (RCP), or DIP. The city may approve the other types of pipe on a case-by-case basis and may limit the options of type of pipe depending on site conditions. All buried PVC pipe shall be marked continuously with metalized locator wire. This should be addressed at the preliminary plan review stage. 
1708 H. - Sanitary sewer pipe bedding. 
Bedding for sanitary sewer pipe shall be as follows (see also standard details): 
1.  For PVC, HDPE and any other pipe made of plastics or resins the minimum bedding shall be class "B". 
2.  For RCP and DIP pipe the minimum bedding shall be class "C". 
3.  In wet areas, the minimum bedding requirements will be increased as needed to ensure a stable support under, and on the sides of the pipe. 
1708 I. - Pre-cast concrete manholes. 
1.  Manholes. Sanitary sewer manholes shall consist of either pre-cast reinforced concrete sections with eccentric top section, or flat slab for shallow manholes, and a base section conforming to the typical manhole details as shown on the standard detail drawings. Flat top manholes will be approved only if a need for such can be demonstrated by the design professional during plan review. 
2.  Manhole sections. Pre-cast manhole sections shall be manufactured, tested, and marked in accordance with the latest provisions of ASTM Standard Specifications, Serial Designation C478. 
3.  Manhole section joints. Joints of the manhole sections shall be of the tongue and groove type. Sections shall be joined using preformed one-inch Butyl Rubber Sealant, equal to Kent Seal No. 2, AASHTO M-198 specifications. 
4.  [Manhole joints.] Manholes in areas where the water table reaches joints on the manhole will be required to have external joint sealants. Joints shall be sealed with a butyl-rubber based tape. The butyl component shall be 0.035 inches thick and contain two percent or less volatile matter. The backing component shall be EDPM rubber and shall be 0.045 inches thick. 
5.  Lift holes. Each section of the pre-cast manhole shall have no more than two holes for the purpose of handling. These holes shall be sealed before backfilling using either rubber plugs designed for this purpose, or with quick setting cement mortar. 
6.  Manhole steps. Manhole steps conforming to the applicable provisions of ASTM Specification C478, latest edition, shall be of #4 steel reinforcing bars covered with polypropylene plastic or rubber and shall be supplied with depth rings and other necessary appurtenances. See the standard detail for a typical manhole step detail. 
7.  Pipe holes. Holes in pre-cast bases to receive sanitary sewer pipe shall be pre-cast at the factory at the required locations and heights. Knocking out of holes in the field shall not be permitted on new construction. However, holes can be cored in the field with a coring machine. All manholes shall have Kor-N-Seal (or equal) rubber boots for all pipe entries/exits. 
8.  Inverts. Manhole inverts shall be constructed of 2,500 psi concrete in accordance with details on standard design drawings and the invert (flow channel) shall have the same cross-section as the sanitary sewers that it connects. The manhole bench and invert shall be carefully formed to the required size and grade by gradual and even changes in direction. Changes in direction of flow through the invert shall be made to a true curve with as large a radius as the size of the manhole will permit. Inverts shall have a "smooth trowel" finish. The manhole bench shall be sloped one-half-inch per foot from the manhole wall toward the invert. 
9.  Manhole foundation. The manhole base shall be set on a compacted mat of #57 size crushed stone. The mat shall be a minimum of six-inch thick and graded level. In wet areas the crushed stone mat shall be thickened as needed to provide a non-yielding foundation. 
10.  Brickwork. Any brickwork required to complete the pre-cast concrete manhole shall be constructed using one part Portland cement to two parts clean sand, meeting ASTM Specifications, Serial Designation C144, thoroughly mixed to a workable plastic mixture. All brickwork shall be constructed in a neat and workmanlike manner. Cement mortar shall be used to grout interior exposed brick joints and faces. No more than three courses of brick with nine-inch maximum total depth of bricks may be used to adjust manhole covers. 
11.  Frame and cover. The cast iron frame for the manhole cover shall be set at the required elevation and cast into the top section, except where adjustments in paved areas warrant detailed adjustments. Frames and covers shall be City of Griffin standard casting design (see standard drawings). The current approved ring and cover is embossed with the City of Griffin logo and is manufactured by East Jordan Ironworks. Where manholes are constructed in paved areas, the top surface of the frame and cover shall be tilted, if necessary, to conform to the exact slope, crown and grade of the existing adjacent pavement. In areas where manhole tops may be submerged by street runoff (such as manholes at low points in streets with curb and gutter) or high flood waters, the manhole lid shall be the bolt-down type. Bolt-down type covers shall be installed on all manholes not installed in the pavement. Gaskets used with bolt-down covers shall be of the O-ring type only. 
12.  Masonry work. Masonry work shall be allowed to set for a period of not less than 24 hours before being placed under traffic or in operation. All loose or waste material shall be removed from the interior of the manhole. 
13.  Location. Manholes shall be installed at the end of each line; all changes in grade, size or alignment; at all intersections; and at horizontal distances normally not greater than 400 feet. Cleanouts may only be used for special conditions and shall not be substituted for manholes nor installed at the ends of laterals greater than 150 feet in length. Manholes in cross-country areas shall be elevated so that the top is 18 inches above ground. 
14.  Drop manholes. A drop pipe shall be provided for a sanitary sewer entering a manhole at an elevation of more than two feet above the manhole invert. The drop pipe shall be of ductile iron materials with mechanical joints. All outside 90-degree elbows shall have concrete support blocking poured below the elbow. Outside drop manholes will be noted on the construction plans any time the vertical drop exceeds two feet. Where the difference in elevation between the incoming sanitary sewer and the manhole invert is less than two feet, the invert shall be sloped from invert to prevent solids deposition. 
1708 J. - Steel casing pipe. 
Steel casing pipe shall be used where boring and jacking of more than 20 feet in length is required for installation. 
1.  Steel casing pipe shall be schedule 40 thickness with minimum yield strength of 35,000 psi and shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A139. The pipe shall be fully coated on the exterior and interior with a coal tar coating. The pipe diameter shall be six to eight inches greater than the "bell" diameter of the carrier pipe. 
2.  Wherever steel casing is required, the carrier pipe shall be ductile iron pipe with push-on joints. Approved spacers made of stainless steel straps with nylon skids shall be used to center the carrier pipe; two spacers per section of pipe shall be used. A manhole shall be placed at each end of the cased section at a distance of five to ten feet beyond the end of the casing. Ductile iron pipe shall be continuous from manhole to manhole. 
1708 K. - Wastewater lift stations. 
A registered professional engineer licensed in the State of Georgia shall do lift station design. The following minimum requirements apply to wastewater lift stations: 
1.  General. 
a.  Lift stations having less than 500 gpm capacity (per pump) shall utilize two submersible centrifugal pumps each having a capacity equal to the design flow. Lift stations having a capacity of 500 gpm or more shall be reviewed on an individual basis and may have requirements differing from those outlined herein. 
b.  Grinder type centrifugal pumps shall be used for pumps having a capacity of less than 100 gpm. Force mains shall be sized to provide a velocity of at least two feet per second. 
c.  The design shall allow for each removal of any pump or equipment item without the need to shutdown the entire lift station. Lift assembly shall be provided for pump or equipment removal. 
d.  The design engineer shall consult with the director of water and wastewater after preliminary design data has been developed for information on approved pump manufacturers. The city reserves the right to review each application on an individual basis and to reject the use of non-approved manufacturers. 
2.  Plan and design submissions. 
a.  In addition to the information requested in these development regulations, construction plans shall also include the following lift station information: 
i.  Capacity calculations. Use one gpm capacity per house for residential developments of less than 200 units, except that the minimum pump capacity must at least be 30 gpm. 
ii.  System head calculations; tabulated and plotted on the pump curve, along with a plot of force main velocity. 
iii.  Standard drawings, details and specifications sufficient to ascertain compliance with these regulations. 
iv.  Cycle time. Calculations showing determination of wet well volume and cycle time at design conditions. Wet well volume should be sufficient to provide a cycle time of no less than five minutes from a pump "on" to the next pump "on" time. 
v.  Storage volume. Calculations showing the volume of storage available in the event of a power outage. The storage zone shall be delineated on plan and profile drawings of the sanitary sewer system. 
vi.  Construction drawings and specifications in sufficient detail to ascertain compliance with these regulations. 
vii.  Buoyancy computations showing that structures are protected against flotation. 
b.  Shop drawings. After construction plan approval, but before purchasing any lift station equipment, shop drawings shall be submitted to the department of water and wastewater including the following information: 
i.  Manufacturer's catalog sheets, performance curves, installation drawings, specifications and list of options for the specific pump that is offered for approval. 
ii.  Similar catalog data for controls, valves, hatches, yard hydrants, pre-cast wet well and other manufactured items. 
c.  Certification. After installation and before placing the system into full operation, the work must be inspected by the developer's engineer who must then issue a certification to the department of water and wastewater verifying that all work has been done in accordance with approved plans. This certification shall include all construction of the lift stations and force mains. After acceptance of the work by the engineer, a factory representative shall inspect and start up the system certifying rotation, capacity, amperage draw, lack of vibration and other standard checks. This certification shall state the beginning date of the warranty and include a copy of the warranty. The pump shall have a minimum manufacturer's warranty of five years with no prorating. 
d.  Operation and maintenance manuals. On or before the date of start-up, five sets of factory O & M Manuals shall be delivered to the department of water and wastewater. These manuals shall include the name of the purchaser, the serial numbers of pumps, detailed wiring schematics, telephone number and address for purchase of parts. 
e.  After construction is complete as-built drawings shall be furnished including one set of Mylar sepias plus four sets of prints. 
3.  Spare parts per manufacturer's recommendations. Lift stations with pumps of five HP or smaller shall be supplied with a spare complete pump. Lift stations with pumps above five HP shall be supplied with an extra impeller and set of bearings plus a complete set of manufacturer's recommended spare parts. 
4.  Standby power. Each lift station shall be provided with a permanent in-place emergency generator for standby power. The only exception to this requirement is if the power supply in the project area of the city has a dual feed. Generators shall not be required where there is a dual feed. Where generators are required, the generator shall be diesel powers with an automatic transfer switch and provisions for an automatic exercise cycle. Specifications for the generator shall be submitted to the city for review and approval. 
5.  Site requirements. 
a.  Flooding. Lift stations shall be designed to remain fully operational and accessible during the 25-year flood event. All electrical controls shall be designed to be above the 100-year flood elevation. All motors and mechanical equipment shall be protected against physical damage from the 100-year flood. 
b.  Access road. Access roads shall be paved with a 12-foot wide surface of either concrete (four-inch thick with wire mesh) or asphalt (six-inch graded aggregated base plus two-inch Type E asphalt). 
c.  Ownership. Lift station sites and the access roads shall be dedicated to the city. The land dedicated for lift stations shall include sufficient space for parking of two trucks, plus turn-around and slope maintenance. The dedicated width for access roads shall be a minimum of 30 feet. 
d.  Fencing. Lift station sites shall be fenced with a minimum of six-foot high chain link fencing topped with three strands of barbed wire. Access gates shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width. The area inside the fencing shall be large enough to facilitate service vehicle access to the pumping station, wet sell, and other facilities. A paved turn-around area shall be provided whenever the access road length exceeds 200 feet or when the access road grade exceeds ten percent. 
e.  Water supply. A metered water supply line (three-fourths-inch minimum size) shall be installed to the site, and a freeze-proof yard hydrant located near the wet well. The hydrant shall be equipped with a suitable backflow preventer (Watts No. NF8 or approved equal). If city potable water is unavailable to the location of the lift station, a well may be supplied. 
f.  Lighting. One pole-mounted, 150-watt mercury vapor security light shall be installed. It shall be photocell controlled and equipped with a manual on/off switch (located in the main control panel) to override the photocell control. 
g.  Screening. Where natural screening is not present to screen the site from view of adjacent residences, special plantings shall be installed to screen the site. 
h.  Ground covers. All unpaved areas inside the fence and extending four feet beyond the fence, shall be treated with an herbicide and covered with a geotextile fabric. The fabric shall be covered with a four-inch thick layer of No. 57 stone. The geotextile fabric shall be a non-woven polypropylene weighing eight oz/S.Y. with a minimum burst strength of 250 psi, such as Amoco type 4553 or equal. 
6.  Design features. 
a.  Wet well volume. The wet well volume shall be sized to limit pump cycles to no more than six cycles per hour under worst conditions. 
b.  Ventilation. The minimum requirement for wet wells shall be two gravity vent pipes designed for natural ventilation. Vents shall be elevated to a minimum of two feet above the 100-year flood elevation. Where conditions are conducive to formation of hazardous conditions (in the design engineer's opinion), mechanical ventilation shall be provided. Mechanical ventilation shall be required for dry wells. 
c.  Structures. Submersible lift stations shall have a wet well structure and a separate valve pit. Both structures shall be pre-case concrete with a monolithic base. The valve pit shall be a minimum of 4' × 4' × 5' deep with manhole steps, floor drain pipe and a 3' × 3' lockable aluminum access hatch. Wet wells may be either round or rectangular and shall have a diameter or width of at least four feet. Wet wells shall be sized to meet cycle time requirements with a draw down (i.e. the distance between high water level and low water level) of not more than three feet. The wet well shall have a lockable aluminum hatch large enough for easy removal of pumps. 
Riser sections in pre-cast units shall be sealed watertight using butyl rubber sealant or other approved sealant ("Ramnek", joint sealant or approved equal). The Butyl component shall be 0.035" thick and contain two percent or less volatile matter. Mastic shall not be used. Structures shall be adequately reinforced for all loading conditions normally encountered during shipping, construction and service. All openings (for pipes, hatch, conduits, etc.) shall be either case in place or cored. Sanitary sewer pipe connections shall utilize rubber boot connectors and be watertight. 
d.  Accessories. All materials inside the wet well and valve pit shall be corrosion resistant. Mechanical equipment requiring ferrous metals shall have a coal tar epoxy coating. Guide rails for pumps shall be stainless steel. Miscellaneous metals including fasteners shall be aluminum or stainless steel; anchor bolts shall be stainless steel. 
e.  Pressure gauge. A pressure gauge shall be installed on the force main downstream of the gate valves, inside the valve pit and visible from ground level. A corporation stop shall be installed on the tap to allow removal of the gauge. 
f.  Valves. The discharge pipe of each pump shall have a check valve followed by a gate valve before the two pipes join into a common force main. 
g.  Surge control valves. The pumping system shall be checked to determine if a surge control valve is required. If a valve is required, it shall be located within the valve pit on the common force main and a drain line installed to drain to the wet well. 
7.  Pump features. 
a.  Pumps shall have the following features: 
i.  Non-clog impeller; 
ii.  Be capable of passing a three-inch sphere (except grinder pumps); 
iii.  Be capable of dry operation without overheating; 
iv.  Have dual mechanical seals with seal leak indicator light in the control panel; 
v.  Pump and motor casings shall be cast iron, and all fasteners shall be stainless steel; 
vi.  Motor shall be selected to be non-overloading under all operating conditions; 
vii.  Motor winding shall have a heat sensor with auto reset to prevent overheating; three-phase motors shall have two sensors; 
viii.  The operating speed of the pump shall not exceed 1,800 rpm without special approval; 
ix.  The motor shall have upper and lower roller bearings; and 
x.  The pump shall be automatically connected to the discharge connection elbow when lowered into place, and shall be easily removed for inspection or service. There shall be no need for personnel to enter pump well. A simple linear downward motion of the pump shall accomplish sealing of the pumping unit to the discharge connection elbow. Each pump shall be equipped with a chain (of aluminum or other non-corrosive material) for easy removal. 
8.  Force main. 
a.  The force main shall be sized for a minimum velocity of two feet per second with one pump operation. 
b.  Force mains of four-inch diameter or larger shall be ductile iron pipe (except for temporary installations where PVC pipe, SDR17, may be allowed for force mains of six-inch diameter or smaller). Force mains smaller than four inches may be used only with grinder pumps and shall be PVC pipe, SDR 17 with gasket joints. PVC pipe shall not be exposed to sunlight or freezing temperatures. Buried PVC pipe shall be marked continuously with metalized locator wire. 
c.  The force main profile shall slope continuously upward where practical. If high points occur where air could be trapped in the pipe, an air release valve (of the type made for sewage applications) shall be installed (in a manhole) at the high points. 
d.  The minimum depth of cover over force mains shall be four feet. 
9.  Electrical. 
a.  Lift station controls and electrical components shall be factory-wired in weatherproof stainless steel metal cabinets (NEMA 4X stainless steel). The cabinet shall be provided with condensate heaters. Spare fuses of each type used in the electrical/control system shall be furnished. 
b.  A main circuit breaker shall be installed that is designed to disconnect power to the entire station. 
c.  Three-phase power shall be provided for all motors exceeding five horsepower. Phase converters will not be allowed. 
d.  Protection against voltage surge and loss of a phase shall be provided. 
e.  The panel shall be equipped with a ground bus and neutral bus. The terminal shall be suitable for either aluminum or copper wire. All internal panel wiring shall be copper. 
f.  Motors shall be suitable for either 230 or 460-volt operation. The design engineer shall consult with the City of Griffin Electric Department to verify specifics pertaining to electrical power availability. 
g.  Four sealed float switches shall control the wet well level. All floats shall be provided with 25-feet of Type SJO flexible cord and shall be attached to a bracket mounted at the top of the wet well. Float functions shall be as follows: 
i.  Float No. 1 Low level (pumps off). 
ii.  Float No. 2 High level (lead pump on). 
iii.  Float No. 3 Extra high level (lag pump on). 
iv.  Float No. 4 Surcharge level (alarm activated). 
h.  The pump control system shall include the following features: 
i.  Lead pump/lag pump alternator; 
ii.  Alarm light and horn to indicate high water level; 
iii.  Seal failure indicating light; 
iv.  Pump failure indicating light; 
v.  Condensate heater; 
vi.  Lead pump selector switch; 
vii.  H-O-A switch and run light for each pump; 
viii.  Control voltage shall be 120V; 
ix.  The wiring shall be neatly tied and number coded to facilitate maintenance and a schematic diagram furnished with the panel; 
x.  A 120V GFCI type electrical receptacle shall be located at the control panel; 
xi.  Pump stations shall be equipped with a remote transmitting unit and telemeter circuitry connected to the city's SCADA system; and 
xii.  Manufacturer's warranties to be supplied with a minimum of 100 percent coverage for five years with no pro-rating. 
i.  Warranty. Regardless of the manufacturer's warranty terms, the developer will be responsible for all repairs necessary within two years from the date the station is completed and approved by the city. The developer will be required to furnish such assurances to the city as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure prompt action. 
1709. - SANITARY SEWER PIPE DESIGN CRITERIA. 
1709 A. - Ductile iron pipe (DIP). 
1.  Scope. Ductile iron pipe shall be required at all utility crossings with less than two feet of clearance (above or below), in locations where cover is less than four feet, at stream crossings, where slopes exceed 20 percent, and where PVC sanitary sewer pipe has more than 16 feet of cover. 
2.  [Materials.] Ductile iron pipe shall be designed and manufactured in accordance with ANSI Specification A21.50 (AWWA C150-76) and ANSI Specification A21.51 (AWWA C151-76). Pipe shall be pressure Class 350. 
Pipe shall be standard cement lined and seal coated with approved bituminous seal coat in accordance with ANSI Specification A21.4 (AWWA C104), latest revision. 
Joints shall be push-on, or flanged joints for piping as called for or shown on the drawings and mechanical joint for fittings conforming to ANSI Specification A21.11 (AWWA C111), latest revision. Fittings shall meet the requirements of ANSI Specification A21.10. Gaskets for flange joints installed at aerial stream crossings shall be American Toruseal Flange Casket or approved equal. 
1709 B. - Polyvinyl chloride pipe (PVC). 
1.  Scope. The contractor shall provide unplasticized PVC gravity sanitary sewer pipe meeting the requirements of ASTM D3034, or latest revision, in the sizes shown unless otherwise indicated in the contract documents. 
2.  Materials. Pipe and fittings shall meet the requirements as specified under ASTM D3034, or latest revision, for pipe through 15 inches and ASTM F679 for pipe 18 inches through 27 inches. All pipe and fittings shall be suitable for use as a gravity sanitary sewer conduit. Bell joints shall consist of an integral wall section with elastomeric gasket joint that provides a watertight seal. The pipe shall be capably of passing all tests that are detailed in this specification. Minimum wall thickness shall be SDR26. 
3.  Fittings. All fittings and accessories shall be manufactured and furnished by the pipe supplier. They shall have bell and/or spigot configurations compatible with that of the pipe and shall have an equivalent wall thickness. 
a.  If Ductile Iron Pipe is required in a run between manholes then the entire section from manhole to manhole shall be DIP (no transitions). 
4.  Pipe and fittings tests. Before shipping any pipe, the manufacturer shall be approved by the city and shall furnish written certification that all pipe through 15 inches meets ASTM Specification D3034 and that pipe 18 inches through 27 inches meets ASTM F679. At least one sample from each 100 pieces of pipe furnished shall be subjected to each test outlined under section 8 of ASTM D3034. An independent laboratory approved by the city will test the samples and a certified copy of results will be furnished to the city. If any test is not met then nine additional tests of that property will be ordered and if any of these nine tests are not met, the manufacturer will not be allowed to furnish materials for the project. No pipe shall be installed until the testing is complete and approved by the city. 
a.  Pipe stiffness. Minimum "pipe stiffness" (F/Y) at five percent deflection shall be 46 psi for all sizes, when tested in accordance with ASTM Standard Method of Test D2412 (latest edition), to determine the "External Loading Properties of Plastic Pipe by Parallel-Plate Loading". There shall be no evidence of splitting, cracking or breaking at a deflection of up to 30 percent of the original diameter. 
5.  Fusion quality. There shall be no evidence of flaking, swelling, or disintegration when the pipe material is tested in accordance with ASTM D2152, "Quality of Extruded Poly (vinyl chloride) pipe by Acetone Immersion". 
6.  Joint tightness. Pipe and fitting joints shall comply with ASTM D3212 (latest edition) for "Joints for Drain and Sanitary Sewer Plastic Pipes Using Flexible Elastomeric Seals". Joint assemblies shall not leak when subjected to both an internal and external hydrostatic test at equivalent pressures of 10.8 psi gauge for a period of one hour. Pipes shall be tested in straight alignment, axially deflected position, and by shear load test as otherwise defined in Paragraphs 7.2, 7.3 and 7.4 of ASTM D3212. 
7.  Installation. PVC pipe will be installed in accordance with ASTM D2321 (latest revision). Class "B" bedding is the minimum bedding requirement for PVC pipe. In any area where the pipe is below existing ground water level, the contractor will embed PVC pipe in sand or graded gravel must extend from six inches below the pipe to 12 inches above the pipe, and the material must be firmly placed under the pipe haunches. Initial backfill shall be compacted to the densities outlined in D2321. The city may require up to ten random compaction tests to insure compliance with D2321. If any material tested is less than the required density, the contractor shall re-compact said material and the city shall then have the right to additional compaction tests at the expense of the developer or his contractor to insure compliance with D2321. 
8.  Deflection limit. Vertical deflection of installed pipe shall not exceed five percent of the undeflected diameter as defined in table X1.1 of ASTM D3034. Upon completion of the pipe laying, and at least 30 days after installation (to allow for settling), the pipe will be tested for final acceptance. The contractor, pulling a mandrel of specified dimensions through the pipeline, shall perform the test. 
9.  Locator wire. All buried PVC pipe shall be marked continuously with metalized locator wire. 
1709 C. - Polyethylene pipe (HDPE). 
1709 D. - Scope. 
This specification covers the requirements of high density polyethylene profile wall gravity sanitary sewer and drain pipe fittings in nominal sizes 18 through 96 inches with integral bell and spigot gasketed joints. 
1.  Classes. Class selection for high-density polyethylene profile wall sanitary sewer pipe shall be a minimum of Class 160 for pipe with zero feet to 18 feet of fill. Polyethylene pipe cannot be used over 18 feet deep. 
2.  Material. Pipes and fittings shall be manufactured from high-density polyethylene resin compound that shall meet the requirements of Type III, Class C, Category 5, Grade P34 in accordance with ASTM D1248. Materials meeting the requirements of ASTM D3350 with a cell classification of PE334433C or higher are also suitable. The pipe shall contain a minimum of 2% carbon black as an ultraviolet inhibitor. 
3.  Pipe dimensions. The average inside diameter and the minimum wall thickness of the waterway of the pipe shall comply with ASTM F894 for RSC Class 160 pipe. 
4.  Joints. The pipe shall be produced with bell and spigot end construction. Joining shall be accomplished by use of neoprene rubber gaskets complying with the physical requirements as specified in ASTM F477. Joints shall be in accordance with ASTM D3212 and withstand an internal operating pressure of 50 psi. 
5.  Pipe stiffness. The profile wall shall be substantially strong to protect against any diametrical deformation. All polyethylene profile wall pipe shall have a minimum specific pipe stiffness of 46 psi at a deflection of five percent of the internal diameter when tested and calculated in accordance with ASTM D2412 (latest edition). 
6.  Retest and rejection. If the results of any tests do not meet the requirements of these specifications, the tests may be conducted again in accordance with agreement between purchaser and seller. In retesting, the product requirements shall be met and the test methods designated in these specifications shall be followed. If upon retest failure occurs, the quantity of product represented by the tests shall be rejected. 
7.  Deflection limit. Vertical deflection of installed pipe shall not exceed five percent of the undeflected diameter as defined in table X1.1 of ASTM D3034. Each segment of line (except service lines) shall be tested at the end of each month just prior to submitting for payment on that segment. Upon completion of the pipe laying, and at least 30 days after installation (to allow for settling), the pipe will be tested again for final acceptance. The contractor, pulling a mandrel of specified dimensions through the pipeline, shall perform the test. 
8.  Locator wire. All buried PVC pipe shall be marked continuously with metalized locator wire. 
1709 E. - Reinforced concrete pipe (RCP). 
1.  General. The use of reinforced concrete pipe for sanitary sewers will be subject to approval on a case-by-case basis depending upon size of the sanitary sewer and site conditions. When approved for use, concrete gravity sanitary sewer pipe shall meet all materials and testing requirements of ASTM C-76, ASTM C-443 and ASTM C-497 (except where modified herein). 
2.  Quality assurance. The contractor must submit to the city the concrete pipe manufacturer's evidence of a working quality control program for approval, prior to any pipe being manufactured. The program and standards of manufacturing must be established and well defined. The program must include: a full time quality control technician, a complete and working quality control laboratory capable of testing and recording the requirements set forth in these specifications for concrete pipe, and a zero defect program for daily material testing and finished product testing to assure quality control as the pipe is being manufactured and shipped for this particular project. 
3.  Guarantee. The contractor shall provide a guarantee against defective materials and workmanship in accordance with the requirements of the section entitled "guarantees and warranties" of these specifications. 
4.  Material. 
a.  All concrete pipe and fittings 12 inches in diameter and larger shall conform to the latest requirements of ASTM C076 with the following modifications: pipe with zero to 20 feet of fill shall be a minimum of Class III with 4500 psi concrete, pipe with 20 to 30 feet of fill shall be Class IV with 4500 psi concrete and pipe with 30 feet of fill or more shall be Class V with 5500 psi concrete. 
b.  Pipe shall have circumferential reinforcement as required for the particular class of pipe furnished. The bell and spigot of the joint shall contain circumferential and longitudinal reinforcement. The pipe shall be centrifugally cast or vibrated, horizontally or vertically cast or made on a Packerhead machine and shall be furnished in lengths not more than 20 feet and not less than eight feet, except where short lengths are required for construction conditions. The pipe shall have bell and spigot joints suitable for the use of a rubber gasket to be provided as a part of this item. 
c.  RCP shall have bell and spigot joints consisting of self-centering steel joint rings securely attached to the pipe reinforcing steel. The steel joint rings shall be suitable for use with a rubber O-ring gasket to be provided as part of this item. The joints shall have the joint rings securely attached to the pipe reinforcing steel. The rings that form the joint shall be made so that they will join with a close, sliding fit. The joint surfaces shall be such that the rubber gasket shall be confined on all sides and shall not support the weight of the pipe. 
The spigot ring shall have an external groove accurately sized to receive the gasket. Special section steel for spigot rings shall conform to ASTM A-283, Grade A, or ASTM A-306, Grade 50. 
The bell ring shall be flared to permit gradual deformation of the gasket when the joint is assembled. Minimum thickness of the bell rings shall be 3/16 inch. Bell rings 1/4 inch or thicker shall conform to ASTM A-283, Grade A, or ASTM A-306, Grade 50. Bell rings less than one-fourth inch shall conform to ASTM A-570, Grade A. 
Each ring shall be precisely sized by expansion beyond the elastic limit of the steel and then gauged on an accurate template. A corrosion-resistant coating of zinc applied by an approved metalizing process after proper cleaning shall protect all exposed surfaces of both rings. 
d.  Lining. The coal tar epoxy system shall be Koppers 300 M, Porter Tarset, Wise Chem CTE 200, Amercoat 78, Protecto 101 or equal. 
The interior concrete or mortar surfaces of pipe and fittings are to be sandblasted and painted with one coat of a high-build, coal tar epoxy system, or two coats of a standard coal tar epoxy system. The dry film thickness of the total system shall be 16 mils minimum on concrete or mortar surfaces and on steel joint ring surfaces. 
Sandblasting shall result in a clean dry surface, free of oil, grease, and r other contaminants. Any air pockets over one-fourth-inch in diameter and one-eighth-inch deep appearing on the concrete surface after sandblasting will be filled with an epoxy sand patching material such as those sold by Sherwin-Williams, Glidden or Moran. The epoxy sand patch should be troweled prior to the application of the coal tar epoxy. 
Any steel surfaces to be painted shall be sandblasted, solvent cleaned or wire brushed prior to painting. Application of the coal tar epoxy shall be by brush, roller or spray system using equipment recommended by the manufacturer of the coal tar epoxy system. The temperature during application and curing of the coal tar epoxy shall be as recommended by the manufacturer of the coal tar epoxy. Time between coats (if applicable) shall be as recommended by the manufacturer of the coal tar epoxy. 
If the inside joint recess will be mortared and painted with coal tar epoxy in the field, the pipe supplier shall not paint the inside vertical surfaces at the ends of the pipe. When the inside joints will not be mortared in the field, the pipe supplier shall paint the inside vertical concrete or mortar surfaces at each end of the pipe. 
The paint shall be extended continuously over the front lip of the steel spigot ring and a minimum of two inches onto the sealing surface of the unrestrained bell rings so that all interior joint surfaces that can be exposed to the fluid inside the pipe are coated. 
1710. - OTHER DESIGN REQUIREMENTS. 
1710 A. - Distance between manholes. 
Maximum distance between manholes shall be 400 feet. 
1710 B. - Depth. 
Any sanitary sewers installed in the street shall be sufficiently deep to provide five feet of cover at the inlet end of all service laterals at the street right-of-way, and over any part of the main or service within the street right-of-way. Any sanitary sewers in off-street easements shall have a minimum of four feet of cover unless cast iron or ductile iron pipe is used. Filling over the pipe to obtain minimum cover is not allowed. 
1710 C. - Drop across manhole. 
For manholes where the change in pipe horizontal direction (deflection) is less than 45 degrees, the normal pipe slope can be maintained across the manhole. Where the deflection is 45 degrees or more, a vertical drop across the manhole (between in and out pipes) of 0.1 feet is required. 
1711. - CONSTRUCTION METHODS. 
1711 A. - Licensing and safety. 
1.  All contractors who work on sanitary sewer systems that will be owned by the City of Griffin must be licensed in accordance with State of Georgia Law and local ordinance. Compliance with applicable safety regulations is the responsibility of each company engaged in the work. The city assumes no responsibility for the actions of others on the job site. It is the responsibility of those installing sanitary sewers, lift stations and related appurtenances to conform to OSHA regulations, 29 CFR Part 1926, Subpart P, Paragraph 1926.650 through 1926.653. Publications from OSHA can be obtained by contacting OSHA Publications Distribution, Washington, D.C. 
2.  Contractors performing sanitary sewer system installations must be approved by the city and shall be required to be completely familiar with the procedures and contract requirements associated with this type project. 
3.  Unsatisfactory work may result in the loss of privilege to obtain a permit for future work in the City of Griffin. 
1711 B. - Construction permits. 
1.  No construction shall begin until the City of Griffin Department of Development Services has issued all applicable permits. A pre-construction conference will be required prior to the commencement of construction. 
2.  The contractor shall submit one copy of the approved construction. The contractor shall furnish his name and address, telephone number, proof of his Georgia license to do this type of work, name of the person in charge of the project, list of any subcontractors and the name and telephone number of a responsible person who can be contacted in case of emergencies during nonworking hours. 
3.  The contractor (whose name shall appear on the approved contractor's list) shall furnish his construction schedule and shall notify the city 24 hours prior to beginning any work. Once the contractor begins work, he shall proceed in a workmanlike manner and shall complete the work in a reasonable time without undue off days and period of inactivity which make it hard for the city to keep up with his activity. 
1711 C. - Revisions to approved plans. 
1.  Any revisions to approved final plans that affect the approved site or subdivision plan, shall require formal city review and approval prior acceptance of the project by the city and issuance of any certificates of completion or occupancy. Revisions shall be submitted and process in accordance with Section 306 D. of these regulations. 
2.  Any major changes to the approved system plans, not affecting the approved site or subdivision plans shall require the design engineer to submit revised drawings to the water and wastewater department prior to construction of the change. Such request shall include an explanation of the reason for the change. Any deviation from city's standards will be considered a major change, as will any change that will affect capacity, longevity, operation or maintenance of the facility. Any deviation from approved materials will be considered a major change. 
3.  Minor field changes may be made by the design engineer only with prior approval of the city and the changes documented in writing. The written documents must be submitted to the city water and wastewater department for review and approval. 
1711 D. - Trench excavations. 
1.  Sanitary sewer lines shall normally be installed by open-cut trench excavation. Trenches shall be cut true to the lines and grades shown on the approved plans. The bottom of the trench shall be cut carefully to the required grade of the pipe except where bedding materials or cradles are shown. In such cases the excavation shall extend to the bottom of the bedding or cradles as shown on the approved plans. Minimum pipe cover shall be as shown on the approved plans. 
2.  Bell holes shall be excavated at proper intervals so the barrel of the pipe will rest on the bottom of the trench for its entire length. Bell holes shall be large enough to permit proper installation of all joints in the pipe. 
3.  Pipe trenches shall not be excavated more than 100 feet in advance of pipe lying and all work shall be performed to cause the least possible inconvenience to the public. Adequate temporary bridges or crossings shall be constructed and maintained where required to permit uninterrupted vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
4.  Excavations adjacent to existing or proposed buildings and structures, or in paved streets or alleys shall be adequately protected by the use of trench boxes, sheeting, shoring and bracing to prevent cave-ins of the excavation, or the undermining or subsequent settlement of adjacent structures or pavements. Underpinning of adjacent structures shall be done when necessary to maintain structures in safe condition. 
1711 E. - Installation of sanitary sewer pipe. 
1.  Construction stakeout shall be required prior to construction of sanitary sewer lines. As a minimum, the horizontal alignment will be staked at 100-foot intervals and each manhole will be located with a centerline stake and two offset hubs. "Cuts" to invert elevations will be shown for each manhole entry and exit pipe. A copy of the stakeout notes will be provided to the water and wastewater department. 
2.  Pipe and accessories shall be handled with care at all times to avoid damage. Whether moved by hand, skidways or hoists, material shall not be dropped or bumped. The interior of all pipes shall be kept free from dirt and foreign matter at all times. Each joint of pipe shall be unloaded opposite or near the place where it is to be laid in the trench. 
3.  All defective or damaged material shall be removed from the job site. 
4.  The preferred order of construction is to connect to existing sanitary sewers after all other construction is complete and conditionally accepted by the city. Connection to existing sanitary sewers can be done at the beginning of construction, however, the new main shall be plugged where it entered either the existing manhole or the new doghouse manhole over an existing sanitary sewer and the plug shall remain in-place until the project is conditionally accepted. 
5.  Sanitary sewer pipes shall be jointed by "push-on" joints using elastomeric gaskets to affect the pressure seal. The ends of pipe to be joined and the gaskets shall be cleaned immediately before assembly and the assembly shall be made as recommended by the pipe manufacturer. Lubricant used must be non-toxic and supplied or approved for use by the pipe manufacturer. Sanitary sewer pipes shall be laid in the uphill direction with the bells pointing upgrade. Any variation from this procedure shall require approval from the city. 
6.  Bell holes shall be provided of sufficient size to allow ample room for making the pipe joints without putting any load on the bell of the pipe. The bottom of the trench between bell holes shall be carefully graded so the pipe barrel will rest on a solid foundation for its entire length as shown on the plans. Each joint shall be laid so it will form a close concentric joint with adjoining pipe and in order to avoid sudden offsets or inequalities in the flow line. 
7.  When pipe is not actively being laid, the open ends of installed pipe shall be plugged with a watertight plug to prevent entrance of trench water into the line. 
8.  Bedding for pipe shall normally be as follows (also see standard details): 
a.  For PVC, H.D.P.E. and any other pipe made of plastics or resins the minimum bedding shall be class "B". 
b.  For concrete and ductile iron pipe, the minimum bedding shall be class "C". 
c.  In wet areas, the minimum bedding requirements will be increased as required to ensure a stable support under the pipe and on the sides of the pipe. 
9.  Trench backfilling. Backfill material up to 12 inches above the top of the pipe shall be compacted dry, loose, soil. If such material is not available from the site, No. 57 stone shall be used to backfill up to 12 inches above the top of the pipe. Backfilling the remainder of the trench may utilize soil and blasted rock (not over 24 inches in any dimension) compacted sufficiently to avoid excessive settlement. Under no circumstances will tree parts, vegetation, building materials or any other type of debris be used for backfill. 
10.  Backfill compaction. All backfill beneath roads, sidewalks or other critical areas shall be compacted to 95 percent Standard Proctor or as otherwise required by the DOT or other such agency having jurisdiction. The compaction shall be done using mechanical tamping equipment in six-inch lifts. Moisture control of the backfill material and/or hauling in of select material may be required to achieve this compaction percentage. Compaction testing and certification by an independent soil testing company will be required in these areas. The test results shall be submitted for review to the director of water and wastewater. 
1711 F. - Railroad crossings. 
All railroad crossings shall conform to the requirements of the American Railway Engineering Association Manual for Railway Engineering, Part 5. The contractor shall secure permission from the railroad to schedule the work so as not to interfere with the operation of the railroads. The contractor shall be held responsible for any delays or damages occurring to the railroads. The contractor shall furnish the railroad with such additional insurance as may be required, cost of the insurance shall be borne by the contractor, together with the costs for flagmen, watchmen, temporary work of any nature, safety devices and any other items that may be required by the railroad. 
1711 G. - Highway crossings. 
All construction work in a state highway right-of-way shall be approved by the Georgia DOT. 
1711 H. - Stream crossings. 
1.  The preferred method for crossing rivers, streams, creeks, impoundments or wet weather ditches is with a minimum of six inches of cover between the lowest point in the stream and the top outside diameter of the pipe. Ductile iron pipe is required for all stream crossings and shall extend a minimum of ten feet beyond the top of bank on each side. Concrete collars or encasement must be provided at all joints for ductile iron pipe with less than three feet of cover. 
2.  The stream bed and sides at the crossing point shall be protected from erosion with the use of rip-rap, as defined and sized in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Appendix C-Construction Materials, 1992 or most current condition. 
3.  Aerial crossings will require detailed plans and will be allowed only when, in the city's opinion, there is no reasonable alternative. 
4.  Erosion control measures shall be installed prior to installing pipe across any stream. All work should be performed when stream flows are at their lowest, and as quickly and safely as possible. As soon as conditions permit, the streambed shall be cleared of all false-work, debris, and other obstructions placed therein or caused by the construction operations. 
5.  Erosion control measures can include, but not be limited to, the following items: type A, B, and/or C silt fencing, erosion control beck dams, channel diversion through temporary storm drain pipe, rock filter dams. The construction and installation of these various structures are detailed in the Manual for Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Georgia or the Georgia DOT Standards and Construction Details. 
1711 I. - Casing for sanitary sewers. 
1.  Where pipe is required to be installed under railroads, highways, streets or other facilities by jacking or boring methods, construction shall be done in a manner that will not interfere with the operation of the facility, and shall not weaken the roadbed or structure. 
2.  The diameter of the bore shall conform to the outside diameter and circumference of the casing pipe as closely as practicable. Any voids that develop during the installation operation shall be pressure grouted. Each segment of the casing pipe shall be welded (full circumference butt weld) to the adjoining segment. The completed casing shall have no sags or crowns that cause the grade for any segment to be less than the minimum slope for the size pipe being installed. 
3.  The carrier pipe shall be fitted with approved spacers to secure its position within the casing. The void at each end of the casing pipe, between the carrier pipe and casing, shall be sealed with brick and mortar. 
1711 J. - Replacement of pavement. 
The contractor shall fully restore and replace all pavement, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and other surface structures removed or disturbed by the construction, to a condition that is equal to or better than the original condition in a manner satisfactory to the city (see standard details). 
1711 K. - Location/protection of existing underground utilities. 
It shall be the responsibility of the contractor to locate and protect all underground utilities. The contractor, at his own expense, shall repair utility lines or services damaged by the contractor. 
1711 L. - Protection of water supply and other utilities. 
1.  The city has an established cross-connection program (1985) to prevent the entry of contaminants of pollutants into any area of the potable water supply. Therefore, it is illegal to introduce any substance into, or to have any cross connections with, the potable water supply. There shall be no physical connection between a public or private potable water supply system and a sanitary sewer that permits the passage of any sewage or polluted water into the potable water supply. 
2.  Whenever possible, sanitary sewers shall be laid at least ten feet distance horizontally from any existing or proposed water main. Should conditions prevent this separation, the lines shall be laid in separate trenches and the sanitary sewers shall be ductile iron. In either case, the elevation of the crown of the sanitary sewer shall be at least 18 inches below the invert of the water main. 
3.  When sanitary sewers cross under water mains, the sanitary sewer shall be laid so the top of the sanitary sewer is at least 18 inches below the bottom of the water main. If conditions prevent this minimum vertical separation, the sanitary sewer shall be ductile iron and shall be encased in concrete. 
1711 M. - Sanitary sewer services. 
1.  A sanitary sewer service shall be provided for every existing or proposed lot or building. All services shall be shown on the construction and as-built drawings. A common service shall not be allowed for two or more buildings. The service shall extend to the property line of the lot being served and shall normally be within ten feet of the lower corner of the lot. Each service shall have a six-inch cleanout installed as shown in the standard details. Services shall be locatable from main to cleanout. 
2.  The developer shall be responsible for serving all lots developed. On any lot where the service cannot be found, the developer shall be responsible for payment of the cost of installation of a new service. Also, unless noted on the final plat, the service shall be located low enough to serve the first floor elevation at the building line. 
3.  The builder shall be responsible for the location of the service prior to the pouring of the foundation, driveway or other appurtenance. The city will not be responsible for any house built too low to be served, nor for any service made inaccessible. 
4.  No plumber or contractor will be allowed to connect to the sanitary sewerage system except at the end of the service provided for this connection. Also, any service provided will be utilized without the installation of additional services. 
1711 N. - Clean-up. 
1.  Prior to requesting the "completion of sanitary sewer construction" inspection, the contractor shall remove and dispose of in an acceptable manner all shipping timbers, shipping bands, spacers, excess materials, broken material, crates, boxes and any other material brought to the job site. 
2.  Any work areas, within the public right-of-way or on private property outside of the development, that were damaged by the sanitary sewer construction shall be repaired or replaced with the same kind of material as existed prior to the damage occurring. All easement areas shall be completely cleared of trees, stumps and other debris and left in a condition such that the easement can be maintained by bush-hog equipment. 
3.  All shoulders, ditches, culverts and other areas disturbed by the sanitary sewer construction shall be brought to the proper grades and left smooth in appearance. 
4.  All manhole covers shall be brought to grade. 
5.  A uniform stand of grass or mulch for erosion protection, as defined in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, is required over all construction easements and sanitary sewer easements prior to the city's acceptance of the sanitary sewer. 
6.  Streets, sidewalks, landscaping and other public and private property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored as near to original condition as possible or better in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
7.  Trenches shall be kept free of water by pumping or well pointing, as determined by the contractor. No structure shall be built, or pipe shall be laid, in water. Water shall not be allowed to flow over or rise upon any concrete, masonry or pipe until the same has been inspected and the concrete or joint material has thoroughly set. All water pumped, bailed, or otherwise removed from the trench or other excavation shall be conveyed in a proper manner to a suitable place of discharge. Such discharge shall not cause injury to public health, property, work completed, work in progress or to any street surface, or cause any interference with the use of it by the public. 
a.  Construction occurring around active sanitary sewer systems shall be done in such a way so as to prevent the spillage of wastewater. 
8.  All excavations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights in compliance with all OSHA and Georgia DOT requirements so as to protect the public and workers from hazard. 
1711 O. - Rock excavation. 
1.  Drilling and blasting operations shall be conducted with due regard for the safety of persons and property in the vicinity and in strict conformity with requirements of all ordinances, laws and regulations governing blasting and the use of explosives. Rock excavation near existing pipelines or other structures shall be conducted with maximum care to avoid damage to the pipelines or structures. The contractor shall promptly repair all injury or damage to other structures and properties to the satisfaction of the city and property owner. 
2.  Rock in trenches shall be excavated over the horizontal limits of excavation and to depths as shown in table 7-3 below: 
Table 17.3 Trench Excavation Depths Size of Pipeline 
(inches) Depth of Excavation 
Below Bottom of Sewer Pipe 
(inches) 4 or less 4 4 to 6 6 8 to 18 8 20 to 30 10 Over 30 12  
3.  The undercut space shall then be brought up to grade by backfilling with Size #57 crushed stone material or approved equal. 
1712. - INSPECTION OF SANITARY SEWERS. 
1712 A. - Responsibility for inspection. 
1.  The developer's contractor is responsible for the quality, accuracy and workmanship of his completed work. In addition, the developer shall employ a qualified professional (this shall normally be the same design professional who prepared the plans for the work) to review the quality of work as required during construction and to oversee the various tests and inspections specified herein. The professional shall demonstrate to the city that he is qualified to perform the inspections and meets state licensure requirements applicable to the profession or practice he is engaged in. 
2.  City personnel will visit the job site on a periodic basis and will make spot checks, as they deem appropriate. The city shall have the right to review and inspect all construction and may reject any work that does not meet quality control standards. 
1712 B. - Access to project. 
Authorized representatives of the city that may include, but is not limited to, city employees, city consultants, state or federal agencies shall have access to the site for inspection at any time. 
1712 C. - Communications during construction. 
1.  All written communications regarding sanitary sewer construction shall be directed to: 
Director of Water & Wastewater 
City of Griffin 
P.O. Box T 
Griffin, GA 30224 
Phone No. 770-229-6424 or Fax No. 770-229-6439 
2.  The developer, contractor(s) and the developer's professional responsible for inspection will be required to attend a pre-construction conference with the city. At the pre-construction conference, the contractor will submit to the city, in writing, the date they propose to begin construction. The contractor shall provide notification by phone any time the work is to be vacated and will provide notice by phone prior to resuming work. 
3.  The city inspector may have informal verbal communications with the contractor, foreman or superintendent at any time during construction. The city inspector will not direct the actions of the contractor's workmen. 
1712 D. - Concealed work. 
The city inspector may direct that the contractor notify the city and receive inspection approval prior to concealing certain work such as manhole foundations, pipe bedding, wyes, bends, service laterals or other appurtenances. 
1712 E. - Minimum required inspections. 
The following inspections shall be the minimum to be performed and certified in writing by the professional employed by the developer for quality control checking of the construction work: 
1.  Horizontal location. Measuring "as-built" distances between manholes and bearings from manhole to manhole to check horizontal location of the line. 
2.  Elevation and slope. Elevation of each invert and top of manhole shall be measured and recorded. Actual pipe slope shall be computed and any segment having less than minimum allowable slope shall be rejected and redone. 
3.  Manhole construction. Every manhole shall be visually inspected to check for plugging of lift holes, use of connection boots, use of joint material, leakage, proper invert construction, and the proper setting of frame and cover. 
4.  Pipe straightness. Every section of sanitary sewer line shall be visually checked for straightness. For a section to pass must show at least 80 percent of a full circle when observed from one end. Any section that fails this visual test shall have water run through it sufficient to fill any sag that may exist. It shall also have a television camera pulled through it to check for sags. Any sag holding more than 11/2 inches of water shall require the pipe be removed and replaced to proper grade. Following the replacement, the section shall be televised again to verify correction. 
5.  Infiltration. The allowable limit of infiltration, for any section from manhole to manhole, shall be 25 gallons per day per inch of pipe diameter per mile of pipe. If any infiltration is present at the most downstream point, then it will be measured using a specially made weir and measurements also made at each upstream manhole that has any visible flow of water. Any individual segment that exceeds the allowable infiltration shall be corrected to within allowable limits. 
6.  Compaction of backfill. Compaction testing shall be required for construction in paved areas or where pavement is planned. A minimum of five tests per 1,000 feet of sanitary sewer shall be conducted at varying depths. If any of these tests show failing results, the failing backfill shall be removed, re-compacted and re-tested, and one additional area shall also be tested. 
1712 F. - Additional testing requirements. 
The contractor shall also perform the tests listed below during the presence of the developer's professional. The city must be notified at least two days prior to these tests being conducted to afford the city the opportunity to be present. 
1.  Mandrel test for gravity sanitary sewer PVC pipe. The procedure for testing PVC sanitary sewer pipe for maximum allowable deflection shall be generally as follows (see ASTM specs for mandrel dimensions and more detail): 
a.  Completely flush the line making sure the pipe is clean of any mud or trash that would hinder the passage of the mandrel. During the final flushing of the line, attach a floating block or ball to the end of the mandrel pull rope and float the rope through the line (a nylon ski rope is recommended). After the rope is threaded through the line, connect the pull rope to the mandrel and place the mandrel in the entrance of the pipe. Connect a second rope to the back of the mandrel. This will enable the mandrel to be retrieved if excessive deflection is encountered. Draw the mandrel through the sanitary sewer line. An increasing resistance to pull is an indication of excessive deflection. If this occurs mark the rope to note the location. Televise the sanitary sewer section to identify the extent of the problem and develop a plan, subject to city approval, for correcting the problem. A retest shall then be undertaken. 
2.  Air pressure test. The contractor, to check for leaks, shall conduct a low-pressure test of each gravity sanitary sewer line section. The following general procedures will apply (also refer to ASTM specs): 
a.  Temporarily plug the line segment between two manholes using plugs with airtight fittings through which low-pressure air can be introduced into the pipe segment being tested. Introduce low-pressure air into the test pipe segment until the internal air pressure reaches 4.5 psig above ground water pressure, if any. Wait at least five minutes for air temperature in the test segment to stabilize while internal air pressure remains at least 3.5 psig above ground water pressure. Bleed internal air pressure to exactly 3.5 psig above ground water pressure. Accurately determine the elapsed time for the internal pressure to drop to 2.5 psig above ground water pressure. The air test is acceptable is elapsed time is no less than shown on table 7-4 below. 
b.  Excessive leakage shall be permanently corrected and the test repeated until the developer's professional witnesses a successful test on each line segment. 
c.  Note: Upon request, the city may allow substitution of an exfiltration test in lieu of the air pressure test. If used, the exfiltration test shall be conducted with a minimum water head of two feet above the groundwater table and the allowable exfiltration shall be limited to 25 gallons per day per inch diameter of pipe per mile of pipe. 
Table 17.4 Air Pressure Test Maximum Acceptable Limits Pipe Diameter 
(inches) Seconds Per 
100 ft. of Pipe Pipe Diameter 
(inches) Seconds Per 
100 ft. of Pipe 4 11 27 77 6 17 30 85 8 23 36 102 10 28 42 119 12 34 48 136 15 43 54 153 18 51 60 170 21 60 66 187 24 68 72 204  
3.  Inspections. Sewer mains are to be television inspected under flow conditions to verify accuracy of slope, alignment displacement of gaskets and cleanliness of the pipe. Two copies of the video inspection are to be submitted to the City of Griffin and must include a written log report of the testing sequence and conditions. 
4.  Damp pipe required. Air leakage time is based on the pipe being damp. If pipe and joints are dry, dampen line if helpful in meeting air test time requirement. 
5.  Force main pressure testing. Before applying the specified test pressure, all air shall be expelled from the pipe. All pipe laid in trenches shall be backfilled adequately to secure the pipe during the test. Any observed leakage shall require corrective measures to pipe lines and/or joints as otherwise provided for in these specifications and to the satisfaction of the city. The city will furnish the necessary water for testing the force main. However, any water lost through breakage of lines or unnecessary or excessive flushing of the line shall be charged to the developer. The force main must be flushed and tested at a pressure of 200 psi for six hours. When testing at the specified pressures, the rate of leakage shall not exceed 25 gallons per 24 hours per inch diameter per mile of line (see table 7-5 below). If the force main does not meet this test, the leaks shall be found and corrected at once and re-tested until the leakage falls within the limits specified. 
6.  Vacuum testing manholes. 
a.  Manholes shall be tested before the ring and cover and grade adjustment rings are installed, and after backfill and compaction is complete. 
b.  Conduct tests in conformance with ASTM C1244 and these specifications. 
c.  Preparation for tests: 
i.  All lift holes, joints and other imperfections shall be filled with an approved non-shrink grout, to provide a smooth finish appearance. 
ii.  All pipes entering the manhole shall be temporarily plugged, taking care to securely brace the pipes and plugs to prevent them from being drawn into the manholes. 
d.  Test procedures: 
i.  The test head shall be placed at the top of the manhole in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation. 
ii.  A vacuum of ten inches mercury shall be drawn in the manhole, the valve on the vacuum line of the test head closed, and the vacuum pump shut off. 
iii.  The time shall be measured for the vacuum drop to nine inches mercury. 
iv.  The manhole shall pass if the time for the vacuum reading to drop from ten inches mercury to nine inches mercury meets or exceeds the values indicated in the following table: 
Table 17.5 Maximum Test Times for Various Manhole Diameters (Inches) Time (sec) Depth 1 48 ft. 60 ft. 72 ft. 8 20 26 33 10 25 33 41 12 30 39 49 14 35 46 57 16 40 52 67 18 45 59 73 20 50 65 81 22 55 72 89 24 59 78 97 26 64 85 105 28 69 91 113 30 74 98 121  
1 Round actual depth of manhole to next depth up (ex. 11-foot deep manhole, use depth of 10 feet). 
v.  If the manhole fails any test, necessary repairs shall be made by an approved method and the manhole shall be retested until a satisfactory test is obtained. 
Table 17.6 Maximum Acceptable Water Leakage Size of Pipe 
(inches) Gallons Per Hour 
Per 100 Feet Gallons Per Day 
Per 100 Feet 14 0.276 6.624 12 0.237 5.688 10 0.197 4.728 8 0.158 3.792 6 0.118 2.832 4 0.079 1.896  
1712 G. - Final inspection and conditional acceptance. 
1.  No buildings or plumbing fixtures shall be connected to the sanitary sewers until inspected and approved by the city. 
2.  The professional responsible for inspection of the construction shall provide the city with an engineering statement after he completes his inspection, testing and submittal of as-built drawings and easements. This statement must certify that all specified inspections and tests have been made and successfully passed, and that the work has been completed in substantial accordance with the approved plans and specifications. After receipt of this statement, the city will schedule a final inspection. A representative of the developer's professional and the contractor shall be present during this final inspection. 
3.  After any discrepancies are corrected, the city will issue a letter certifying conditional acceptance of the system. This letter shall commence the start of the 24-month warranty period that is required of the contractor. 
4.  At the end of the warranty period, the subdivision inspection team will again inspect the entire development. When all discrepancies have been corrected, the city will issue an acceptance letter and will begin perpetual maintenance and operation of the system. 
1712 H. - Maintenance and payment bond. 
The developer shall post a maintenance bond on the facility, in accordance with these regulations, for a two-year period after completion and conditional acceptance of the facility by the city. In addition, the developer shall post a payment bond on the facility for all subcontractor and material supplier work. 
1712 I. - Maintenance until final acceptance. 
It shall be the developer's obligation to provide all maintenance for a two-year period after conditional acceptance of the project by the city. At the end of the maintenance period the city shall inspect the sewer system, and upon correction by the developer of all deficiencies noted by the city, the city will accept the system for operation. 

17.1: Peak Flow Factors

17.2: Precast Concrete Manhole

17.3: Standard Vented Manhole (for Pipe Larger Than 18")

17.4: Standard Manhole Plans

17.5: Manhole Step

17.6: Standard Manhole Frame and Cover

17.7: Manhole Frame Grade Adjustment

17.8: Sewer Service Lateral

17.9: Sewer Service Location Detail

17.7: Cleanout Detail

17.8: Concrete Encasement

17.12: Typical Pipe Adapter

17.9: Sewer Pipe Anchor

17.14: Pipe Class "A" Bedding

17.15: Pipe Class "B" Bedding

17.16: Pipe Class "C" Bedding

17.17: Minimum PVC Pipe Bedding Detail

17.18: Sewer Air and Vacuum Valve Assembly

17.19: Sewer Casing Spacer Detail

17.10: Fence and Gate Detail

17.11: Residential Street Utility Location

17.12: Plan and Profile-Submittal Example
ARTICLE 18. - SOLID WASTE REQUIREMENTS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

1801. - GENERAL POLICY AND REQUIREMENTS. 
    The City of Griffin's Solid Waste Department has the responsibility to protect the public health, safety and well being of its citizens and to protect and enhance the quality of its environment by enforcing policies governing the collection, storage, handling and disposal of solid waste and construction and/or demolition debris as part of all new development within the City of Griffin including residential, commercial and industrial. 
    Therefore, the city has adopted procedures in accordance with laws enforced by the Georgia Environmental Protection Agency to regulate solid waste handling, storage, collection and disposal by the solid waste department, who is licensed to collect, store, handle and dispose of solid waste, commercial, and/or demolition debris generated from residential, commercial and industrial developments within the city. 
1802. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 
1802 A. 
Prior to issuance of building permits for all construction including new or remodeling of residential, commercial or industrial sites, the applicant must provide documentation of the manner in which collection, storage and disposal of all building materials will be handled during construction. The director of solid waste or designee shall approve the proper location for the container. All residential and commercial contractors and/or property owners are required to keep the project site free of waste, debris and litter generated during new construction or remodeling. 
1802 B. 
All commercial, industrial and multi-family generators of solid waste within the city are responsible for assuring the safe handling, storage and collection of solid waste from their premises. Commercial, industrial and multi-family customers are expected to enter into written service contracts with the city and abide by the regulations for such service as from time to time promulgated by the director of solid waste. 
1802 C. 
Standardized commercial containers, including compactors and roll-off boxes, may be furnished by the City of Griffin Solid Waste Department. The solid waste department reserves the right to determine the location of each container, including the right to require joint usage by more than one customer where feasible. Customer-owned compactors are encouraged and the solid waste department can furnish specifications for installation of compactors compatible with city equipment. All new customers shall consult with the solid waste department in the design and development of commercial, industrial and multi-family sites to assure access and compatibility with city-owned equipment. 
1802 D. 
It shall be the responsibility of each commercial, industrial and multi-family customer to provide adequate containers for storage of its own solid waste. It shall be the responsibility of each commercial, industrial and multi-family customer to provide a location easily accessible for the customer and the collection equipment utilized for disposal. The City of Griffin will not be responsible for deterioration of parking lots, driveways, streets or roads. The location of the permanent refuse container shall be detailed on the site plan in a location approved by the solid waste director or designee. 
1802 E. 
For complete rules and regulations governing solid waste in the City of Griffin, please refer to the Code of Griffin, Georgia, Chapter 74. 
1803. - PLANNING AND DESIGN (GENERAL). 
1803 A. 
All dumpsters and compactor sites shall contain the following: 
1.  Concrete pad. 
2.  Concrete approach pad. 
3.  Enclosure walls. 
4.  Gates with stops and locks. 
1803 B. 
All front-loading refuse containers used in the city shall be equipped with waterproof covers and kept closed when not in use. 
1803 C. 
Containers used for grocery stores, restaurants or other businesses that may generate food or liquid type waste shall be designed with seals, gaskets or plugs to prevent these waste materials from escaping or leaking from the container. The pad must be sloped to a central drain connected to the sanitary sewer system and kept clean at all times. 
1803 D. 
All other container pads shall allow for positive drainage so that no standing water or sediment may accumulate. 
1803 E. 
Container pads shall not be used for any outside storage. All grease traps, racks and other materials will not be allowed in container pad area. 
1803 F. 
Container pads shall not be located adjacent to or over water lines, water meters, gas lines, gas meters, under electric lines or any other utility. Access to the container pad shall be limited in crossing all utilities. 
1803 G. 
All commercial dumpsters and compactors shall bear the name, address, phone number and contact person of the contracting company for identification purposes. 
1804. - SINGLE-UNIT DESIGN. 
1804 A. 
Concrete pad shall be a minimum of eight feet in length by 12 feet in width, inside dimension, sloped for positive drainage capable of withstanding the front weight of a 60,000 pound front-end loading truck. 
1804 B. 
Concrete approach pad shall be a minimum of 15 feet in length and 12 feet in width, inside dimension and constructed to hold a 60,000 pound front-end loading truck. 
1804 C. 
Dumpster pad shall be enclosed on three sides with walls a minimum of six feet in height constructed of wood fence, masonry wall or non-transparent material compatible with the design, material and color selections used on the principal building(s). 
1804 D. 
The front side of the dumpster shall have gates a minimum of six feet in height, constructed of wood, chain link fence with privacy inserts or metal. Gates and gateposts shall be constructed to prevent leaning or sagging. Foot rollers may be used in design to accomplish these criteria and to ensure gates are easy to open. Gates shall have stops and locks installed. 
1804 E. 
Details of pad and enclosure are to be noted on site plans with "no vertical interference," statement on site plans. 
1804 F. 
A minimum of two steel bollards set in concrete 48 inches on center (the distance from the center of one bollard to the center of the next bollard) shall be placed at the rear of the pad to prevent damage to the rear wall of the dumpster enclosure. 
1804 G. 
Pad must be constructed for accessibility of front-end loading trucks, with no vertical interference entering or exiting proposed site. 
1805. - DOUBLE-UNIT DESIGN. 
1805 A. 
Concrete pad shall be a minimum of eight feet in length by 24 feet in width, inside dimension, sloped for positive drainage capable of withstanding a 60,000 pound front-end loading truck. 
1805 B. 
Concrete approach pad shall be a minimum of 15 feet in length by 24 feet in width, inside dimension, and constructed to withstand a 60,000 pound front-end loading truck. 
1805 C. 
Container area shall be enclosed on three sides with walls at least six feet in height constructed of wood fence, masonry wall or non-transparent material compatible with the design, material and color selections used on the principal building(s). 
1805 D. 
The front side of the dumpster pad shall have gates with stops and locks at least six feet in height. Gates are to be constructed of wood, chain link fence with privacy inserts or metal. Gates and gateposts shall be constructed to prevent sagging and leaning and to be easily opened and closed. 
1805 E. 
Details of the container pad and enclosure are to be noted on the site plan with "no vertical interference," statement on the plan. 
1805 F. 
A minimum of four bollards spaced 47 inches on center (the distance from the center of one bollard to the center of the next bollard) for each pair. Bollards are to be set in concrete at rear of pad to prevent damage to the rear wall of the container enclosure. 
1805 G. 
Pad must be constructed for accessibility of front-end loading trucks with no vertical interference entering or exiting the proposed site. 
1805 H. 
Double unit may be designed with or without partition wall between containers. 
1805 I. 
Double unit may have one or two pair of gates. If designed with one pair of gates then the foot rollers shall be installed. 
1806. - COMPACTOR DESIGN. 
1806 A. 
Concrete pad 36 feet in length by 12 feet in width, inside dimension, capable of holding a 60,000 pound roll-off truck. 
1806 B. 
Concrete approach pad shall be 20 feet in length by 12 feet in width, inside dimension, capable of withstanding a 60,000 pound roll-off truck. Approach shall be straight to allow tandem truck to back into compactor pad. 
1806 C. 
Compactor pad shall be enclosed on three sides with a wall height of a minimum of eight feet, constructed of a wood fence, masonry wall or non-transparent material compatible with the design, material and color selections used on the principal building(s). 
1806 D. 
Compactor pad shall have gates with stops and locks. Gates shall be a minimum of eight feet in height. Gates and gateposts shall be constructed to prevent sagging and leaning and to be easily opened and closed. Foot rollers may be installed to accomplish these criteria. 
1806 E. 
On commercial sites, walls may be omitted if unit design is self-contained with access to hopper from the interior of the building. 
1806 F. 
For residential units, the enclosure walls at the hopper access shall be designed to prevent access by children and to prevent accidental injury. The area adjacent to the unit shall be no more than 42 inches to the access of the hopper. 
1806 G. 
Electric shall be installed according to the manufacturer's specifications. 
1806 H. 
Compactor pads shall allow for positive drainage to prevent the accumulation of standing water or sediment. A floor drain may be installed to permit stormwater drainage. 
1806 I. 
Details of the compactor pad are to be noted on the site plan with "no vertical interference," statement on the plan. 
1806 J. 
Hopper size shall be large enough to accommodate the volume of waste for which the container is designed to handle. Hoppers may require sides or tops depending on the application. 
1806 K. 
The power unit, electric connection and hydraulic tank shall have easy access and be elevated to prevent water accumulation, which would interfere with safe operation of the compactor. 
1806 L. 
The control unit shall be keyed and placed in an area of easy access for operation of the compactor. A sign with instructions and safety information shall be posted next to the control unit. A lock over the control unit shall be required for all residential complexes. 
1806 M. 
Installation of a self-contained or stationary compactor shall be completed in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications. 
1806 N. 
Any variance request from these requirements shall be placed in writing to the attention of the City of Griffin Solid Waste Director. 
1807. - INFORMATION. 
    For further information regarding solid waste requirements for the City of Griffin, please contact: 
Director, Solid Waste Department 
132 Emlet Drive 
Griffin, GA 30223 
770-229-6421 
ARTICLE 19. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

1901. - CONFLICTING ORDINANCES REPEALED. 
    All zoning and land development ordinances heretofore enacted by the City of Griffin, Georgia, are expressly hereby repealed. Article 12 of this ordinance now restates in its entirety the sign regulations codified at Chapter 70 of the Code of Griffin, Georgia, which chapter shall now be shown to be "Reserved". All other chapters of said Code, including those provisions which may address subject matters regulated by this ordinance, are saved from repeal. To the extent any Code provision, or provisions of other uncodified ordinance(s) conflict with any provision(s) of this ordinance the latest legislative pronouncement of the board of commissioners shall be deemed controlling. 
1902. - IMPLEMENTATION OF THE LAND USE PLAN. 
    This Unified Development Code is intended to implement the current City of Griffin Comprehensive Plan. When the future land use element of the comprehensive plan is amended from time to time, this zoning ordinance shall be amended, as appropriate, within a reasonable period of time, in order to implement the amendment to the future land use element. 
1903. - VALIDITY. 
    Should any part of this ordinance be declared by a court to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the specific part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. It is intended the court shall sever from this ordinance only the unconstitutional or invalid part(s) in order to allow the remainder of this ordinance to be valid and enforceable. 
1904. - LIABILITY. 
    It is the intent of this ordinance to protect the public health, life safety, morals and general welfare of persons and property within the City of Griffin in general and not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or without the boundaries of said city. The city reserves the right to asset all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking equitable relief and/or to impose monetary damages upon the city, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. To the extent any federal or state law, regulation or ordinance requires compliance as a condition precedent to the issuance of any approval, permit, plan or design approval, inspection or other activity by the city, its officers, employees and agents, issuance of such permit, approval, plan or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver or estoppels of the condition precedent and it shall remain the sole obligation and responsibility of the owner, his design professional(s) and contractor(s) to satisfy such legal requirements. 
1905. - EFFECTIVE DATE. 
    This ordinance, approved on second and final reading on March 13, 2012, shall become effective on April 1, 2012. 
APPENDIX A. - ACKNOWLEDGMENT FORM 
    The applicant for amendment to this ordinance shall sign the following statement or other similar statement approved by the zoning administrator: 
"I, ___________, applicant for amendment to the City of Griffin Unified Development Code, swear that all information in the application is true to the best of my knowledge and belief; and that I have had the opportunity to participate in a conference with the zoning administrator; that I have had an opportunity to read and/or purchase a copy of the Unified Development Code; that I agree to abide by the decisions of the zoning administrator, planning and zoning board, board of commissioners, as well as any other city official or body relative to this application; and that I intend to complete any and all buildings or other improvements, as approved by the City of Griffin, in accordance with all city ordinances and in accordance with the plans and information submitted in this application." 
This, the _____ day of _______, 20___. 
___________ 
Print Name 
___________ 
Sign Name 
APPENDIX B. - CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURE AFFIDAVITS 
    O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-4; Any local government official knowingly failing to make a disclosure required by Code § 36-67A-2 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any applicant for rezoning action knowingly failing to make and disclose as required by Code § 36-67A-3 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
    Members of the board of board of commissioners and the planning and zoning board shall make and file an affidavit with the zoning administrator in any zoning matter in which the official (1) has a property interest in any real property affected by the rezoning; (2) has a financial interest in any business entity which has a property interest in any real property affected by the rezoning action upon which that official is authorized to vote; or (3) has a member of the family having an interest described above. For purposes of this requirement, members of the family shall include the official's spouse, father, mother, brother, sister, son or daughter. Affidavits shall be filed immediately upon learning that a rezoning action is pending. Officials making disclosure under this requirement shall exercise discretion in whether to participate in consideration of the rezoning action. 
    Applicants applying for a rezoning action, within ten days of filing of the application, shall file with the zoning administrator an affidavit disclosing whether, within two years immediately preceding the filing of said application, applicant has made campaign contributions or gifts totaling or having an aggregate value of $250.00 or more to a member of the board of board of commissioners or the planning and zoning board who is authorized to vote on the rezoning action. This disclosure shall state the name of the official, the amount and date of the campaign contribution or a description and estimate of value of any gift. 
STATE OF GEORGIA 
COUNTY OF SPALDING 
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT 
Re: Application of: ___________ 
Real property located at: ___________ 
Date of Application: ___________ 
Disclosure filed by: ___________ 
Title of local governing official: ___________ 
For purposes of complying with the requirement of Georgia Laws 1986, page 1269 (O.C.G.A. 36-67A-2); the undersigned makes the following disclosures: 
1.  The undersigned (has or does not have) a property interest in the real property affected by the rezoning action upon which the undersigned is authorized to vote. 
2.  The undersigned (has or does not have) a financial interest in any business entity which has a property interest in the real property affected by the rezoning action upon which the undersigned is authorized to vote. 
3.  The undersigned (has or does not have) a family member having any property interest or financial interest in the real property affected by the rezoning action upon which the undersigned is authorized to vote. 
EXPLAIN THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF ANY INTEREST DISCLOSED ABOVE IN THE SPACE BELOW: 
_____
This, the _____ day of _______, ___. 
___________ 
Local Governing Official 
Sworn and subscribed before me this the _____ day of _______, ___. 
Notary Public: ___________ 
My commission expires: _______ 
CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURE FOR APPLICANT 
Have you, within the two years immediately preceding the filing of the rezoning application, made campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to a member of the Board of Board of commissioners, a member of the Planning and Zoning Board or any other government official who will consider the application? 
_____ 
Yes or No 
If the answer is yes, please complete the following section: 
Name and Official Position of Government Official: 
___________ 
Please list the Date and the Amount of Contribution(s) (List all which aggregate to $250.00 or more): 
___________ 
___________ 
___________ 
___________ 
Signature of Applicant 
___________ Date _______ 
Printed Name: 
___________ 
Signature of Applicant's Attorney or Representative 
___________ Date _______ 
Printed Name: 
___________ 
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table gives the location within this Unified Development Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 12-12  3-13-2012       Added 101, 201, 202, 301-305, 401-414, 501-505, 601-605, 701-724, 801-809, 901-906, 1001-1003, 1201-1222, 1301-1311, 1401-1414, 1501-1507, 1601-1610, 1701-1712, 1801-1807, 1901-1906, Apps. A, B 12-13  9-11-2012 1       Added 504 F. 13-05  5-14-2013 1 1214 13-11  8-27-2013 1 724 14-2  5-27-2014 1 704 14-3  5-27-2014 1 720 D. 3. 14-04  7- 8-2014 1 704 14-07 12- 9-2014 1       Added 203 15-01  1-27-2015 1 704 15-04  4-28-2015 1 1213 B. 9. 15-08  6-23-2015 1 704 15-09  7-13-2015 1 1205 A. 15-10  7-28-2015 1 704 15-11  7-28-2015 1 704 722 A., Fig. 7.1 15-15 10-27-2015 1       Rpld 1201-1222       Added 1201-1222 16-01  1-12-2016 1 704 16-03  2- 9-2016 1       Added 401 E. 16-09  7-26-2016 1 202 16-10  7-26-2016 1 704 18-05  3-27-2018 1 504 F.       Added 504 G. 18-06  3-27-2018 1 704 18-07  5- 8-2018 1 605 B. 605 C. 18-08  5- 8-2018 1 202 18-09  5- 8-2018 1 606 19-05  1-22-2019 1 704 19-07  2-26-2019 1 605 F.  
