THE CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF HARTWELL, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2010 by Order of the Mayor and City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: December 6, 2010 
Effective: December 6, 2010 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
HARTWELL, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Jennifer Scott 
Mayor 
____________ 
Sarah Mayfield 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Arthur Craft 
Billy Ethridge 
David Little 
Tray Hicks 
Van Senkbeil 
City Council 
____________ 
David Aldrich 
City Manager 
____________ 
Jean Turner 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Robert Leverett 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Hartwell, Georgia. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1989 Code, as supplemented through January 4, 2010, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1989 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 LOCAL ACTS LA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 LOCAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE LACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Code Attorney, and Daryl Jaquette, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to David Aldrich, City Manager; Jean Turner, City Clerk; and Robert F. Leverett, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Hartwell, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Hartwell, Georgia. 
(c)  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Hartwell, Georgia. 2010. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2010-02 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF HARTWELL, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT PROVIDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of Ordinances, City of Hartwell, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 42, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before January 4, 2010, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $3,500.00, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after January 4, 2010, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective December 6, 2010. 
Passed and adopted by the Council of the City of Hartwell, Georgia this 6th day of December, 2010. 
      Mayor   ATTEST: 
      City Clerk   1st Reading: November 1, 2010 
2nd Reading: December 6, 2010 
Council Action: Approved 
Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the Hartwell City Council, held on the 6th day of December, 2010. 
      City Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 2010-02 12- 6-2010 Included 1 2010-04  1- 3-2011 Included 1 HB 584  5-11-2011 Included 2 2011-01  7- 5-2011 Included 2 2011-02  8- 1-2011 Omitted 2 2012-02  8- 6-2012 Included 2 2012-04 11- 5-2012 Included 2 02-07-11(Res.)  2- 7-2011 Included 3 2013-01 10- 7-2013 Included 3 2013-02 10- 7-2013 Included 3 2013-03  1- 6-2014 Included 4 2014-03 10- 6-2014 Included 4 2014-04 10- 6-2014 Included 4 2015-01  2- 2-2015 Included 5 2015-02  1- 8-2015 Included 5 2015-03  8- 3-2015 Included 6 2015-04  7-20-2015 Included 6 2015-06  1- 4-2016 Included 6 2015-07  1- 4-2016 Included 6 2017-01  5- 1-2017 Included 7 2017-02  8- 7-2017 Included 7  
PART I - CHARTER AND LOCAL ACTS 
Subpart A - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The City of Hartwell, Georgia, was originally incorporated February 26, 1856, by 1855 Ga. Laws (Act No. 321), page 323. Printed herein is the most current Charter of the city, as adopted by 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 764), page 5476. The sequence of sections within each article are the same as in the act comprising it. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by history notes following amended provisions, except for 1957 Ga. Laws (Act No. 414), § 1, page 3128, which amended the Charter by directing that the word "city" be substituted throughout the Charter for the word "town." That substitution has been accomplished without history note. Otherwise, the absence of a subsequent history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been retained, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Requirement for incorporation, dissolution, merger, or consolidation of municipalities by local act, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-2; standards for original incorporation, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq.; limitations on local control by municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-1 et seq., 36-35-1 et seq.; amendment of municipal charters, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-35-3(b), 36-35-6; terms "city," "town," and "municipality" declared synonymous, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1; municipal home rule, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; limitations on municipal home rule, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Name. 
    This city and the inhabitants thereof are constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style City of Hartwell, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the mayor of the city and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map or Description of the Corporate Limits of the City of Hartwell, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city manager shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps that it is designated to replace. 
Sec. 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this Charter or by general law or by the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
Sec. 1.13. - Municipal powers. 
    Said powers shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this paragraph; 
(3)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of this city; 
(4)  Building regulations. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air-conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades except as otherwise prohibited by general law; 
(5)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for the failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(6)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 22-1-1 et seq.] or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(7)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(8)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists inside or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(9)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations, not inconsistent with general law relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business within the city and benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(11)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property that is detrimental to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation within the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares in the city; to provide for the commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for the commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(15)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(19)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers, and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, cable television, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties therefor; and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; and to authorize the extension of water, sewerage, and electrical distribution systems, and all necessary appurtenances by which said utilities are distributed, inside and outside the corporate limits of the city; and to provide utility services to persons, firms, and corporations inside and outside the corporate limits of the city as provided by ordinance; 
(21)  Nuisances. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(22)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(23)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and esthetically pleasing community; 
(24)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a firefighting agency; 
(25)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(26)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide any other public improvements inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 22-1-1 et seq.] or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(27)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(28)  Public transportation. To organize and operate or contract for such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(29)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and the standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission, and to own and operate its own franchises for the delivery of such services including cable television and related services; 
(30)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, inside or abutting the corporate limits of the city and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(31)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(32)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to negotiate and execute leases over, through, under, or across any city property or the right-of-way of any street, road, alley, and walkway or portion thereof within the corporate limits of the city, for bridges, passageways, or any other purpose or use between buildings on opposite sides of the street and for other bridges, overpasses, and underpasses for private use at such location, and to charge a rental therefor in such manner as may be provided by ordinance; and to authorize and control the construction of bridges, overpasses, and underpasses within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities and for private use; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(33)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system; to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(34)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(35)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxing or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortune telling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(36)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs of any public improvement; 
(37)  Ad valorem taxes. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(38)  Other taxes. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(39)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(40)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and 
(41)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this Charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1.14. - Exercise of powers. 
    All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Sec. 2.10. - City council creation; number; election. 
    The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and six council members. The mayor and council members shall be elected in the manner provided by this Charter. 
Sec. 2.11. - City council terms and qualifications for office. 
    The members of the city council shall serve for terms of four (4) years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as council member unless such person shall be twenty-one (21) years of age on or before the date of the election and such person shall have been a resident of the city for twelve (12) months immediately prior to the date of the election of mayor or members of the city council; and each shall continue to reside in the city during such council member's period of service and be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancies in office. 
(a)  The office of mayor or council member shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, removal of residence from the city, missing four (4) consecutive city council meetings without leave from the council, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or general law of the State of Georgia. A vacancy in the office of mayor or council member shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this Charter. 
(b)  Upon the suspension from office of mayor or council member in any manner authorized by the general laws of the State of Georgia, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, then the office shall become vacant and shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this Charter. 
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
    The mayor and council members shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.14. - Conflicts of interest; holding other offices. 
(a)  Conflict of interest. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of such person's official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of judgment or action in the performance of such person's official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of such person's official duties or would tend to impair the independence of judgment or action in the performance of such person's official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which such person is engaged without the proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or the private interest of such person or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to such person's knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the governmental body by which such person is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign. Valuables are defined as gifts worth over fifty dollars ($50.00); 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; and 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which such person has financial interest. 
(b)  Disclosure. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the city council. The mayor or any council member who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and the mayor or council member shall be disqualified from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(c)  Use of public property. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this Charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Contracts voidable and rescindable. Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(e)  Ineligibility of elected official. Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any council member shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency thereof during the term for which elected. No former mayor and no former council member shall hold any compensated appointive office in the city until one (1) year after the expiration of the term for which elected. 
(f)  Penalties for violation. 
(1)  Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited such office or position. 
(2)  Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit such office or position as described in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
    The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and, for this purpose, may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.16. - General power and authority of the city council. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by Article I of this Charter. 
Sec. 2.17. - Eminent domain. 
    The city council is empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, cable television systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city and to regulate the use thereof and, for such purposes, property may be condemned under procedures established under general law applicable now or as provided in the future. 
Sec. 2.18. - Oath of office. 
    The oath of office shall be administered by the city manager to the newly elected members as follows: 
    "I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (council member) of this city and that I will support and defend the Charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
Sec. 2.19. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three (3) members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to council members shall not be required if the mayor and all council members are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a council member in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such council member's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting without unanimous consent of such council members present. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made as required by law. 
Sec. 2.20. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings that shall be a public record. The rules of procedure adopted shall not expand or restrict any powers assigned to the mayor and council members by this Charter. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairpersons and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor, but each and every such appointment shall be subject to the right of the city council to override or rescind such appointment at any time by a vote of a majority of the city council, in its discretion. All committee members shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time, but each and every such appointment shall be subject to the same right of the city council to override or rescind such appointment or appointments by a majority vote of the city council. 
(HB 584, 5-11-2011) 
Sec. 2.21. - Quorum; voting. 
(a)  Four council members shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact the business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the affirmative vote of a majority of council members present shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
(b)  In the event vacancies in office result in less than a quorum of council members holding office, then the remaining council members in office shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. A vote of a majority of the remaining council members shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
Sec. 2.22. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject that is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The Council of the City of Hartwell hereby ordains ..." and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any council member and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances as provided in section 2.24. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the city manager shall, as soon as possible, distribute a copy to the mayor and to each council member and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the city manager and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
Sec. 2.23. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
    Acts of the city council that have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. All other matters of business shall be considered in the form of a resolution. 
Sec. 2.24. - Emergencies. 
    To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three (3) council members and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within thirty (30) days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least a majority of the council members present shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed thirty (30) days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Sec. 2.25. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: 
(1)  The requirements of subsection (b) of section 2.22 of this Charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(2)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the city manager pursuant to section 2.26 of this Charter. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the city manager for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Sec. 2.26. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing of ordinances. 
(a)  The city manager shall authenticate by signing and recording in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly together with all amendments thereto and shall contain such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of Ordinances, City of Hartwell, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and shall be made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and Charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this Charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and Charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code then in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation within the code. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
Sec. 2.27. - City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
    The city council shall employ a city manager for an indefinite term and shall fix the compensation of the city manager. The city manager shall be employed solely on the basis of the city manager's executive and administrative qualifications. Any contract for the employment of a city manager shall provide for review of the city manager's performance at regular intervals to ensure the adequate performance of the city manager to the satisfaction of the city council. 
Sec. 2.28. - Removal of city manager. 
(a)  The city council may remove the city manager from office in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The city council shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members a preliminary resolution that must state the reasons for removal and may suspend the city manager from duty for a period not to exceed forty-five (45) days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the city manager; 
(2)  Within five (5) days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the city manager, the city manager may file with the city council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the request is filed. The city manager may file with the council a written reply not later than five (5) days before the hearing; and 
(3)  If the city manager has not requested a public hearing within the time specified in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the city council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members. If the city manager has requested a public hearing, the city council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members at any time after the public hearing. 
(b)  The city manager shall continue to receive the same salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal. 
Sec. 2.29. - Acting city manager. 
    By letter filed with the city council, the city manager shall designate, subject to approval of the city council, a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during the city manager's temporary absence or disability. During such absence or disability, the city council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the city manager shall return or the city manager's disability shall cease. 
Sec. 2.30. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
    The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in the city manager's charge by or under this Charter. The city manager shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  The city manager shall employ and, when the city manager deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees and administrative officers the city manager employs, except as otherwise provided by law, in this Charter, or in personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this Charter. The city manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency; 
(2)  The city manager shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law; 
(3)  The city manager shall attend all city council meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion but may not vote; 
(4)  The city manager shall see that all laws, provisions of this Charter, and ordinances of the city council, subject to enforcement by the city manager or by officers subject to the city manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(5)  The city manager shall prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the city council; 
(6)  The city manager shall submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city at the regularly held monthly meeting of the city council; 
(7)  The city manager shall make such other reports as the city council may require concerning the operation of city departments, offices, and agencies subject to the city manager's direction and supervision; 
(8)  The city manager shall keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as the city manager deems desirable; and 
(9)  The city manager shall perform other such duties as are specified in this Charter or as may be required by the city council. 
Sec. 2.31. - Council interference with administration. 
    Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under section 2.15, the mayor and the city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the mayor nor the city council or its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
Sec. 2.32. - Election of mayor; forfeiture; compensation. 
    The mayor shall be elected and serve for a term of four (4) years and until a successor is elected and qualified. The mayor shall be a qualified elector of this city, shall be twenty-one (21) years of age on or before the date of election, and shall have been a resident of the city for at least twelve (12) months immediately preceding such election. The mayor shall continue to reside in this city during the period of service as mayor. The mayor shall forfeit office on the same grounds and under the same procedures as for council members. The compensation of the mayor shall be established in the same manner as for council members. 
Sec. 2.33. - Mayor pro tem; election. 
    By a majority vote, the city council shall elect a council member to serve as mayor pro tem. 
Sec. 2.34. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
    The mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)  Have the power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; 
(4)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city that by law are required to be in writing; 
(5)  Vote at city council meetings only in the event of a tie vote by council members; and 
(6)  Have veto power to be exercised in the manner set out in section 2.36. 
Sec. 2.35. - Mayor pro tem; power and duties. 
    During the absence or disability of the mayor for any cause, the mayor pro tem, or in the absence or disability of the mayor pro tem for any reason, any one (1) of the council members chosen by a majority vote of the city council, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the duties of the office of the mayor so long as such absence or disability shall continue. Any such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of all council members. 
Sec. 2.36. - Submission of ordinances to the mayor; veto power. 
(a)  Every ordinance adopted by the city council shall be presented promptly by the city manager to the mayor. 
(b)  The mayor, within five (5) calendar days of receipt of an ordinance, shall return it to the city manager with or without approval or with disapproval. If the ordinance has been approved by the mayor, it shall become law upon its return to the city manager; if the ordinance is neither approved nor disapproved, it shall become law at 12:00 noon on the tenth calendar day after its adoption; if the ordinance is disapproved, the mayor shall submit to the city council a written statement of the reasons for the veto. The city manager shall record upon the ordinance the date of its delivery to and receipt from the mayor. 
(c)  Ordinances vetoed by the mayor shall be presented by the city manager to the city council at its next meeting. If the city council then or at its next general meeting adopts the ordinance by an affirmative vote of two-thirds of its members, it shall become law. 
(d)  The mayor may disapprove or reduce any item or items or appropriation in any ordinance. The approved part or parts of any ordinance making appropriations shall become law, and the part or parts disapproved shall not become law unless subsequently passed by the city council over the mayor's veto as provided in subsection (c) of this section. The reduced part or parts shall be presented to the city council as though disapproved and shall become law unless overridden by the city council as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city council by ordinance shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointed officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of that department or agency. 
(e)  All directors under the supervision of the city manager shall be nominated by the city manager with confirmation of appointment by the city council. The city manager may suspend or remove directors under the city manager's supervision, which suspension shall be effective immediately following the city manager's giving written notice of such action and the reasons therefor to the director involved and to the city council. The director involved may appeal to the city council that, after a hearing, may override the city manager's action by a vote of four council members. 
Sec. 3.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority created pursuant to subsection (c) of this section shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed in this Charter for the original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until the member has executed and filed with the city manager an oath obligating such member to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of four members of the city council. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one (1) of its members as chairman and one (1) member as vice chairman, and may elect as its secretary one (1) of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the city manager. 
Sec. 3.12. - City attorney. 
    The city council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party, may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court, shall attend the meetings of the council as directed, shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs, and shall perform such other duties as may be required of the city attorney by virtue of the position as city attorney. The city attorney shall serve at the discretion of the city council. 
Sec. 3.13. - City clerk. 
    The city manager may employ a city clerk who shall not be a council member. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal, maintain city council records required by this Charter, and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council or delegated by the city manager. 
Sec. 3.14. - City treasurer. 
    The city manager may employ a financial officer to collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other moneys belonging to the city, subject to the provisions of this Charter and the ordinances of the city, and to enforce all laws of Georgia relating to the collection of delinquent taxes and sale or foreclosure for nonpayment of taxes. The financial officer shall also be responsible for the general duties of a treasurer and fiscal officer. 
Sec. 3.15. - City accountant. 
    The city council shall appoint a city accountant to perform the duties of an accountant. The city accountant shall serve at the discretion of the city council. 
Sec. 3.16. - Position classification and pay plans. 
    The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan that shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
Sec. 3.17. - Personnel policies. 
    The city council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this Charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of the position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leave of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be effected; 
(4)  Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)  Such other personnel notices as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Sec. 4.10. - Municipal court. 
    There shall be a court to be known as the municipal court of the City of Hartwell. 
Sec. 4.11. - Judges. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, fulltime, or standby judges as shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless such person shall have attained the age of twenty-one (21) years. All judges shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve at the discretion of the city council. 
(c)  Compensation of the judge or judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Judges may be removed for cause by a vote of a majority of the members present of the city council. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath given by the mayor that such judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the office to the best of such judge's ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in section 2.20 of this Charter. 
Sec. 4.12. - Convening of court. 
    The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this Charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have the authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) or ten (10) days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00) or imprisonment for ninety (90) days or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. The maximum punishment for offenses committed under state law shall be those limits as established by general law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have the authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the actual cost of meals, transportation, and care taking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violation of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety bond for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, the bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution shall be issued thereon by serving the defendant and the sureties on the bond with a rule nisi at least two (2) days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(i)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to municipal courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
Sec. 4.14. - Certiorari. 
    The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Hart County, under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules. 
    With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city manager, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to said proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
    All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.] as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.11. - Election of the city council and mayor. 
(a)  There shall be a municipal general election biennially on the Tuesday following the first Monday in November. 
(b)  There shall be elected the mayor and three (3) council members at one (1) election and at every other election thereafter. The remaining city council seats shall be filled at the election alternating with the first election so that a continuing body is created as provided for in the initial election held under this Charter pursuant to Section 7.12. 
Sec. 5.12. - Nonpartisan elections. 
    Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party labels. 
Sec. 5.13. - Special elections; vacancies. 
    In the event that the office of mayor or council member shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within three (3) months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those members remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.] as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.14. - Other provisions. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code " [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.]. 
Sec. 5.15. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  The mayor, council members, or other appointed officers provided for in this Charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Incompetence, misfeasance, or malfeasance in office; 
(2)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this Charter or by law; 
(4)  Knowingly violating any express prohibition of this Charter; 
(5)  Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; 
(6)  Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this Charter or by state law; or 
(7)  Knowingly violating section 2.31 of this Charter dealing with council interference with administration. 
(b)  Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one (1) of the following methods: 
(1)  By the vote of a majority of council members present after an investigative hearing. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing that shall be held not less than ten (10) days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as provided in this section shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the superior court of Hart County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)  By an order of the superior court of Hart County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Hartwell. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 6.10. - Property tax. 
    The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage rate; due date; payment methods. 
    The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one (1) lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
    The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling within the city to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way that may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.13. - Licenses; permits; fees. 
    The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individual or corporation who transacts business in this city or who practices or offers to practice any profession or calling within the city to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulations. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitate. 
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises. 
    The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of thirty-five (35) years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city manager in a registration book kept by the city manager. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Sec. 6.15. - Service charges. 
    The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available inside or outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.16. - Special assessments. 
    The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the costs of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.17. - Construction; other taxes. 
    This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
    The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this Charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due, late penalties or interest, issuance and execution of fi. fas., creation and priority of liens, making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed, revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees, and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.19. - General obligation bonds. 
    The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this Charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
    Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.21. - Short-term loans. 
    The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31st of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 6.22. - Fiscal year. 
    The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
Sec. 6.23. - Preparation of budget. 
    The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. 
Sec. 6.24. - Submission of operating budget to city council. 
    On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than forty-five (45) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as the city manager may deem pertinent. The operating budget, the capital improvements budget provided for in this Charter, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city manager and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 6.25. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the city manager, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council by ordinance shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the fifteenth of December of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by said date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the then current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to section 6.23 of this Charter. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof to which it is chargeable. 
Sec. 6.26. - Levy of taxes. 
    Following adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expense of the general government of this city. 
Sec. 6.27. - Changes in appropriations. 
    The city council by ordinance vote may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purposes, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
Sec. 6.28. - Capital improvements budget. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council, but not later than forty-five (45) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements budget with the city manager's recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have the power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement, unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in section 2.24. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the fifteenth day of December of each year. No appropriations provided for in a prior capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriations were made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the city manager may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by the city manager's recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
Sec. 6.29. - Independent audits. 
    There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Sec. 6.30. - Contracting procedures. 
    No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn by or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, is signed by him to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to section 2.21 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.31. - Centralized purchasing. 
    The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 6.32. - Sale of city property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the city manager and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the city manager to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place when such exchange is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
    The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 7.11. - Prior ordinances; rules and regulations. 
    All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this Charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 7.12. - First election under this Charter. 
    The first municipal election shall be the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 1993, at which time the positions held by Joan Saliba, George Rooks, Herbert Maret, and Ed Weaver shall be filled. 
Sec. 7.13. - Existing personnel and officers. 
    Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all personnel and officers of the city and their rights, privileges, and powers shall continue beyond the time this Charter takes effect for a period of sixty (60) days before or during which the existing city council shall pass a transition ordinance detailing the changes in personnel and appointed officers required or desired and arranging such titles, rights, privileges, and powers as may be required or desired to allow a reasonable transition. 
Sec. 7.14. - Pending matters. 
    Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 7.15. - Definitions and construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this Charter are informative only and shall not be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Sec. 7.16. - Severability. 
    If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this Charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this Charter unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this Charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
Sec. 7.17. - Effective date. 
    This Charter shall become of full force and effect on June 1, 1992. 
Sec. 7.18. - Specific repealer. 
    An Act incorporating the City of Hartwell in the County of Hart, approved April 3, 1972 (Ga. L. 1972, p. 3743), is repealed in its entirety June 1, 1992, and all amendatory Acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. 
Sec. 7.19. - Repealer. 
    All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
Subpart B - LOCAL ACTS 
ARTICLE I. - RECREATION AUTHORITY ACT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is 1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 759), page 3998, establishing the city's recreation authority. The sequence of sections within each article are the same as in the act comprising it. Amendments are indicated by history notes following the section. The absence of a subsequent history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been retained, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Short title. 
    This Act shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Hartwell Recreation Authority Act." 
Sec. 2. - City of Hartwell Recreation Authority. 
(a)  There is hereby created a public body corporate and politic to be known as the "City of Hartwell Recreation Authority," which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the state and a public corporation, and by that name, style, and title said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity. The Authority shall have perpetual existence. 
(b)  The Authority shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by the mayor and council of the City of Hartwell, Georgia. With respect to the initial appointment by the mayor and council of the City of Hartwell, Georgia, two members shall be appointed for a term of three years, two members shall be appointed for a term of two years, and one member shall be appointed for a term of one year. Thereafter, all appointments, shall be made for terms of three years and until successors are appointed and qualified. Immediately after such appointments, the members of the authority shall enter upon their duties. To be eligible for appointment as a member of the Authority, a person shall be at least 21 years of age, a resident of the City of Hartwell for at least two years prior to the date of his or her appointment, and shall not have been convicted of a felony. Any member of the Authority may be selected and appointed to succeed himself or herself. Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall be a member of the Authority. Vacancies on the authority shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by the appointment of a qualified person by the mayor and council of the City of Hartwell. 
(c)  The appointing mayor and council of the City of Hartwell, Georgia, may provide by resolution for compensation for the services of the members of the Authority in such amounts as they may deem appropriate; provided, however, that such members shall be reimbursed for their actual expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(d)  The members of the Authority shall elect one of their number as chairperson and another as vice chairperson. The members of the Authority shall also elect a secretary, who need not be a member of the Authority, and may also elect a treasurer, who need not be a member of the Authority. The secretary may also serve as treasurer. If the secretary or treasurer is not a member of the Authority, such officer shall have no voting rights. Each of such officers shall serve for a period of one year and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. 
(e)  Three members of the Authority shall constitute a quorum. No vacancy on the Authority shall impair the right of the quorum to exercise all of the rights and perform all of the duties of the Authority. 
Sec. 3. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Authority" means the City of Hartwell Recreation Authority created by this Act. 
(2)  "Costs of the project" means and embraces the cost of construction; the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements, and franchises acquired; the cost of all machinery and equipment; financing charges; interest prior to and during construction and for six months after completion of construction; the cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal agents', and legal expenses, plans and specifications, and other expenses necessary or incidental to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project; administrative expenses, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized; working capital; and all other costs necessary to acquire, construct, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate, and maintain the project. 
(3)  "Project" means (i) an athletic stadium or stadiums, recreational centers and areas, including, but not limited to, playgrounds; parks, hiking, camping, and picnicking areas; swimming pools; lakes; golf courses; tennis courts; athletic fields and courts; club houses and gymnasiums; and all facilities appertaining to such stadiums and recreational centers and areas, including, but not limited to systems, plants, works, instrumentalities, and properties used or useful in connection with the collection, treatment, and disposal of sewage, waste, and storm water and (ii) any undertaking permitted by the Revenue Bond Law. 
(4)  "Revenue Bond Law" means Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-1 et seq.], the "Revenue Bond Law," or any other similar law hereinafter enacted. 
(5)  "Revenue bonds" means revenue bonds authorized to be issued pursuant to this Act. 
(6)  "Self-liquidating" means any project which the revenues and earnings to be derived by the Authority, including but not limited to any contractual payments with governmental or private entities and all properties used, leased, and sold in connection therewith, together with any grants, will be sufficient to pay the costs of operating, maintaining, and repairing the project and to pay the principal and interest on the revenue bonds or other obligations which may be issued for the purpose of paying the costs of the project. 
(7)  "State" means the state of Georgia. 
Sec. 4. - Powers. 
    The Authority shall have the power: 
(1)  To have a seal and alter the same at its pleasure; 
(2)  To acquire by purchase, lease, gift, condemnation, or otherwise and to hold, operate, maintain, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(3)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, or by condemnation in accordance with the provisions of any and all existing laws applicable to the condemnation of property for public use, real property or rights or easements therein, or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue, and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or dispose of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the Authority, the Authority being under no obligation to accept and pay for any property condemned under this Act, except from the funds provided under the authority of this Act, and in any proceedings to condemn, such orders may be made by the court having jurisdiction of the suit, action, or proceedings as may be just to the Authority and to the owners of the property to be condemned, and no property shall be acquired under the provisions of this Act upon which any lien or encumbrance exists, unless at the time such property is so acquired a sufficient sum of money is to be deposited in trust to pay and redeem the fair value of such lien or encumbrance; 
(4)  To appoint, select, and employ, officers, agents, and employees, including engineering, architectural, and construction experts, fiscal agents, and attorneys and fix their respective compensations; 
(5)  To execute contracts, leases, agreements, and instruments necessary or convenient in connection with the acquisition, construction, addition, extension, improvement, equipping, operation, or maintenance of a project; and any and all persons, firms, and corporations and the state, and any institution, department, or other agency thereof, and any county, municipality, school district, or other political subdivision or authority of the state are hereby authorized to enter into contracts, leases, agreements, or instruments with the Authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable and as they are authorized by law; 
(6)  To acquire, construct, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate, and maintain projects; 
(7)  To pay the costs of the project with the proceeds of revenue bonds or other obligations issued by the Authority or from any grant or contribution from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof or from the state or any agency or instrumentality or other political subdivision thereof or from any other source whatsoever; 
(8)  To accept loans or both loans and grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality may require; 
(9)  To accept loans or grants or both loans and grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the state or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the state or such agency or instrumentality or political subdivision may require; 
(10)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to issue revenue bonds, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(11)  To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, including the power to incur short-term debt and to approve, execute, and deliver appropriate evidence of any such indebtedness; and 
(12)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this Act. 
Sec. 5. - Revenue bonds. 
    The Authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties, and liabilities vested in the Authority created by this Act, shall have power and is hereby authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of revenue bonds of the Authority for the purpose of paying all or any part of the costs of the project and for the purpose of refunding revenue bonds or other obligations previously issued. The principal of and interest on such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund hereby provided for such payment. The revenue bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates per annum, payable at such time or times, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding 40 years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the Authority, and may be redeemable before maturity, at the option of the Authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the Authority in the resolution for the issuance of such revenue bonds. 
Sec. 6. - Same; form; denomination; registration; place of payment. 
    The Authority shall determine the form of the revenue bonds and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the revenue bonds. The revenue bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the Authority may determine, and provision may be made for registration and exchangeability privileges. The Authority shall fix the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereon, which may be at any bank or trust company within or without the state. 
Sec. 7. - Same; signatures; seal. 
    All such revenue bonds shall bear the manual or facsimile signature of the chairperson or vice chairperson of the Authority and the attesting manual or facsimile signature of the secretary, assistant secretary, or secretary-treasurer of the Authority, and the official seal of the Authority shall be impressed or imprinted thereon. Any coupons attached thereto shall bear the manual or facsimile signatures of the chairperson or vice chairperson and the secretary, assistant secretary, or secretary-treasurer of the Authority. Any revenue bonds or coupons attached thereto may bear the manual or facsimile signature of such persons as at the actual time of the execution of such revenue bonds or coupons shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of issuance of such revenue bonds, such person may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any revenue bond or any coupon shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such revenue bond, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes as if that person had remained in office until such delivery. 
Sec. 8. - Same; negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
    All revenue bonds shall have and are hereby declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the laws of this state. All revenue bonds, their transfer, and the income therefrom shall be exempt from all taxation within this state. 
Sec. 9. - Same; sale; price; proceeds. 
    The Authority may sell revenue bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be in the best interest of the Authority. The proceeds derived from the sale of revenue bonds shall be used solely for the purpose or purposes provided in the resolutions and proceedings authorizing the issuance of such revenue bonds. 
Sec. 10. - Same; interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
    Prior to the preparation of any definitive revenue bonds, the Authority may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates, or temporary revenue bonds, with or without coupons, exchangeable for definitive revenue bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
Sec. 11. - Same; replacement of lost of mutilated bonds. 
    The Authority may provide for the replacement of any revenue bonds or coupons that shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
Sec. 12. - Same; conditions precedent to issuance. 
    The Authority shall adopt a resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds. In the resolution, the Authority shall determine that the project financed with the proceeds of the revenue bonds is self-liquidating. Revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things other than those proceedings, conditions and things that are specified or required by this Act. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this Act shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular, special, or adjourned meeting of the Authority by a majority of its members. 
Sec. 13. - Credit not pledged. 
    Revenue bonds shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of the City of Hartwell, Georgia, nor a pledge of the faith and credit of said city, but such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the fund hereinafter provided for. The issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate said city to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatsoever for payment of such revenue bonds or to make any appropriation for their payment, and all such revenue bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this section. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, this Act shall not affect the ability of the Authority and said city to enter into an intergovernmental contract pursuant to which said city agrees to pay amounts sufficient to pay operating charges and other costs of the Authority or any project including, without limitation, the principal of and interest on revenue bonds in consideration for services or facilities of the Authority. 
Sec. 14. - Trust indenture as security. 
    In the discretion of the Authority, any issuance of revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the Authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or without the state. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of the revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the Authority in relation to the acquisition and construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair, and insuring of the project, and the custody, safeguarding, and application of all moneys. 
Sec. 15. - To whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
    In the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, the Authority shall provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the revenue bonds to any officer or person who, or any agency, bank, or trust company which, shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes thereof, subject to such regulations as this Act and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. 
Sec. 16. - Sinking fund. 
    The moneys received pursuant to an intergovernmental contract and the revenues, fees, tolls, charges, and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such revenues, fees, tolls, fines, charges, and earnings were produced by a particular project for which revenue bonds have been issued, unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the Authority to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the Authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture may provide, and such funds so pledged from whatever source received shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture, into a sinking fund, which said sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payment of: 
(i)  The interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due; 
(ii)  The principal or purchase price of such revenue bonds as the same shall fall due; 
(iii)  Any premium upon such revenue bonds as the same shall fall due; 
(iv)  The purchase of such revenue bonds in the open market; and 
(v)  The necessary charges of the paying agent for paying principal and interest. 
    The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture; but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be maintained as a trust account for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. 
Sec. 17. - Remedies of bondholders. 
    Any holder of revenue bonds or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by a resolution passed before the issuance of the revenue bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of this state, including specifically but without limitation, the "Revenue Bond Law," or granted hereunder or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this Act or by such resolution or trust indenture to be performed by the Authority or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, fines, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
Sec. 18. - Validation. 
    Revenue bonds and the security therefor shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure of the Revenue Bond Law. The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action the state, and any institution, department or other agency thereof, and any county, municipality, school district, or other political subdivision or authority of this state which has contracted with the Authority for services or facilities relating to the project for which revenue bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated, and such defendant shall be required to show cause, if any exists, why such contract or contracts shall not be adjudicated as a part of the basis for the security for the payment of any such revenue bonds. The revenue bonds when validated and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such revenue bonds and the security for the payment thereof and interest thereon and against the Authority and all other defendants. 
Sec. 19. - Venue and jurisdiction. 
    Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this Act or any suit or action against such Authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Hart County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall likewise be brought in said court which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
Sec. 20. - Interest of bondholders protected. 
    While any of the revenue bonds issued by the Authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties, or existence of said Authority or its officers, employees, or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such revenue bonds, and no other entity, department, agency, or authority will be created which will compete with the Authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such revenue bonds, nor will the state itself so compete with the Authority. The provisions of this Act shall be for the benefit of the Authority and the holders of any such revenue bonds and, upon the issuance of such revenue bonds under the provisions hereof, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such revenue bonds. 
Sec. 21. - Moneys received considered trust funds. 
    All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this Act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, or as revenue, income, fees, and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act. 
Sec. 22. - Purpose of the authority. 
    Without limiting the generality of any provision of this Act, the general purpose of the Authority is declared to be that of providing recreational services and facilities and other public services and facilities for the citizens in the City of Hartwell, Georgia, and environs, including Hart County, Georgia, and other counties and municipalities. 
Sec. 23. - Rates, charges, and revenues; use. 
    The Authority is hereby authorized to prescribe and fix rates and to revise same from time to time and to collect revenues, tolls, fees, and charges for the services, facilities, and commodities furnished and, in anticipation of the collection of the revenues, to issue revenue bonds or other types of obligations as herein provided to finance, in whole or in part, the costs of the project, and to pledge to the punctual payment of said revenue bonds or other obligations, all or any part of the revenues. 
Sec. 24. - Rules, regulations, service policies, and procedures for operation of projects. 
    It shall be the duty of the Authority to prescribe rules, regulations, service policies, and procedures for the operation of any project or projects constructed, acquired, or constructed and acquired under the provisions of this Act, including the basis upon which recreational services and facilities and other public services and facilities shall be furnished. The Authority may adopt bylaws. 
Sec. 25. - Tort immunity. 
    To the extent permitted by law, the Authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the City of Hartwell, Georgia; and the officers, agents, and employees of the Authority when in the performance of the work of the Authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the officers, agents, and employees of the City of Hartwell, Georgia, when in the performance of their public duties or work of the city. 
Sec. 26. - Tax-exempt status of authority. 
    The properties of the Authority, both real and personal, are declared to be public properties used for the benefit and welfare of the people of the state and not for purposes of private or corporate benefit and income, and such properties and the Authority shall be exempt from all taxes and special assessments of any municipality, county, or the state and any political subdivision thereof. 
Sec. 27. - Effect on other governments. 
    This Act shall not and does not in any way take from the City of Hartwell, Georgia, or any county or municipality the authority to own, operate, and maintain recreational facilities or to issue revenue bonds as provided by the Revenue Bond Law. 
Sec. 28. - Liberal construction of Act. 
    This Act being for the welfare of various political subdivisions of the state and its inhabitants shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
Sec. 29. - Severability; effect of partial invalidity of Act. 
    The provisions of this Act are severable, and if any of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions. 
Sec. 30. - Effective date. 
    This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
Sec. 31. - Repealer. 
    All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
CHARTER AND LOCAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto as well as the sections of local acts included herein. 
Ga. Laws 
Year Act No. Page Section 
in Charter 
or Local Laws 1855 321 323 Char. Arts. I-VII 1957 414 3128 Char. Arts. I-VII 1992 764 5476 Char. Arts. I-VII 1996 759 3998 Local Acts Art. I 5-11-2011 HB 584 Char., § 2.20(b)  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal Home Rule Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; limitations on home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; authority to adopt ordinances for regulation of matters for which no provision has been made by general law, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; duty to codify ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19; inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.; requirements for publication of code, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19; maximum penalties that may be imposed by municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-35-6, 36-32-1, 36-32-5; additional penalties and bond in certain criminal and traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to impose community service as punishment, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-1; alternative sentences by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5; municipal corporation defined, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1. 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this chapter and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of Ordinances, City of Hartwell, Georgia," and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited by the short title, "Hartwell City Code." 
(Code 1989, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt ordinances for regulation of matters for which no provision has been made by general law, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; duty to codify ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
(a)  Applicability. In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which contain any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of the section may be repugnant thereto. 
(b)  Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. 
(1)  The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. 
(2)  In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the city council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil, and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate any provision hereof, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
(3)  All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. 
(4)  Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions on the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provisions imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific provision controls over the general provision. 
(c)  Bond requirements. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they are bound thereby. 
(Code 1989, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1. 
Sec. 1-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Advice and consent. Whenever the term "advice and consent" of the city council is used in this Code it means an affirmative vote of the majority of the entire city council. 
    As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
    City. The term "the city" or "this city" means the City of Hartwell, Georgia. Where appropriate, the term "the city" or "this city" also means duly authorized officials, officers and employees of the city. 
    City council, council, mayor and council, governing authority, or governing body. The term "city council," "council," "mayor and council," "governing authority," or "governing body" means the city council of the City of Hartwell, Georgia. 
    Code. The term "Code" means The Code of Ordinances of Hartwell, Georgia. 
    Computation of time. When a number of days are prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first and last day shall be counted. If the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation. 
    Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by any of the conjunctions "and," "or," "either/or," or "neither/nor," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows; provided that in appropriate cases the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The terms "either/or" and "neither/nor" indicate that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
    County. The term "the county" or "this county" means the County of Hart, Georgia. 
    Court. The term "court" means the city court. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or other officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, the term "delegation of authority" means to authorize such department head or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
    Department, city council, agency. The name or title of any department, city council or agency, unless otherwise specifically stated, shall be read as though the words "of the City of Hartwell, Georgia" were added thereto. 
    Gender. A word importing, the masculine gender only shall extend and be implied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than any general provisions imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be applicable. 
    Joint authority. Provisions giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Judge. The term "judge" means the judge of the city court. 
    Keeper, proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean a person, as the term "person" is defined in this section, whether acting by himself or through an agent or employee. 
    May. The term "may" is permissive. 
    Mayor. The term "mayor" means the mayor of the city. 
    Mayor and council. The term "mayor and council" means the mayor and city council of the city. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Municipality. The term "municipality" shall be synonymous with the term "city," "town," or "municipal corporation." 
    Number. The singular number shall include the plural and the plural number shall include the singular. 
    Oath. The term "oath" means an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the words "swear" or "sworn." 
    O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
    Officials or officers. Whenever reference is made to officials, the city council, commissions, departments or other municipal agents by title only, such reference shall be read as though followed by the words "of the City of Hartwell, Georgia." 
    Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the city council of a general and permanent nature. 
    Owner. The term "owner," when applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, and any other group action as a unit, as well as an individual. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as defined in this section. 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real, personal and mixed estates and interests. 
    Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, shopping center, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned, and any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or to congregate. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Reasonable time or reasonable notice. The term "reasonable time" or "reasonable notice" means only such time as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the act required. 
    Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the city council of a special or temporary character. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. The term "sidewalk" does not include any unimproved area between the curbline and improved walkways. 
    Signature, subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark intended as such when the person cannot write. 
    State. The term "state" or "this state" means the State of Georgia. 
    Statute. The term "statute," unless otherwise specifically stated, refers to the indicated portion of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
    Street. The term "street" includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, allay, viaduct or bridge and the approaches thereto, within the city. 
    Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," when applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
    Will. The term "will" is mandatory. 
    Writing or written. The terms "writing" and "written" include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1989, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections and subsections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections or subsections, nor as any part of the section or subsection, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections or subsections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1989, § 1-3) 
State Law reference- Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect. 
(Code 1989, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect the remaining clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1989, § 1-5) 
State Law reference- Severability of state legislation, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the passage of the ordinances originally included in this Code, which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and added hereto. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from the reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of The Code of Ordinances, City of Hartwell, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provision may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not theretofore existing in this Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of Ordinances, Hartwell, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which said section (or article or chapter) reads as follows:...." The new section (or article or chapter) may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be, or by setting them out at length in the repealing ordinance. 
(Code 1989, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in this Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into this Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, this Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. Charter amendments may be included in like manner. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of this Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from this Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of this Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in this Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the term "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ through ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of this Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into this Code; 
but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in this Code. 
(Code 1989, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-9. - General penalty; continuing violations; abatement of nuisances. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance or city resolution amending this Code, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code, ordinance or resolution the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor in this Code or by general law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance or resolution shall be punishable by: 
(1)  A fine not to exceed $3,500.00; 
(2)  Imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days; 
(3)  A sentence to perform labor on the roads and streets or other public works of the city for not more than 90 days; or 
(4)  Any one or more of the penalties stated in subsections (a)(1) through (3) of this section. 
Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance or resolution shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city, as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1989, § 1-8) 
State Law reference- Maximum penalties, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-35-6, 36-32-1, 36-32-5; additional penalties in certain traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to impose community service as punishment, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-1; alternative sentences by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5. 
Sec. 1-10. - Fees established by resolution. 
    Fees for permits, licenses and other city services shall be as established from time to time by city council resolution and set forth in the separate fee schedule adopted by the city and available for inspection in the city clerk's office. 
Sec. 1-11. - Provisions as continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are substantially the same as ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this Code is derived shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1989, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-12. - Altering Code, ordinance or other public document. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, mutilate, or in any other manner alter any ordinance book or minute book, or any notice posted by the city for the benefit of the public, or any other document or record of the city municipal government. 
(Code 1989, § 1-10) 
State Law reference- Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-13. - Ordinances, etc., not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any rates, fees or charges consistent with this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3)  Any ordinance consistent with this Code prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, such as prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic or limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones; 
(4)  Any ordinance consistent with this Code fixing salaries of officials, officers or employees of the city; 
(5)  Any budget ordinance or appropriation ordinance; 
(6)  Any ordinance levying any tax; 
(7)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution to any person; 
(8)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening or vacating any street or public way in the city; 
(9)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(10)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(12)  Any ordinance establishing or changing the boundary of the city; and 
(13)  Any ordinance regulating zoning or subdividing in the city. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1989, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-14. - Court costs; fees; warrants; technology surcharge. 
(a)  Upon conviction of the violation of a municipal ordinance in the city municipal court the defendant shall be obligated to pay any and all surcharges and costs provided by this section, and all costs accruing by the court for the prosecution of the case. The municipal court judge shall determine the costs, surcharges and costs of prosecution and such costs shall be a lien against the property of the person so convicted. 
(b)  Upon conviction, a five percent surcharge shall be added to the costs of prosecution. 
(c)  The cost of a warrant for the violation of a municipal ordinance issued by the municipal court judge, a magistrate or other city official authorized to issue warrants shall be $10.00. 
(d)  In addition to all other fees imposed by the municipal court, this Code or applicable law, there shall be imposed by the municipal court a technology surcharge in the amount of $15.00 per offense for all offenses, except those offenses contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-8-76. 
(1)  All revenue derived from the technology surcharge shall be utilized by the city to provide technology support for the city's law enforcement and municipal court functions. Two-thirds of the technology surcharge fees actually collected shall be allocated to and made available to the police department and one-third of the surcharge fees actually collected shall be allocated to and made available to the finance department. 
(2)  As used in this section, the term "technology support" means computer hardware, computer software and other machinery or equipment which will be used to improve the efficiency or safety of sessions of the municipal court, or the performance of other tasks directly related to municipal court operations. 
(Code 1989, § 1-12; Ord. of 7-1-1991; Ord. No. 2004-03, § 2, 7-6-2004) 
State Law reference- Maximum penalties that may be imposed by municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-35-6, 36-32-1, 36-32-5; additional penalties and bond in certain criminal and traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to impose community service as punishment, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-1; alternative sentences by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5; powers of municipal court judges in criminal cases, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-3; jurisdiction of municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6 et seq. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal Home Rule Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; limitations on home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; general authority of municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-1 et seq., 36-35-1 et seq.; liability of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-1 et seq.; limitations on home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties, municipalities, and other governmental entities, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-2 et seq.; liability of municipal corporations for acts or omissions, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-1 et seq.; municipal acquisition and disposition of real and personal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Open records. 
(a)  All municipal records, except those that by order of a state court or by law are prohibited from being open to public inspection, shall be open for personal inspection by any citizen of the state during the hours of operation of the administrative service prescribed in this chapter. 
(b)  Notwithstanding this section or any other provision of this Code, the city shall not be required to make available for public inspection or copying any document or portion of a document that is not otherwise subject to inspection or copying under the Georgia Open Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-72 et seq. 
Secs. 2-2-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of council to bind subsequent council, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-3; councilmen incompetent to hold other municipal office, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-4; effect of residence in annexed territory as qualification for office, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-5; voting when personally interested, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-6; method of calling election in the event all seats in municipal governing authority are vacant, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-13; initial terms of office of members of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-9. 

Sec. 2-21. - Procedure for adopting ordinances. 
    All ordinances adopted by the city council shall be adopted in the following manner: 
(1)  The title of a proposed ordinance or the proposed ordinance in full at the council's discretion shall be read by the city administrator or mayor at a meeting of the city council. 
(2)  The proposed ordinance, at the council's discretion, may be adopted or rejected at such meeting, or it may be carried over to the next meeting. 
(Comp. 1976, § 3-101; Code 1989, § 2-1; Ord. of 4-7-1975(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Secs. 2-22-2-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES (RESERVED) 

Secs. 2-48-2-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AUTHORITIES AND COMMITTEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-68. - Standing committees. 
    There shall be such standing committees as may be established from time to time by the city council. All committees, committee chairpersons and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the mayor's pleasure. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Secs. 2-69-2-92. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning, Ga. Const., Art. IX, §§ 2, 4; zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-93. - Established; purpose. 
    In order to guide and accomplish a coordinated and harmonious development of the city which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and the general welfare as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, the municipal planning commission is hereby created and established as authorized by law. Such commission shall be organized and empowered as provided in this division. 
(Comp. 1976, § 3-703; Code 1989, § 14-1; Ord. of 5-5-1958) 
Sec. 2-94. - Composition; terms; vacancy; compensation. 
(a)  The city planning commission shall have not less than five or more than 12 members appointed by the city council. 
(b)  A majority of the members of the planning commission shall be citizens who hold no other public office or position in the city or county except that one member may be a member of the board of zoning appeals. 
(c)  Citizen members shall be appointed for overlapping terms of not less than three or more than five years or thereafter until their successors are appointed. 
(d)  Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by city council, which shall have the authority to remove any member for cause on written charges after a public hearing. 
(e)  All members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for the actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Comp. 1976, § 3-703; Code 1989, § 14-2; Ord. of 5-5-1958, § 1) 
Sec. 2-95. - Election of officers; rules; staff; finances. 
(a)  The city planning commission shall elect its chairperson from among its members. The term of the chairperson shall be one year with eligibility for reelection. 
(b)  The city planning commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the city. 
(c)  The commission shall adopt rules for transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record, and shall determine its time of meeting. 
(d)  The commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. 
(e)  The expenditures of the commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the city council. 
(Comp. 1976, § 3-703; Code 1989, § 14-3; Ord. of 5-5-1958, § 2) 
Sec. 2-96. - Powers. 
    From and after the time the city planning commission shall have organized and selected its officers together with the adoption of its rules or procedure, it shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities as provided by law. 
(Comp. 1976, § 3-703; Code 1989, § 14-4; Ord. of 5-5-1958, § 3) 
Secs. 2-97-2-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STREET TREE COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-121. - Established; composition. 
    An administrative committee called the "Street Tree Committee" is hereby established. The committee shall consist of nine members. Three of the members shall be nominated by the city, three members shall be nominated by the Hartwell Garden Club Council, and three members shall be nominated by the Hartwell/Hart Clean and Beautiful Board. The Hartwell/Hart Clean and Beautiful Board shall always choose as one of its nominees the Hart County Extension Service County Agent. All nominees except the Hart County Extension Service County Agent are subject to the city council's approval. The street tree committee shall elect a chairperson and any other officers it may desire to create. 
(Comp. 1976, § 17-125; Code 1989, § 15-1; Ord. of 10-1-1983, § 1; Ord. of 11-6-1995) 
Sec. 2-122. - Terms. 
    The nine-member committee shall be have terms as follows: 
(1)  Five members shall be appointed for a term of two years (two members from the city, two members from the Hartwell Garden Club Council, and one member from Hartwell/Hart Clean and Beautiful Board); 
(2)  Three members shall be appointed for a term of one year (one from the city, one from the Hartwell Garden Club Council, and one from Hartwell/Hart Clean and Beautiful Board); 
(3)  One member, the Hart County Extension Service County Agent, shall be a permanent member. 
(Comp. 1976, § 17-125; Code 1989, § 15-1; Ord. of 10-1-1983, § 1; Ord. of 11-6-1995) 
Sec. 2-123. - Authority; rules and regulations. 
    The street tree committee shall have the authority to adopt rules and regulations as may be necessary for the purpose of carrying out its functions. Regulations for the planting, care, pruning and removal of trees shall not only be aimed at the elimination of economic waste by reason of damage to public property and the property of others in the interest of public health, safety and welfare, but also for the aesthetic appearance of streets, highways, parks and other public areas in the city. 
(Comp. 1976, § 17-125; Code 1989, § 15-2; Ord. of 10-1-1983, § 2) 
Sec. 2-124. - Duties. 
    The street tree committee shall have the right and duty to care for and protect all trees and shrubs now or hereafter existing on public property. Permission must be obtained from the street tree committee to remove or plant any trees or shrubs on public property. Private property owners will be notified by the committee if trees or shrubs on their property constitute a public nuisance or are affecting the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Comp. 1976, § 17-125; Code 1989, § 15-3; Ord. of 10-1-1983, § 3; Ord. of 11-6-1995) 
Secs. 2-125-2-146. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ETHICS COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-147. - Composition. 
    The ethics committee shall consist of three persons, one appointed by the mayor, one appointed by the city council, and the third appointed by the two appointed members subject to approval of a majority of the city council. The third member shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2001-008, § 1(13-80), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 2-148. - Qualifications; compensation; term. 
    All members shall be residents of the city and shall serve, without compensation, for a two-year term, or until their successors are appointed. 
(Ord. No. 2001-008, § 1(13-80), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 2-149. - Complaint procedure. 
(a)  All complaints against city councilmembers shall be filed with the ethics committee. The ethics committee may require that oral complaints, and complaints illegibly or informally drawn, be reduced to a memorandum of complaint in such form as may be prescribed by the city council. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the ethics committee shall review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the city council's disciplinary jurisdiction. 
(c)  The ethics committee shall be empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and to add the findings and results of its investigation to the file containing such complaint. The ethics committee shall be empowered to conduct probable cause investigations, take evidence and hold hearings where provided in the rules. 
(d)  Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the ethics committee shall be empowered to dismiss those complaints which are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded, or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the city council's disciplinary jurisdiction; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the ethics committee shall not deprive the complaining party of any action he might otherwise have at law or in equity against the respondent government servant. 
(e)  The ethics committee shall be empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, subpoenas, notices, applications for reinstatement and any other written instrument necessary or desirable under these rules. 
(Ord. No. 2001-008, § 1(13-81), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 2-150. - Additional regulations. 
    This section shall be cumulative to any other ordinance, resolution or act now existing. Specifically, this section is in addition to section 2.14 of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2001-008, § 1(13-82), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 2-151. - Appeals. 
    Any final decision by the city council pursuant to this code of ethics for city councilmembers shall be reviewable by the county superior court. The review by the superior court shall be limited to an inquiry of whether there was any evidence before the city council, which supported the council's decision. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, no city council action refusing or failing to take action pursuant to this code of ethics shall be reviewable by the superior court. 
(Ord. No. 2001-008, § 1(13-83), 8-6-2001) 
Secs. 2-152-2-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Adoption of budget articles and resolutions, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; political subdivision audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1; limitations on use of purchasing and contract procedures, O.C.G.A. § 34-4-3.1. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-171. - Fiscal year. 
    The city's fiscal year shall begin on January 1 and end on December 31 of each year. 
Secs. 2-172-2-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONTRACTS 

Sec. 2-196. - Procedure. 
    No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless it is in writing, drawn by or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney (and, as a matter of course, is signed by him to indicate such drafting or review), and made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings. 
Sec. 2-197. - Local bidder credits. 
(a)  Whenever the city solicits bids of any sort, either sealed or unsealed, or verbal or written, and receives a bid from a person or entity which maintains an office in the geographic limits of the county, then the bid of that person or entity shall be reduced by three percent of the amount of the bid for the purposes of comparing that bid with other bids and determining the lowest bid. 
(b)  The reduction contemplated in this section is not intended to reduce the actual bid, but merely to provide local bidders a credit for the purposes of determining the lowest and best bid, and if the bid is awarded to that person or entity, then that person or entity shall be entitled to receive the full amount of that person's or entity's bid without reduction. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall entitle a local bidder to receive a bid, or be construed as a finding that all local bidders are automatically qualified to bid on any project or to receive any bid. 
(Ord. No. 2003-06, § 1, 9-2-2003) 
Secs. 2-198-2-217. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PURCHASING (RESERVED) 

Secs. 2-218-2-242. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BUDGET (RESERVED) 

Secs. 2-243-2-262. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - NATURAL GAS FUND 

Sec. 2-263. - Established. 
    A special fund, known as the "Natural Gas Fund," shall be maintained as a separate and unique fund. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 2-264. - Disposition of monies. 
    Revenues derived from the operation of the city natural gas system shall be used and applied solely for improvements, extensions and replacements of buildings, lands, equipment, and distribution and transmission systems now owned and used or which may hereafter be acquired by the city in connection with the operations of its natural gas system, except that monies may, from time to time, be transferred to the city's general fund, and applied to payment of other valid and legal debts and obligations of the city; provided, however, that sufficient monies remain in the Natural Gas Fund to pay the costs of anticipated capital expenditures, in accordance with accepted standards of sound municipal finance and public utility management, and also provided that such monies are applied to valid and legal debts and obligations of the city. No expenditure or transfer of money shall be made from this fund except by city voucher or purchase order. All depositories and signatures for disbursement of funds shall be designated by a city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 4-6-1998; Ord. No. 2012-02, § 1, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 2-265. - Investment of excess monies. 
    All sums in the fund, in excess of amounts required for immediate disbursement, may be invested in securities which are direct and general obligations of the U.S. Government or its agencies, or guaranteed by the U.S. Government or its agencies as to both principal and interest, municipal and state bonds, bank certificates if protected by escrow of an equal value of the type of investments mentioned in this section, federal savings and loan to the limit covered by insurance, or the Local Government Investment Pool. All interest accumulations from the bonds and certificates shall be accrued in the fund. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 2, 4-6-1998; Ord. No. 2012-02, § 1, 8-6-2012) 
Secs. 2-266-2-269. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - WATER AND SEWER FUND 

Sec. 2-270. - Established. 
    A special fund, known as the "Water and Sewer Fund," shall be maintained as a separate and unique fund. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 2-271. - Disposition of monies. 
    Revenues derived from the operation of the city water and sanitary sewer systems shall be used and applied solely for improvements, extensions and replacements of buildings, lands, equipment, and distribution and transmission systems now owned and used or which may hereafter be acquired by the city in connection with the operations of its water and sanitary sewer systems, except that monies may, from time to time, be transferred to the city's general fund, and applied to payment of other valid and legal debts and obligations of the city; provided, however, that sufficient monies remain in the Water and Sewer Fund to pay the costs of anticipated capital expenditures, in accordance with accepted standards of sound municipal finance and public utility management, and also provided that such monies are applied to valid and legal debts and obligations of the city. No expenditure or transfer of money shall be made from this fund except by city voucher or purchase order. All depositories and signatures for disbursement of funds shall be designated by a city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 2-272. - Investment of excess monies. 
    All sums in the fund, in excess of amounts required for immediate disbursement, may be invested in securities which are direct and general obligations of the U.S. Government or its agencies, or guaranteed by the U.S. Government or its agencies as to both principal and interest, municipal and state bonds, bank certificates if protected by escrow of an equal value of the type of investments mentioned in this section, federal savings and loan to the limit covered by insurance, or the Local Government Investment Pool. All interest accumulations from the bonds and certificates shall be accrued in the fund. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3, 8-6-2012) 
Secs. 2-273-2-279. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - SANITATION FUND 

Sec. 2-280. - Established. 
    A special fund, known as the "Sanitation Fund," shall be maintained as a separate and unique fund. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 4, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 2-281. - Disposition of monies. 
    Revenues derived from the operation of the sanitation department shall be used and applied solely for improvements, extensions and replacements of buildings, lands, equipment, and distribution and transmission systems now owned and used or which may hereafter be acquired by the city in connection with the operations of its sanitation department, except that monies may, from time to time, be transferred to the city's general fund, and applied to payment of other valid and legal debts and obligations of the city; provided, however, that sufficient monies remain in the sanitation fund to pay the costs of anticipated capital expenditures, in accordance with accepted standards of sound municipal finance and public utility management, and also provided that such monies are applied to valid and legal debts and obligations of the city. No expenditure or transfer of money shall be made from this fund except by city voucher or purchase order. All depositories and signatures for disbursement of funds shall be designated by a city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 4, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 2-282. - Investment of excess monies. 
    All sums in the fund, in excess of amounts required for immediate disbursement, may be invested in securities which are direct and general obligations of the U.S. Government or its agencies, or guaranteed by the U.S. Government or its agencies as to both principal and interest, municipal and state bonds, bank certificates if protected by escrow of an equal value of the type of investments mentioned in this section, federal savings and loan to the limit covered by insurance, or the Local Government Investment Pool. All interest accumulations from the bonds and certificates shall be accrued in the fund. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 4, 8-6-2012) 
Secs. 2-283-2-293. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, adopted Aug. 6, 2012, redesignated the former Div. 6, Identity Theft Prevention Program as Div. 8, Identity Theft Prevention Program. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 2-294. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Covered account means: 
(1)  An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family or household purposes that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account or savings account; and 
(2)  Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation or litigation risks. 
    Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of a debt or to incur debt and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefor. 
    Creditor. 
(1)  The term "creditor" means: 
a.  Any person who regularly extends, renews or continues credit; 
b.  Any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal or continuation of credit; or 
c.  Any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew or continue credit. 
(2)  The term "creditor" includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
    Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
    Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
    Personal identifying information. 
(1)  The term "personal identifying information" means a person's credit card account information, debit card information, bank account information and driver's license information. 
(2)  For a natural person, the term "personal identifying information" includes their social security number, mother's birth name and date of birth. 
    Red flag means a pattern, practice or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
    Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 2(10-202), 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 2-295. - Title. 
    This division shall be known as the City of Hartwell, Georgia Identity Theft Prevention Program. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1(10-200), 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 2-296. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to comply with 16 CFR 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1(10-201), 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 2-297. - Findings. 
    The city council hereby finds and declares as follows: 
(1)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(2)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include natural gas, sanitary sewer service, water and solid waste. 
(3)  The city's previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts includes an example several years ago where a customer used her roommate's identity to obtain utility service. 
(4)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, making payments on such accounts, cutting service off and giving information concerning utility account balances to real estate closing attorneys have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(5)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(6)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways: 
a.  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
b.  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
c.  Use of another person's credit card, bank account or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account; and 
d.  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account or other method of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1(10-203), 5-4-2009) 
Secs. 2-298-2-327. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Covered Accounts 

Sec. 2-328. - Establishment procedure. 
(a)  Required information. As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with the following personal identifying information of the customer: 
(1)  The applicant's name; 
(2)  A government-issued identification card with a picture of the applicant (such as a driver's license, green card, or other similar identification card) which picture reasonably matches the individual's appearance, within the discretion of the city employee receiving the application; or in lieu of such a card with a picture, a social security card and a certified copy of the applicant's birth certificate which matches the name (allowing for reasonable differences between maiden and married names); 
(3)  The applicant's social security number; 
(4)  The applicant's date of birth; 
(5)  The service address; 
(6)  If the applicant is a renter, a lease rental agreement (in a form approved by the finance officer) signed by the landlord or lessor; 
(7)  An application for service, in a form approved by city staff; 
(8)  The applicant's previous address; 
(9)  The applicant's telephone number; 
(10)  The name of the applicant's employer, if any; and 
(11)  The name, social security number and date of birth of the applicant's spouse, if any. 
Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. 
(b)  PINs. Each account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) that shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
(c)  Retention of records. Applications shall be retained in a secure location, for the period of time required by the city records management plan. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1(10-204), 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 2-329. - Access to information. 
(a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to finance department staff. 
(b)  Each employee in the finance department shall maintain a password for access to such employee's computer. Each such employee's password shall: 
(1)  Be changed by the employee on a regular basis, approximately every 30 to 90 days; 
(2)  Be at least eight characters in length; and 
(3)  Contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager and the password changed immediately. 
(d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1(10-205), 5-4-2009) 
Secs. 2-330-2-346. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Administration and Enforcement 

Sec. 2-347. - Credit and debit card payments; bank drafts. 
(a)  In the event that credit or debit card payments made over the Internet are processed through a third-party service provider, such third-party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)  All credit and debit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer database. 
(c)  The city employee accepting a credit or debit card payment made over the telephone shall create a written record of such payment, including the payment amount and credit or debit card number and city utility account. The credit or debit card payment shall be immediately processed through the city's credit and debit card terminal and entered into the city's utility and tax software. After the credit or debit card payment is processed through the city's credit and debit card terminal and entered into the city's utility and tax software, the written record shall be immediately destroyed. The city employee accepting a credit or debit card payment made in person at city hall shall not create any additional written record of such payment other than the receipt generated by the credit and debit card terminal. At the end of each day, all credit card and debit card receipts from that day shall be placed in a sealed envelope in the vault at city hall. Such receipts shall be shredded periodically, but no less than every 30 to 60 days. 
(d)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. The written record of credit or debit card payments made by telephone may include a full account number, but shall be immediately destroyed after the credit card or debit card payment is processed through the city's credit and debit card terminal and entered into the city's utility and tax software. 
(e)  All records concerning the authorization to debit customer bank accounts for payment of utility bills shall be maintained in a secure location, which shall not be accessible to the public, and shall be accessible by key to only a limited number of specifically authorized employees in the finance department. The location shall remain locked. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1(10-206), 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 2-348. - Red flags. 
    All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include, but are not limited to: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
1.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
2.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
3.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
4.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  The personal identifying information provided is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
1.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
2.  The social security number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.  The personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  The personal identifying information or a phone number or address is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  The personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account the city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example, the customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
2.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns; 
3.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors). 
4.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
5.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
6.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
7.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or so-called "phishing" relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1(10-207), 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 2-349. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city finance officer. If, in his discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city finance officer, who may in his discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city finance officer, in his discretion, determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city finance officer: 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.  Close the account; 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)  Notify a debt collector, by the end of the next business day, of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate the identity theft. 
(b)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city finance officer. If, in his discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city finance officer, who may in his discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city finance officer, in his discretion, determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city finance officer: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate the identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1(10-208), 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 2-350. - Annual reviews; updating. 
    The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the city council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1(10-209), 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 2-351. - Responsibilities of city finance officer. 
(a)  The city finance officer is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the city manager's opinion, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration. 
(b)  The city finance officer will report to the city manager at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
(1)  The effectiveness of the city's policies and procedures in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
(2)  Service provider arrangements; 
(3)  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
(4)  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(c)  The city finance officer is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The city finance officer shall exercise his discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1(10-210), 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 2-352. - Outside service providers. 
    In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts the city finance officer shall exercise his discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1(10-211), 5-4-2009) 
Secs. 2-353-2-377. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, adopted Aug. 6, 2012, redesignated the former Div. 7, Treatment Of Address Discrepancies as Div. 9, Treatment Of Address Discrepancies. 

Sec. 2-378. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 USC 1681(c)(h)(1) that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address in the agency's file for the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 2(10-221), 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 2-379. - Purpose. 
    Pursuant to 16 CFR 681.1, the purpose of this division is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 2(10-220), 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 2-380. - Policy. 
    In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
a.  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 USC 5318(1); 
b.  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices other customer account records or tax records; 
c.  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
(2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 2(10-222), 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 2-381. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(a)  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer-reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
(1)  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
(2)  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
(3)  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer-reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(b)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer-reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 2(10-223), 5-4-2009) 
Sec. 2-382. - Methods of confirming consumer addresses. 
    The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)  Verifying the address through third-party sources; or 
(4)  Using other reasonable processes. 
Except as expressly stated in this section or elsewhere in this chapter, chapter 36 shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 2(10-224), 5-4-2009) 
Secs. 2-383-2-413. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ETHICS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Ethics in Government Act, O.C.G.A. § 21-5-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-414. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City councilmember means any person who is an elected city official, including the mayor of the city. 
    Employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the city. 
    Government or city means the city government. 
(Ord. No. 2001-008, § 1(13-60), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 2-415. - Penalties. 
    The code of ethics to be observed by city councilmembers is set forth in this article and any violation thereof shall subject the offender to disciplinary action which may include censure and either public or private reprimand. The power to administer a greater punishment shall include the power to administer the lesser. 
(Ord. No. 2001-008, § 1(13-69), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 2-416. - Acceptance of gifts. 
(a)  Prohibited. City councilmembers shall not solicit or accept directly or indirectly anything of value from any person corporation or group which: 
(1)  Has, or is seeking to obtain, contractual or other business or financial relationships with the city; 
(2)  In exchange for the thing of value seeks to have a councilmember exercise a matter of discretion in his favor; 
(3)  Anything, regardless of its monetary value, which, under the circumstances, a reasonably prudent person in the position of the councilmember to whom the thing is or may be offered, would recognize as being likely intended to influence the councilmember in the performance or nonperformance of an official action. 
(b)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Campaign contributions which shall be reported in accordance with state law; and 
(2)  Any gift having a value of $50.00 or less. 
(Ord. No. 2001-008, § 1(13-61), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 2-417. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this section that city councilmembers avoid any action whether or not specifically prohibited by section 2-416 that might result in or create the appearance of the following: 
(1)  Using a public office for private gain; 
(2)  Impeding government efficiency or economy; or 
(3)  Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity of the government. 
(Ord. No. 2001-008, § 1(13-62), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 2-418. - Public property. 
    A city councilmember shall not use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he direct employees to use such property for these purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2001-008, § 1(13-63), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 2-419. - Confidential information. 
    A city councilmember shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, for the purpose of furthering a private interest, official information not made available to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 2001-008, § 1(13-64), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 2-420. - Coercion by councilmembers. 
    A city councilmember shall not use his position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to him or persons within his immediate family, or those with whom a councilmember has business or financial ties. The term "family members" includes a spouse, mother, father, child and sibling. 
(Ord. No. 2001-008, § 1(13-65), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 2-421. - Voting in matters of personal interest. 
(a)  A city councilmember shall disclose the nature of any interest or benefit he has at the time such matter is presented to the council for discussion and/or action. Such disclosure shall become part of the minutes of the meeting and become part of the public record. 
(b)  No city councilmember shall participate in the discussion, debate, deliberation or vote, or otherwise take part in the decision-making process on any agenda item, any official act or action in which he has a conflict of interest. 
(c)  To avoid the appearance of impropriety, after any councilmember is determined to have a conflict of interest or a potential conflict of interest in any matter, the member shall leave his seat as a councilmember and not return to it until deliberation and action on the matter is completed. 
(Ord. No. 2001-008, § 1(13-66), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 2-422. - Unauthorized use of public employees. 
    A city councilmember shall not use his position to request or require a city employee to: 
(1)  Do clerical work on behalf of his family, business, social, church or fraternal interests; 
(2)  Purchase goods and services to be used for personal, business or political purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2001-008, § 1(13-67), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 2-423. - Travel expenses. 
    A city councilmember shall not draw per diem or expense monies from the city to attend a seminar, convention or conference, then fail to attend the seminar, convention or conference without refunding the prorata unused per diem or expense monies to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2001-008, § 1(13-68), 8-6-2001) 
Secs. 2-424-2-460. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-01, §§ 1-7, adopted July 5, 2011, enacted provisions which did not specify manner of inclusion. To facilitate indexing, said provisions have been included herein as Art. VII, §§ 2-461-2-467. 

Sec. 2-461. - County conduction of municipal elections. 
    Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-45(c), and subject to the conditions set forth in section 2-463 of this article, the mayor and council of the City of Hartwell, Georgia hereby find and determine that it would be in the best interest of the citizens of Hartwell, Georgia, for the city to pay Hart County, Georgia to utilize the judge of the probate court of Hart County, Georgia, who serves as Ex-Officio Hart County Election Superintendent, and his staff, equipment and expertise in conducting city elections in the future. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 7-5-2011) 
Sec. 2-462. - County election superintendent duties. 
    Subject to the conditions set forth in section 2-463 of this article, the mayor and council of the City of Hartwell hereby request that, as of, from and after the effective date of this article, the Hart County Election Superintendent and his staff conduct any and all future municipal elections in the City of Hartwell, Georgia, and perform all duties as superintendent of elections as specified under O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 2, except for calling municipal elections and qualifying candidates for such elections, which shall be performed by the current municipal election superintendent (the Hartwell City Clerk). 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 2, 7-5-2011) 
Sec. 2-463. - County conduction of municipal elections conditional upon intergovernmental agreement. 
    The findings and action of the mayor and city council, as set forth in this article, are all expressly conditioned upon, and shall not be effective unless, the city, Hart County, Georgia, and the Hart County Election Superintendent enter into an intergovernmental agreement regarding the Hart County Election Superintendent's conducting of municipal elections and performing of all duties of superintendent of elections, and outlining specific duties, costs and other details of such matters, and such intergovernmental agreement is in form and substance satisfactory to the Hartwell City Council. The approval of such intergovernmental agreement by the Hartwell City Council shall be effective upon approval by resolution of the Hartwell City Council, and it shall not be necessary for such agreement to be approved by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 3, 7-5-2011) 
Sec. 2-464. - Negotiation of terms of intergovernmental agreement. 
    The city manager of the City of Hartwell, Georgia, and the city clerk of the City of Hartwell, Georgia, are herby authorized to negotiate with Hart County, Georgia, and the Hart County Election Superintendent to determine the terms of the intergovernmental agreement described in section 2-463 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 4, 7-5-2011) 
Sec. 2-465. - Effective date. 
    This article shall take effect upon its adoption, without any further action by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 5, 7-5-2011) 
Sec. 2-466. - Repeal of inconsistent ordinances or resolutions. 
    Any and all ordinances or resolutions, or parts of ordinances or resolutions, which are inconsistent with this article shall be and are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 6, 7-5-2011) 
Sec. 2-467. - Severability of provisions. 
    The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this article are severable. If any section, provision or clause of this article shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this article as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or to affect the application of this article to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent as the city council of Hartwell that this article would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 7, 7-5-2011) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; regulation of alcoholic beverages generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1 et seq.; authority of local authorities to license and regulate alcoholic beverage sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; local regulation of sales on Sundays, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7; prohibited acts on licensed premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-40 et seq.; malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-1 et seq.; wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-1 et seq.; local licensing requirements for sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40 et seq.; requirements for sale of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  State. For the purposes of this chapter, the definitions contained in the following statutes shall apply, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth in this section: 
(1)  O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2. 
(2)  O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7. 
(3)  O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
(4)  O.C.G.A. § 3-4-1. 
(5)  O.C.G.A. § 3-5-1. 
(6)  O.C.G.A. § 3-6-1. 
(7)  O.C.G.A. § 3-7-1. 
(b)  City. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrator means the city manager or his designee, or any other person appointed by the city council to administer the provisions of this chapter. 
    Agent means that person designated by a licensee in the licensee's application for a permit to sell distilled spirits by the drink in the city. 
    Drink means any distilled spirits not in its original package for consumption on the premises that may or may not be diluted by any other liquid. 
    Entertainment venue means one of the following fixed locations operated for the primary purpose of providing live public entertainment: 
(1)  A live music hall in which a ticketed event offering not less than 50 available seats occurs, but only if such live music hall has fixed seating capacity for 50 or more patrons and does not hold itself out as any other type of establishment; or 
(2)  A theater which presents theatrical performances. 
As used in this paragraph, the term "theatrical performances" means performances of plays or other dramatic works in which actors or actresses or both take part in person in a live performance presented in a permanent structure or building that is commonly called a theater to which admission may be had by payment of a fee or by purchase and presentation of a ticket or token obtained for money and to which the public generally may gain admission. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, however, nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to permit or authorize any number of fixed seats in any venue if such number of seats would not be permitted under the Hartwell Zoning Ordinance, Georgia State Minimum Standard Fire Code, or other applicable law, regulation, or ordinance. Adult entertainment establishments shall under no circumstances be considered as entertainment venues. For purposes of this chapter, without conferring any vested rights, and expressly reserving the right to amend or revoke this designation, the following locations are specifically declared to be entertainment venues: Hart County Community Theater, High Cotton Music Hall, Savannah River Productions. 
    Licensee means any person who holds a license from the city to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
    Monthly period means the calendar month of the year. 
    Open container means any bottle, can, glass, cup or other vessel that contains an alcoholic beverage not in its original container. The term "open container" also means the original container of an alcoholic beverage when: 
(l)  The container contains an alcoholic beverage; and 
(2)  The seal on the container has been broken, the top or cap on the container has been removed, or if the container is a can, the tab has been removed or the surface of the can has been pierced. 
    Private club means a corporation chartered, organized and existing under state law, exempt from federal income taxes pursuant to section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code (26 USC 501(c)), actively and continuously in operation within the city as a nonprofit corporation for at least one year immediately prior to the application for a license under this division and during which time such corporation shall have had continuously not less that 50 members whose names, current addresses and current telephone numbers have been kept listed on the club premises, which members shall have regularly paid quarterly, semiannual or annual dues. The nonprofit corporation shall be operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other nonprofitable purposes, and no part of the bet earnings of the corporation shall inure to the benefit of any member, director or officer. No member, director, officer, agent or employee of the club shall be paid or directly or indirectly receive, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of distilled spirits by or to the club or its members or guests, except such salary as may be fixed by its members at any annual meeting or by its governing board out of the general revenue of the club. 
    Purchase price means the consideration received for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee to the purchaser, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
    Purchaser means any person who orders and gives present or future consideration for any distilled spirits by the drink from a licensee. 
    Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and which meets the criteria of the county health department. 
    Semipublic parking facility includes any privately owned area wherein motor vehicles may be parked by the public in conjunction with any business enterprise, commercial establishment, office building, church, school or multiple-family residential building. 
    Tax means any taxes imposed under this chapter. 
(Comp. 1976, § 4-118-B; Code 1989, §§ 3-1, 3-2; Ord. of 8-4-1986, § 2; Ord. of 2-6-1989; Ord. No. 98-005, § 3-2, 6-1-1998; Ord. No. 2001-01, § 1(3-100), 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 8-3-2015) 
Sec. 4-2. - State beverage code adopted; conflicts. 
(a)  The Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq., wherever applicable to municipalities is hereby adopted and incorporated as if fully set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  Any provisions of this chapter in conflict with the cited state code, shall be invalid and the state code section dealing with the same subjects shall control unless the city is authorized under state law to impose regulations or standards that differ or vary from state law. 
Sec. 4-3. - Sale of alcoholic beverages declared privilege. 
    Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city is a privilege, and not a right, and the issuance of a license under this chapter shall not create any property rights in the license holder. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1. 
Sec. 4-4. - Compliance with chapter required. 
    Any licensee under this chapter shall ensure that the licensee and all employees of the licensee are advised of and comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
Sec. 4-5. - Duty to report use of illegal drugs or narcotics on premises. 
    For every license issued pursuant to this chapter, it shall be the duty and responsibility of the licensee, or licensee's agent or employee to report to the police department any usage or possession of illegal drugs or narcotics on a licensed premises. 
Sec. 4-6. - Brown bagging. 
(a)  Definition. For the purpose of this section, the term "brown-bagging" means the consumption of any alcoholic beverage: 
(1)  On the premises of a business licensed to operate within the city, but not licensed for the consumption of such alcoholic beverage on the premises; 
(2)  By a customer or patron of such business; 
(3)  If the alcoholic beverage was not purchased from the business; 
unless such consumption occurs during a private party held in a portion of the premises reserved for private parties, to which members of the general public are not admitted. 
(b)  Prohibited. Brown bagging is prohibited within the city. 
(c)  Exceptions. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the consumption of alcoholic beverages in a house, apartment, room or other premises designed and used for private residential occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 1(3-3), 3-3-2008) 
Secs. 4-7-4-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 4-31. - Authority. 
    The administrator shall enforce this chapter. The administrator shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or other laws of the city, state or the constitution of the state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of this chapter and the collection of the taxes under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2001-01, § 1(3-101), 3-5-2001) 
Sec. 4-32. - Reports. 
    In the administration of this chapter, the administrator may require the filing of reports by any person having in the person's possession or custody information relating to sales of beverages that are subject to taxation under this chapter. The reports shall be filed with the license division, department of finance, when required and shall set forth the price charged for each sale, the dates of sales and the other information as may be required. 
(Ord. No. 2001-01, § 1(3-101), 3-5-2001) 
Sec. 4-33. - Confidentiality. 
(a)  The administrator or any person having an administrative duty under this chapter shall not make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty. 
(b)  The administrator or any person having an administrative duty under this chapter shall not make known the amount of source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof set forth or disclosed in any return or permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having the administrative duty under this chapter, except for judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the tax levied and assessed. 
(c)  Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties. 
(Ord. No. 2001-01, § 1(3-101), 3-5-2001) 
Sec. 4-34. - Examination of records; audits. 
    The administrator may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the licensee to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(Ord. No. 2001-01, § 1(3-101), 3-5-2001) 
Secs. 4-35-4-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Local authority to regulate manufacture, distribution and package sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-40 et seq.; municipal authority to adopt regulations and determine location, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49; local licenses regarding malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-42; local licenses for sale of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 4-48-4-56. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, adopted Oct. 7, 2013, amended Div. 2 to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2, §§ 4-57-4-60, pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete history of former Div. 2. 

Sec. 4-57. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful to manufacture, distribute, sell or offer to sell any malt beverages only, wine only, or malt beverages and wine, at wholesale or retail, or for consumption on the premises within the city without having the appropriate license for the distribution, manufacture or sale or to carry on the activity in violation of the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 4-58. - Criteria for disqualification of applicant or location. 
    No license for the sale of malt beverages only, wine only, or malt beverages and wine, shall be issued to: 
(1)  A person under 21 years of age. 
(2)  A person of unsound mind. 
(3)  A person who is not a citizen of the United States. 
(4)  A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license would not be eligible for the license upon a first application. 
(5)  A person who is serving as an elected city official or the city administrator; nor shall any license be granted to any business in which any person falling under this subsection holds any interest. 
(6)  A person who has held a previous license that has been revoked for cause within a period of three years immediately prior to the filing of the application. 
(7)  Any person as determined by the city council by reason of the person's business experience, financial standing, trade associations, personal associations, record of arrest, or reputation in any community in which applicant has resided, who is not likely to maintain the operation for which applicant is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules and regulations. 
(8)  Any person convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony involving moral turpitude. 
(9)  Any person who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony not involving moral turpitude within ten years immediately preceding the filing of application for the license. 
(10)  Any person convicted under any federal, state, or local law of a misdemeanor, particularly, but not limited to, those involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or tax law violations, if the conviction tends to indicate that the applicant will not maintain the operation for which the applicant is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules and regulations. 
(11)  A location not suitable in the city council's judgment and discretion because: 
a.  Of traffic congestion; 
b.  The general character of the neighborhood; or 
c.  By reason of the effect that the establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding properties or neighborhood. 
(12)  A location within an area where, in the city council's judgment, the number of malt beverages only licenses, wine only licenses, or malt beverages and wine licenses, already granted makes it contrary to the public interest or welfare. 
(13)  A location at which a previous malt beverages only licenses, wine only license, or malt beverages and wine license, has been revoked or suspended, and where, in the city council's judgment, the problems which have arisen from the operation of a license at the location indicate that it is not in the interest of public health, safety, welfare or morals that the sale of malt beverages only, wine only, or malt beverages and wine, be permitted at the location. 
(14)  An application that has included untrue or misleading information in an application or made or allowed to be made a material omission in the application for a license. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 4-59. - Time limit for reapplication after refusal. 
    If an applicant is refused a license for cause as provided for in this chapter, no application for the same applicant will be accepted for one year from the date of filing the application. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 4-60. - Annual fees. 
(a)  The following annual license fees shall apply for the sale of malt beverages only, wine only, or malt beverages and wine: 
(1)  Class A. Class A licenses allow the retail sales of malt beverages only, wine only, or malt beverages and wine, for on-premises consumption at private clubs, entertainment venues, and restaurants only, and the annual fee shall be in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(2)  Class B. Class B licenses allow the retail sales of malt beverages only, wine only, or malt beverages and wine, for off-premises consumption, and the annual fee shall be in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(3)  Class C. Class C licenses allow the sale and distribution of malt beverages only, wine only, or malt beverages and wine, by wholesale distributors, and the annual fee shall be in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(4)  Class D. Class D licenses allow the manufacturing of malt beverages only, wine only, or malt beverages and wine, and sale by wholesale dealers whose principle place of business is in the city. The annual fee shall be in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(b)  Within each class of license described in this section, the city council shall be authorized to set a fee for a license to sell malt beverages only, a different fee for a license to sell wine only, and a different fee for a license to sell malt beverages and wine. 
(c)  Licenses granted in the second half of the licensing year will be reduced by one-half. No other proration will be allowed. 
(d)  Except as may be permitted otherwise from time to time by city council resolution (as provided in subsection (e) of this section), when a license has been approved and granted, and before the license is issued to the licensee, the fee for such license shall be paid to the city by cash, certified check, cashier's check or money order in the full amount of the license fee. The city shall not be obligated to issue such license until the city has received payment of such fee in full by one of the permitted methods. The city shall not be obligated under any circumstances to accept late payment of any such fee. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the requirement in subsection (d) of this section, however, concerning payment of license fees in full in advance, the city council shall be authorized to provide by city council resolution from time to time for the payment of annual fees for Class A licenses only in installments, in such amounts and at such times as the city council may determine from time to time, in its discretion, but only as long as the holder of such Class A license also holds a license for the sale of distilled spirits for beverage purposes for consumption on the premises. Any such city council resolution shall provide specific dates when each such installment shall be due. If installment payments are authorized, each such payment shall be made by cash, certified check, cashier's check or money order, and the city shall not be obligated to issue such license until the city has received the first such installment. A licensee's failure to pay any installment in a timely manner shall be sufficient grounds for the suspension or revocation of such license. The city shall not be obligated under any circumstances to accept late payment of any such fee. This exception shall apply only to licensees who simultaneously hold a Class A license and a license for the sale of distilled spirits for beverage purposes for consumption on the premises. Annual license fees for persons who hold a Class B license, Class C license, Class D license, or only a Class A license, shall be paid in full in advance as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 10-7-2013; Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1, 2-2-2015; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 8-3-2015) 
Secs. 4-61-4-78. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 4-79. - Application. 
(a)  Inspections. Each applicant shall apply to the city administrator for a license by written application on forms approved by the city council. The city administrator shall inspect the application for completeness and, if acceptable, shall note on the application the date and exact time of filing. 
(b)  City council determination. Applications shall be presented and considered by the city council in the order of their filing; provided that no application shall be presented to the city council unless 30 days have elapsed after the date of filing and all necessary investigations have been completed, whichever is later. 
(Comp. 1976, § 4-118-B; Code 1989, § 3-34; Ord. of 8-4-1986, §§ 7, 14(a); Ord. of 2-6-1989) 
Sec. 4-80. - Determination of applicant. 
    All questions and information requested on the application form shall be filled in and subscribed to by all applicants under oath. For purposes of this article, the applicants shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  If the owner of the business is a resident individual, the application shall be made by the individual owner. 
(2)  If the owner of the business for which a license is sought is a partnership, cooperative, joint venture, association, corporation or nonresident, the application shall be in the name of the resident officer, partner or associate who owns a substantial interest in the business or in the name of the principal resident managing officer or managing agent and the application shall show that the license is for the use of the owner and the owner shall be named. 
(3)  In the event that a partnership, cooperative, joint venture, association or corporation owns or operates more than one place of business in the city, all applications for licenses for each place of business made pursuant to this chapter shall be made by the same individual. 
(4)  If the application is made on behalf of a private club, the application shall be made by an officer of the private club. 
(Comp. 1976, § 4-118-B; Code 1989, § 3-31; Ord. of 8-4-1986, § 4; Ord. of 2-6-1989) 
Sec. 4-81. - Fees. 
    Every application, excluding renewals, shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution. The fees shall be paid by cash or certified check, cashier's check or money order made payable to the city and shall be credited toward the license fee if a license is granted. 
(Comp. 1976, § 4-118-B; Code 1989, § 3-32; Ord. of 8-4-1986, § 5; Ord. of 2-6-1989) 
Sec. 4-82. - Investigations. 
    Upon acceptance of a completed application for a license under this chapter, the city administrator or his designee shall cause the character and reputation of the applicant and the suitability of the location of the establishment for which the license is sought to be fully investigated. 
(Comp. 1976, § 4-118-B; Code 1989, § 3-33; Ord. of 8-4-1986, § 6; Ord. of 2-6-1989) 
Sec. 4-83. - City manager's recommendation. 
    Upon completion of the investigation required in this division, the city administrator shall present the application for a license to the city council for consideration. 
Sec. 4-84. - Factors considered in review of application. 
    In determining whether any license applied for under this article shall be granted, in addition to all the other provisions of this chapter, in the public interest and welfare the following will be considered: 
(1)  The applicant's reputation, character, mental and physical capacity to conduct this business. 
(2)  If the applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell any alcoholic beverage, whether or not applicant has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to the business. 
(3)  If the applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell any alcoholic beverage, the manner in which the applicant conducted the business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to the business. 
(4)  Whether the person has previously had an alcoholic beverage license suspended or revoked. 
(5)  The nature of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the proposed location. 
(6)  The proximity of churches, hospitals and schools to the proposed locations. 
(7)  The adequacy of parking available at the proposed location. 
(8)  Traffic congestion. 
(9)  The history or reputation of the proposed location. 
(10)  The criminal record of the applicant. 
(11)  The financial responsibility of the applicant. 
(12)  Evidence presented to the council and recommendation for or against approval of the application. 
(Comp. 1976, § 4-118-B; Code 1989, § 3-34; Ord. of 8-4-1986, §§ 7, 14(a); Ord. of 2-6-1989) 
Secs. 4-85-4-111. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ENFORCEMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-01, § 2, adopted Oct. 7, 2013, amended Div. 4 to read as herein set out. Former Div. 4, §§ 4-112-4-120, pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete history of former Div. 4. 

Sec. 4-112. - Duration; lapse. 
(a)  All licenses shall be issued for a calendar year. In case of the revocation or surrender of a license before the expiration of the calendar year, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to receive a refund whatsoever. 
(b)  All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid only so long as licensees are actively engaged in the business, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecoration, and in the event the licensee shall cease to be actively engaged in the business, the license shall be invalid and the licensee of the business shall immediately notify the city administrator and return the license thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 2, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 4-113. - Expiration; renewal; denial. 
(a)  All licenses granted under this article shall expire on December 31 of each year and shall be renewable at the city council's option. Applications for renewal shall be made on or before November 1. 
(b)  The city council shall have the full power and authority to refuse to renew any license to sell malt beverages only, wine only, or malt beverages and wine, for violation of this chapter or violation of any state or federal law that controls the sale or use of malt beverages only, wine only, or malt beverages and wine. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 2, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 4-114. - Sale of business automatically terminates license. 
    In the event that a licensee sells the business at which a license issued under this article authorizes the sale of malt beverages only, wine only, or malt beverages and wine, the license shall automatically terminate. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 2, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 4-115. - Nontransferable. 
(a)  No license granted under this article shall be transferable from one person to another. 
(b)  In the event that the holder of a license on behalf of a corporation or private club ceases to be an officer of the corporation or is no longer associated with the private club, the corporation or private club shall apply within 15 days after the event has occurred for a new license to be issued to the person holding the same office as the original applicant, and a fee in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution shall be paid to the city. 
(c)  No license shall be transferred from one location to another. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 2, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 4-116. - Display. 
    The city license shall at all times be posted in a conspicuous place within the building; if the license is not so posted, the business shall not be authorized to sell alcoholic beverages until same shall be posted. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 2, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 4-117. - Suspension, revocation and probation-Penalty; grounds. 
(a)  In addition to and totally separate and distinct from punishment for a violation of this chapter under general penalty section 1-9, any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of any licenses, regardless of the number of locations involved, and regardless of whether or not the holder of the license knew or contributed to the violation. 
(b)  It is the intent of this section, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, to grant to the city council the right to suspend or revoke any licenses held by a licensee when any violation of this chapter occurs at any place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold pursuant to a license issued under this article. 
(c)  The following shall be grounds for revocation of suspension of a license: 
(1)  The discovery by the city of any untrue or misleading information or a material omission in the application pursuant to which a license was issued. 
(2)  A conviction, plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a felony or a crime involving indecency or immorality. 
(3)  A conviction, plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any violation of city ordinances relating to the use, sale, manufacture, taxability or possession of any malt beverages or wine, or violations of any state or federal laws pertaining to the use, sale, manufacture, taxability, transportation or possession of any alcoholic beverages. 
(4)  A violation of any city ordinance or state or federal law controlling the use, sale, manufacture, distribution or possession of alcoholic beverages. The determination of whether any the violation has occurred shall be made by the city council and a conviction or plea in court shall not be necessary in order to suspend or revoke the license. 
(5)  Conduct occurring on premises detrimental to the welfare of the city or its citizens. 
(6)  Disturbances or altercations resulting in violence occurring on the premises. 
(d)  Any violation of a general state law pertaining to alcoholic beverages shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(e)  The city council shall have the full power and authority to revoke, suspend or place on probation any license to sell malt beverages only, wine only, or malt beverages and wine, for violation of this chapter or violation of any state or federal law that controls the sale or use of alcoholic beverages. 
(f)  When a licensee, agent or employee of the licensee is judged to have violated this chapter, the licensee's license shall be suspended for a minimum of 30 days. 
(g)  Whenever the state shall revoke, suspend or probate any license to sell any alcoholic beverage at retail, the city license to deal in the product shall thereupon be automatically revoked, suspended or probated accordingly without any action by the city council or any municipal officer. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 2, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 4-118. - Same-Procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall have full power and authority to revoke, refuse to renew, suspend or place on probation any license to sell alcoholic beverages for any violation of this chapter, or of the state or federal law or when the continued operation of the licensed business is detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the public. 
(b)  Before taking any action, the city council shall conduct a hearing in the matter after at least five days' notice of the hearing shall have been given to the affected licensee of the time and place of the hearing, and at the hearing licensee may present evidence to the city council which will refute the alleged violation, and which will show that there is no cause for revocation. 
(c)  The city council shall hear all evidence relative to the violation and shall then render a decision as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 2, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 4-119. - Reapplication fee. 
    In the event a license is revoked for cause, the city council shall require the licensee to pay a reapplication fee in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 2, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 4-120. - Restrictions on the sale of malt beverage and wine. 
(a)  Retail establishments engaged solely in the sale of malt beverages only, wine only, or malt beverages and wine shall be prohibited in the city. 
(b)  A retail establishment may obtain a license for the sale of malt beverages only, wine only, or malt beverages and wine, for consumption off premises (a Class B license); provided the applicant or licensee has and maintains a grocery related business in combination with the sale of malt beverages only, wine only, or malt beverages and wine, as appropriate, with a grocery related inventory, exclusive of malt beverages only or malt beverages and wine, of a wholesale value of not less than $2,500.00. Any applicant or licensee shall, at the city council's discretion, or upon reasonable demand by any law enforcement officer, be required to produce and exhibit the wholesale receipts supporting the value of the inventory. 
(c)  The sale and consumption on the premises of malt beverages only, wine only, or malt beverages and wine, shall be allowed only at locations that qualify as restaurants, private clubs, or entertainment venues, as defined in this chapter, and the sale and consumption of such beverages at entertainment venues shall be further limited as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  The sale and consumption on the premises of malt beverages only, wine only or malt beverages and wine shall be allowed at a location that qualifies as an entertainment venue, as defined in this chapter, but only at the following times: 
(1)  Starting 30 minutes before the beginning of a live performance; 
(2)  During the performance of live entertainment; and 
(3)  During any intermission or short break in the live performance. 
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, however, nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to permit the sale or consumption of any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any entertainment venue at any time when the sale of such beverages is prohibited by section 4-127. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 2, 10-7-2013; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 3, 8-3-2015) 
Secs. 4-121-4-126. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - REGULATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-01, § 3, adopted Oct. 7, 2013, amended Div. 5 to read as herein set out. Former Div. 5, §§ 4-127-4-131, pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete history of former Div. 5. 

Sec. 4-127. - Hours, days and conditions of sale. 
(a)  No retail dealer shall engage in the sale of malt beverages only, wine only, or malt beverages and wine, except: 
(1)  With respect to all retail dealers (those that are licensed to sell for consumption on the premises [Class A licenses] and those that are licensed to sell for consumption off premises, commonly referred to as package sales [Class B licenses]), between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on weekdays and Saturdays; and 
(2)  With respect to retail dealers that are licensed to sell malt beverages only, wine only, or malt beverages and wine, for consumption off premises, commonly referred to as package sales (Class B licenses), between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sundays, but only as long as such retailer complies with the condition set forth in subsection (e) of this section. 
(b)  No retailer shall permit the sale of malt beverages only, wine only, or malt beverages and wine, on Christmas Day or any other day on which state law prohibits the sale of such alcoholic beverage. 
(c)  Unless prohibited by state law, the sale of malt beverages only, wine only, or malt beverages and wine on any city, county, state and national election day is hereby permitted. 
(d)  All persons shall be off the premises of retail dealers at 12:00 midnight on weekdays and Saturdays, and at 11:30 p.m. on Sundays for package sales, at which time such retail dealer shall close for business. Lounges, restaurants or other retail dealers where the principal business is the sale of food, and the sale of malt beverages or wine is incidental thereto, may remain open during other hours, but shall not sell malt beverages only, wine only, or malt beverages and wine except during the times and hours specified in this chapter. 
(e)  A retailer shall not be permitted to sell malt beverages only, wine only, or malt beverages and wine, on Sundays, unless such licensed retail dealer holds a valid Class B license. 
(f)  The business hours of wholesale dealers shall be the same hours and days as retail dealers are allowed to engage in the sale of malt beverages only, wine only, or malt beverages and wine, by the terms of subsections (a) through (e) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 3, 10-7-2013; Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 1-8-2015) 
Sec. 4-128. - State law adopted. 
(a)  All provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1 et seq. applicable to sale of malt beverages only, wine only, malt beverages and wine, and distilled liquor by the drink are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth in this article and shall control in case of a conflict with this chapter. 
(b)  Any violation of general state law pertaining to alcoholic beverages shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 3, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 4-129. - Storage of malt beverages and wine limited to licensee's premises. 
    All licensed retailers shall store all malt beverages and wine in their possession only on the premises for which the license was issued. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 3, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 4-130. - Location restrictions. 
    It shall be unlawful to grant a license for the sale of any alcoholic beverages: 
(1)  Within 100 yards of any school building, school grounds or college campus. This subsection shall not apply: 
a.  At any location for which a license has been issued prior to July 1, 1981; 
b.  To the renewal of the license; or 
c.  At any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of malt beverages only, wine only, or malt beverages and wine, was lawful at the location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding the application. 
(2)  In any existing building or establishment having a history of, or reputation for, prostitution or other sex offense; fighting, shooting, stabbing or other violence; gambling; illegal dealing in alcoholic beverages or drugs; and other violations of the law. The term "by history or reputation" means within the 12 months immediately preceding the filing of the application and provided the business is at the time of application owned, operated, managed or in any way connected to the person operating the establishment during the time the offenses occurred. 
(3)  In a building occupied as a residential dwelling; provided, however, that if (i) areas in a building are used for residential purposes and other separate areas in the same building are used for commercial purposes, (ii) such different uses in different areas of the same building are permitted under applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the Hartwell Zoning Ordinance, and (iii) the commercial areas are not located in any apartment or other space devoted to residential use, then a license may be granted for the sale of alcoholic beverages in a commercial area of such building. 
(4)  In any location at which the operation of the proposed business would be in violation of the city's zoning ordinance. 
(5)  Within 750 feet of a location which has been issued a game room license by the city or a similar license by any other governmental entity. This prohibition shall also apply to a location that has been issued a license. As used in this subsection, the term "game room" shall have the meaning set forth in section 10-382. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 3, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 4-131. - Container number and sizes; sale in machines. 
(a)  No licensee, except the holder of a Class A license authorizing the sale of malt beverages only, wine only, or malt beverages and wine, at retail in the city shall, upon the licensed premises, sell less than the packaged container as packaged by the wholesaler, distributor or manufacturer. Malt beverages may be sold in any size or type of bottle or other container as long as the beverages are bottled and capped by the brewer and delivered by the wholesaler and the bottle or container is of a type that is customarily sold by wholesalers of alcoholic beverages and is not prohibited by applicable law or rules or regulations of the commissioner. A Class B licensee may sell draft beer by the quarter, half, full barrel, or keg. Such barrel or keg must be sealed when delivered by the wholesaler and must remain sealed through the delivery to retailer's customer. 
(b)  No licensee shall sell or offer for sale malt beverages only, wine only, or malt beverages or wine, by the use of vending machines. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 3, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 4-132. - Limitations on physical arrangement of premises of Class B licensee. 
    The premises of a Class B license shall comply with the following restrictions and limitations: 
(1)  Separate doorway to exterior. The only ingress and egress to or from the premises of a Class B license for customers and their purchases, and for employees, shall be through a door opening to the outside and facing a public street or an area for public pedestrian traffic and not from or into any other business establishment. 
(2)  Visibility of entrance from public street. The front entrance to the premises of a Class B licensee shall be clearly visible from a public street; provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply if the licensee is a motel, hotel, or private club, or is located in shopping center or multiple-story business building. 
(3)  Visibility into interior; lighting. No screens, blinds, curtains, partitions, articles or things which shall prevent a clear view into the interior premises of a Class B licensee shall be permitted in the window or doors of such premises; and no booth, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any such premises. The premises of a Class B licensee shall be so lighted that the interior premises are visible day and night. 
(4)  Transactions outside licensed premises prohibited. In a Class B establishment, the total commercial transactions shall take place only within the area licensed for sales of malt beverages and wine for off-premises consumption. 
(5)  Opening of original retail container prohibited. Except as specifically provided for in section 4-133 of this Code concerning wine tastings, the original retail containers of any alcoholic beverage sold by a Class B licensee hereunder shall not be opened on the lot or premises of the location licensed for the sale thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 3, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 4-133. - Wine tastings. 
    Wine tastings are permitted as long as they comply with the following rules and regulations: 
(1)  No wine tasting shall be sponsored or conducted in the city unless by permit of the city council. 
(2)  Each applicant for a wine tasting shall apply to the city administrator for a license by written application on forms approved by the city council. The city administrator shall inspect the application for completeness and, if acceptable, shall note on the application the date and exact time of filing. Applications shall be presented and considered by the city council in the order of their filing; provided that no application shall be presented to the city council unless all necessary investigations have been completed. Upon acceptance of a completed application for a wine tasting permit, the city administrator or his designee shall cause the circumstances of the proposed wine tasting to be fully investigated. Upon completion of the investigation, the city administrator shall present the application for a wine tasting to the city council for consideration, and the city council shall be authorized to deny the permit or to issue the permit subject to such terms and conditions as the city deems in the public interest. 
(3)  The applicant for a wine tasting must hold at least one of the following: (i) a valid current state license as a farm winery, (ii) a valid current Class B license, or (iii) a valid current permit under section 4-270. Additionally, if the applicant holds a Class B license or holds a permit under section 4-270, and does not hold a valid current state license as a farm winery, then the applicant must state in its application that a duly authorized representative of a state farm winery will be present at the wine tasting, and a representative of such state farm winery must actually be present at, conduct and superintend the wine tasting from start to finish. 
(4)  Wine tastings may only be conducted in connection with a promotion that includes some education or instruction on wines generally or the manufacture, grading, or assessment of wine, or pairing of wine with food. 
(5)  Wine tastings must comply with all laws and regulations otherwise pertaining to the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the state. 
(6)  All applicants and permit holders must comply with all state statutes and sections of this Code and other City of Hartwell ordinances concerning alcoholic beverages, including but not limited to those dealing with hours of operation, zoning, and distance requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 3, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 4-134. - Violations concerning coin operated game machines. 
    Any violation of subsection (e), (t), or (g) of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 by a licensee shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 2(4-132), 1-6-2014) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-03, § 2, adopted Jan. 6, 2014, supplied provisions to be added to this Code as § 4-132. In order to maintain the existing numbering system, at the discretion of the editor, this section has been redesignated as § 4-134 to read as set out herein. 
Secs. 4-135-4-138. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WINE TASTING ROOMS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-139. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Farm winery means a domestic winery that is licensed as a farm winery by the state. 
    Tasting room means an outlet for the promotion of a farm winery's wine by providing complimentary samples of such wine to the public and for retail sale of such wine as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 1, 10-1-2007) 
Secs. 4-140-4-161. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 4-162. - Required. 
    There is hereby created a license for the business of operating a state farm winery tasting room in conformance with the laws of the state and city. It shall be unlawful to operate a wine tasting room, or to promote locally harvested or fermented wine by providing samples of such wine to the public in the city without having the appropriate license for the operation of a wine tasting room. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 1, 10-1-2007) 
Sec. 4-163. - Duration; expiration. 
    All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall: 
(1)  Have a term of one calendar year; 
(2)  Expire at 12:00 midnight on December 31 of the year in which issued; and 
(3)  Be renewable at the city council's option. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 1, 10-1-2007) 
Sec. 4-164. - Lapse. 
    All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be valid only so long as licensees are actively engaged in such business, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecoration, and in the event the licensee shall cease to be actively engaged in such business, such license shall be invalid and the licensee of such business shall immediately notify the city manager and return the license thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 1, 10-1-2007) 
Sec. 4-165. - Fees. 
(a)  The fee for a farm winery tasting room license shall be in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(b)  In case of the revocation or surrender of the license before expiration of the calendar-year period, the holder shall not be entitled to receive any refund of any fees or taxes whatsoever. 
(c)  Licenses granted in the second half of the licensing year will be reduced by one-half. No other proration will be allowed. 
(d)  Except as may be permitted otherwise from time to time by city council resolution (as provided in subsection (e) of this section), when a license has been approved and granted, and before the license is issued to the licensee, the fee for such license shall be paid to the city by cash, certified check, cashier's check or money order in the full amount of the license fee. The city shall not be obligated to issue such license until the city has received payment of such fee in full by one of the permitted methods. The city shall not be obligated under any circumstances to accept late payment of any such fee. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the requirement in subsection (d) of this section, however, concerning payment of license fees in full in advance, the city council shall be authorized to provide from time to time by city council resolution for the payment of annual fees in installments, in such amounts and at such times as the city council may determine from time to time, in its discretion, but only as long as the holder of such farm winery tasting room license also holds a license for the sale of distilled spirits for beverage purposes for consumption on the premises. Any such city council resolution shall provide specific dates when each such installment shall be due. If installment payments are authorized, each such payment shall be made by cash, certified check, cashier's check or money order, and the city shall not be obligated to issue such license until the city has received the first such installment. A licensee's failure to pay any installment in a timely manner shall be sufficient grounds for the suspension or revocation of such license. The city shall not be obligated under any circumstances to accept late payment of any such fee. This exception shall apply only to persons who simultaneously hold a farm winery tasting room license and a license for the sale of distilled spirits for beverage purposes for consumption on the premises. 
    Annual license fees for persons who hold only a farm winery tasting room license shall be paid in full in advance as provided in paragraph (d) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 1, 10-1-2007; Ord. No. 2015-01, § 2, 2-2-2-15) 
Sec. 4-166. - Application required; contents. 
    Any person desiring a license to operate a state farm winery tasting room in the city shall apply for such license on a form created by the city manager. Such person shall specify in the application the proposed location of the proposed wine tasting room, and shall tender with such application proof that such person has been issued a state farm winery tasting room license for such location, and a city license to sell wine at such location. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 1, 10-1-2007) 
Sec. 4-167. - Nontransferable. 
(a)  No license granted under this article shall be transferable from one person to another. 
(b)  In the event that the holder of a license on behalf of a corporation or private club ceases to be an officer of the corporation or is no longer associated with the private club, the corporation or private club shall apply within 15 days after the event has occurred for a new license to be issued to the person holding the same office as the original applicant, and a fee in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution shall be paid to the city. 
(c)  No license shall be transferred from one location to another. 
(Comp. 1976, § 4-118-B; Code 1989, § 3-39; Ord. of 8-4-1986, § 13; Ord. of 2-6-1989) 
Sec. 4-168. - Display. 
    The city license shall at all times be posted in a conspicuous place within the building; if the license is not so posted, the business shall not be authorized to sell alcoholic beverages until same shall be posted. 
(Comp. 1976, § 4-118-B; Code 1989, § 3-40; Ord. of 8-4-1986, § 15; Ord. of 2-6-1989) 
Sec. 4-169. - Reapplication fee. 
    In the event a license is revoked for cause, the city council shall require the licensee to pay a reapplication fee in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(Comp. 1976, § 4-118-B; Code 1989, § 3-43; Ord. of 8-4-1986, § 14(e); Ord. of 2-6-1989) 
Secs. 4-170-4-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 4-186. - Sale of other alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
    The farm winery tasting room permitted by this article is limited to farm wineries licensed by the state and allows the licensee to deal in its farm winery products pursuant to state law. No license is created by this article authorizing any other person to deal in any other alcoholic beverage, unless such licensee also obtains a license to sell another type of alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 1, 10-1-2007) 
Sec. 4-187. - Food sale requirement inapplicable. 
    The requirements of this Code, with respect to the sale of food with alcoholic beverages, shall not apply to farm winery tasting rooms. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 1, 10-1-2007) 
Sec. 4-188. - Revocation or suspension-Grounds. 
(a)  The approval of a farm winery tasting room license is conditional at all times. In addition to and totally separate and distinct from punishment for violation of this chapter under general penalty section 1-9, the commission of any act or any omission which would constitute a violation of the state wine tasting room license or of any city license to sell wine shall be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of any farm winery tasting room license, regardless of whether or not the licensee knew or contributed to such violation. 
(b)  Licenses may be suspended for a period up to 12 months depending upon history and severity of violations. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 1, 10-1-2007) 
Sec. 4-189. - Same-Procedure. 
    The city council shall have the full power and authority to revoke, refuse to renew, suspend or place on probation any farm winery tasting room license for any violation of this chapter, or of the state or federal law or when the continued operation of the licensed business is detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the public. Before taking any such action, the city council shall conduct a hearing in the matter after at least five days' notice of the hearing shall have been given to the affected licensee of the time and place of such hearing, and at such hearing the licensee may present evidence to the city council which will refute the alleged violation, and which will show that there is no cause for revocation. The city council shall hear all evidence relative to the violation and render a decision as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 1, 10-1-2007) 
Secs. 4-190-4-202. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DISTILLED SPIRITS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-203. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
    Alcoholic beverage includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
    Auditorium means a permanent building or hall used for concerts, speakers, plays and similar activities and that has a seating capacity in excess of 50 seats. 
    Church means a permanent building specifically constructed for the purpose of persons assembling twice a month or more frequently for religious worship. 
    Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
    Election day means that period of time beginning with the opening of the polls and ending with the closing of the poles for any election conducted within the city. 
    Firearm means any handgun, rifle, shotgun or other weapon that will or can be converted to expel a projectile by the action of an explosive or electrical charge. 
    Government center means a building owned or leased by and operated by the state, county or city and which contains a lobby or atrium area or other room that is used for group functions. If a license is issued for premises within a government center, a government official or employee shall be named licensee. 
    Hotel means a building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, the sleeping accommodations being conducted in the same building or in separate buildings or structures used in connection therewith that are on the same premises and are a part of the hotel operation. Motels meeting the qualifications set out in this definition for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of being granted franchises for the operation of a lounge, restaurant or nightclub in their premises and the holder of the franchise shall be included in this definition. 
    License means the authorization granted by the city to engage in the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages. 
    Licensee means a person holding any class of license issued under this division. 
    Lounge means a separate room connected with a part of and adjacent to a restaurant or located in a hotel with all booths, stools and tables being unobstructed and open to view. A lounge that is operated in a separate building or that is not connected or adjacent to a restaurant shall be considered a separate establishment and an additional license fee shall be paid therefor. 
    Manufacturer means any maker, producer or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term "manufacturer" also means any person engaged in the distilling, rectifying or blending any distilled spirits. 
    Minor means a person less than 21 years of age. 
    Post, chapter or club of nationally chartered veterans and fraternal organizations means those clubs, associations or organizations which, in the case of veteran organizations, are recognized as representatives of veterans by the Veterans Administration, and as to fraternal organizations, have charters from Elks, Moose or similar organizations, and which have complied with section 501(a) of the United States Internal Revenue Code (26 USC 501(a)) for a tax exempt status. 
    Premises means the closed or partitioned area of or on the licensed property, whether room, shop, tasting room or building wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed. The term "premises" includes any area or patio immediately adjacent to the main licensed facility and located on property owned by such licensee. 
    Private club means a corporation chartered, organized and existing under state law, exempt from federal income taxes pursuant to section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code (26 USC 501(c)), actively and continuously in operation within the city as a nonprofit corporation for at least one year immediately prior to the application for a license under this division and during which time such corporation shall have had continuously not less that 50 members whose names, current addresses and current telephone numbers have been kept listed on the club premises, which members shall have regularly paid quarterly, semiannual or annual dues. The nonprofit corporation shall be operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other nonprofitable purposes, and no part of the bet earnings of the corporation shall inure to the benefit of any member, director or officer. No member, director, officer, agent or employee of the club shall be paid or directly or indirectly receive, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of distilled spirits by or to the club or its members or guests, except such salary as may be fixed by its members at any annual meeting or by its governing board out of the general revenue of the club. 
    Private residence. 
(1)  The term "private residence" means a house or dwelling wherein not less than one or more than two families reside. 
(2)  The term "private residence" does not include: 
a.  An apartment house having facilities for housing more than two families; 
b.  A boardinghouse or roominghouse where there are five or more boarders or roomers; or 
c.  Any building occupied as a residence located within an area zoned for business. 
    Resort facility means a golf course or golf course facility and restaurant operated in connection therewith. The term "resort facility" includes any hotel and restaurant facility operated in connection with such golf course facility. 
    Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and which meets the criteria of the county health department. 
    Retailer, retail dealer mean any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
    Sale means selling or offering for sale any alcoholic beverages to any member of the public. 
    School. 
(1)  The term "school" means only such state, county, city, church or other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state. 
(2)  The term "school" does not include private schools where only specialized subjects, such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
    Sports facility means premises operated exclusively for the purpose of providing professional sporting events, such as professional football, auto racing, or similar athletic or amusement events for attendance by the public. 
    Weapon means any pistol, revolver, or any weapon designed or intended to propel a missile of any kind, or any dirk, bowie knife, switchblade knife, ballistic knife, any other knife having a blade of two or more inches, straight-edge razor, razor blade, spring stick, metal knucks, blackjack, any bat, club, or other bludgeon-type weapon, or any flailing instrument consisting of two or more rigid parts connected in such a manner as to allow them to swing freely, which may be known as a nunchahka, nunchuck, nunchaku, shuriken, or fighting chain, or any disc, of whatever configuration, having at least two points or pointed blades which is designed to be thrown or propelled and which may be known as a throwing star or oriental dart, or any weapon of like kind, and any stun gun or taser as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-11-406(a). 
    Wholesaler, wholesale dealer mean any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, retail dealers or to retail consumption dealers. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-100, 1-7-2008) 
Secs. 4-204-4-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 4-216. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful to manufacture, distribute, sell or offer to sell any distilled spirits for beverage purposes for consumption on the premises, at wholesale or retail, within the city without having the appropriate license for such distribution, manufacture or sale, or to carry on such activity in violation of the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-200, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-217. - Duration; expiration; renewal. 
    All licenses issued under the provisions of this division shall: 
(1)  Have a term of one calendar year; 
(2)  Expire at 12:00 midnight on December 31 of the year in which issued; and 
(3)  Be renewable at the city council's option. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-201, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-218. - Lapse. 
    All licenses issued pursuant to this division shall be valid only so long as licensees are actively engaged in such business, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecoration, and in the event the licensee shall cease to be actively engaged in such business, such license shall be invalid and the licensee of such business shall immediately notify the city administrator and return the license thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-202, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-219. - Categories. 
(a)  The distilled spirits licenses that may be issued under this division are: 
(1)  Wholesaler; 
(2)  Retail sales of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises; and 
(3)  Manufacturer. 
(b)  A separate application is required for each license category enumerated in subsection (a) of this section. The city council will act upon each application separately. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-203, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-220. - Fees. 
(a)  License fees for each category of license specified in section 4-219 shall be in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution and shown in the city's fee schedule. 
(b)  In case of the revocation or surrender of the license before expiration of the calendar-year period, the holder shall not be entitled to receive any refund of any fees or taxes whatsoever. 
(c)  Licenses granted in the second half of the licensing year will be reduced by one-half. No other proration will be allowed. 
(d)  An applicant for a license shall tender with the application a certified check, cashier's check or money order in the full amount of the license fee, but the city shall not negotiate such check or money order until the license is approved by the city council. The city shall not be obligated to issue such license until the city has received payment of such fee in full by one of the permitted methods. The city shall not be obligated under any circumstances to accept late payment of any such fee. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the requirement in subsection (d) of this section, however, concerning payment of license fees in full in advance, the city council shall be authorized to provide from time to time by city council resolution for the payment of annual fees in installments, in such amounts and at such times as the city council may determine from time to time. Any such city council resolution shall provide specific dates when each such installment shall be due. If installment payments are authorized, each such payment shall be made by cash, certified check, cashier's check or money order, and the city shall not be obligated to issue such license until the city has received the first such installment. A licensee's failure to pay any installment in a timely manner shall be sufficient grounds for the suspension or revocation of such license. The city shall not be obligated under any circumstances to accept late payment of any such fee. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-204, 1-7-2008; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 3(3-204), 3-3-2008; Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 2-2-2015) 
Sec. 4-221. - Application. 
(a)  Required. The applicant for a license under this division shall make a written application under oath on the form as provided by the city manager or his designee. Such application shall be a public record and open to public inspection by any citizen at a reasonable time. 
(b)  Fees. The applicant shall, upon turning in the completed application to the city clerk or his designee, at the same time tender with such application a certified check, cashier's check or money order in the full amount of the applicable license fee and a separate certified check, cashier's check or money order in an amount established from time to time by city council resolution as a nonrefundable application fee. The city shall be authorized to negotiate the check or money order for the nonrefundable application fee immediately upon receipt, but shall not negotiate the check or money order for the license fee until the license is approved by the city council. If the license is subsequently not approved, then the check shall either be returned to the applicant, or if the applicant cannot redeem the check, the city shall negotiate the check and issue a refund to the applicant. 
(c)  Corporation-Stockholders. All applicants who are corporations having ten or less stockholders shall list the names and addresses of all stockholders and the percentage of stock owned by each on the application form. If a named stockholder therein is another corporation, the same information shall be given for the stockholding corporation. If during the life of the license the identity of the stockholders or their percentages of ownership should change, that information shall be sent to the city clerk or his designee for processing. 
(d)  Same-Agents. All corporate applicants, without regard to the number of stockholders, shall list the names and addresses of the officers of the corporation. In addition thereto, they shall name an agent and address of the agent, who shall be the individual who does in fact have regular, managerial and supervisory authority over the business conducted on the licensed premises. In addition, the manager shall be an agent for service for the corporation in addition to all other methods allowed for serving a corporation by state law. Any person who has been an agent/manager of a corporation whose license has been revoked is ineligible to act as an agent/manager for any corporate licensee thereafter. 
(e)  Documents. The following documents shall be attached to each application: 
(1)  Evidence of ownership of the premises where the proposed business is to be located or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building or premises. 
(2)  A certified or cashier's check payable to the city for the proper amount of the license fee. If the license is refused, the amount of the check shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(3)  A drawing to scale, showing the nearest school, college, church or single family zoned resident or an affidavit of a registered surveyor that the proposed location of the business premises complies with section 4-247. 
(4)  A copy of an advertisement to be run in The Hartwell Sun one time stating the purpose of the application, the location of the business and the owner of the business together with an affidavit by the applicant stating the date when this advertisement has or will run in such newspaper. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-205, 1-7-2008; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 4(3-205), 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 4-222. - Qualifications. 
(a)  All applicants for licenses under this division must attach to their application evidence of their good character. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to grant a license for the sale of any distilled spirits for beverage purposes for consumption on the premises to: 
(1)  A person under 21 years of age. 
(2)  A person of unsound mind. 
(3)  A person who is not a citizen of the United States. 
(4)  A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license would not be eligible for such license upon a first application. 
(5)  A person who has held a previous license that has been revoked for cause within a period of three years immediately prior to the filing of the application. 
(6)  Any person who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony involving moral turpitude. 
(7)  Any person who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony not involving moral turpitude within ten years immediately preceding the filing of application for such license. 
(8)  Any person convicted under any federal, state or local law of a misdemeanor involving alcoholic beverages, if such conviction tends to indicate that the applicant will not maintain the operation for which applicant is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-206, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-223. - Procedure; criteria. 
(a)  All applications presented shall be noted as to the date and exact time of filing and, after filing, such applications shall be presented and considered by the city council in the order of their filing, provided 30 days have elapsed after the date of filing and all necessary investigation has been completed, whichever is later. 
(b)  The application shall be sworn to and directed to the city manager who shall inspect the application. The city manager or his designee shall cause the character and reputation of the applicant and suitability of the location of the establishment for which the license is sought to be fully investigated. 
(c)  The city manager or his designee shall submit the application within two business days after filing to the police department. The police department shall make an arrest and conviction investigation concerning any applicants under this division if individuals and the officers and designated agent or manager if the applicant is a corporation and shall submit the results of such investigation to the city manager within seven days of submission. 
(d)  In determining whether or not any license applied for under this division shall be granted, in addition to all the other provisions of this chapter, in the public interest and welfare, the following will be considered: 
(1)  The applicant's reputation, character, mental and physical capacity to conduct this business. 
(2)  If applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell any alcoholic beverage, whether or not the applicant has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
(3)  If applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell any alcoholic beverage, the manner in which applicant conducted the business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
(4)  Whether the person has previously had an alcoholic beverage license suspended or revoked. 
(5)  The nature of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the proposed location. 
(6)  The proximity of churches, hospitals and schools to the proposed locations. 
(7)  The adequacy of parking available at the proposed location. 
(8)  Traffic congestion. 
(9)  The history and/or reputation of the proposed locations. 
(10)  The criminal record of the applicant. 
(11)  The financial responsibility of the applicant. 
(12)  Evidence presented to the council for or against that application. 
(e)  All applicants for new licenses or for transfers of locations shall be passed upon by the city council and its action shall be taken within 60 days from the date of the filing of the application. 
(f)  Any change in any relationship declared in section 4-221, pertaining to the application's contents, which requires investigation by the city manger or city council prior to the issuance of a renewal license, shall be passed upon by the city council within 60 days from the date of filing of the change. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-207, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-224. - Investigation. 
(a)  Applicants, by filing for a license agree to furnish the date, information and records required by this division and also agree to submit under oath to interrogation by the city manager, city attorney, and/or city council as to any facts considered pertinent to the application. Applicants, by filing the application, also agree to produce for oral interrogation by the city manager, city attorney and city council, any person requested by the city manager and city council, as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to the granting of the license. Failure to furnish this date, information and records or failure to produce these persons within 30 days from the date of the request by the city shall automatically serve to dismiss with prejudice the application of the applicant failing to furnish the date, information and records or failing to produce these persons. 
(b)  All applications for new licenses, and applications for renewals thereof, shall be investigated by the designee of the city clerk, and no new or renewal license shall be acted upon by the city council or issued by the city clerk until the designee has indicated in writing that in his opinion no violation exists upon the facts as stated and ascertained by such investigation as to any ordinance or law in effect as of the date of the rendering of the opinion. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-208, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-225. - City council action. 
(a)  Before the city council shall deny any application or reapplication for a license, or shall revoke or suspend any existing license, the applicant or licensee, as the case may be, shall be given notice in writing by the mayor or the city clerk to show cause before the city council at a time and place specified and being not less than three days or more than ten days from the date of service of the notice, why the application or reapplication for license should not be denied, or why the license should not be revoked or suspended, as the case may be. This notice shall set forth any objections to the application or reapplication and any possible grounds on which a denial of the application or reapplication or a revocation or a suspension of the license may be based as well as the names of any witnesses to be called in support of the denial or revocation. At the appointed time and place the applicant or licensee shall have an opportunity to present evidence, call witnesses, cross examine witnesses, make statements and otherwise show cause, if any exists, why the application or reapplication should not be denied or why the license should not be revoked or suspended. 
(b)  After this hearing and based upon the evidence presented at this hearing, the city council shall take such action as it, in its judgment and discretion, shall deem warranted under the facts. The hearing provided for in this section need not be at a regular meeting of the city council but may be at such time and place as shall be fixed in the notice. 
(c)  The city council shall have the right to suspend any license for the sale of distilled spirits pending the hearing provided for in this section where in the city council's judgment, such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare or morals of the community. Any such suspension shall not exceed ten days unless the licensee requests a continuance of the hearing before the city council in which case the suspension will stay in effect until the time of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-209, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-226. - False statements in applications; penalties. 
(a)  Any person making a false statement in any application for a license, or statement in connection with renewal thereof, shall be guilty of an offense and punished as provided by state law relating to false swearing, and further, a license, if previously granted or renewed, may be revoked for the violation. 
(b)  It shall be an offense for any person to give other than the true and correct legal name of the intended licensee. 
(c)  A conviction for a violation of this section shall be punished as provided by general penalty section 1-9, and in his discretion, the municipal court judge may revoke, suspend or probate any license for such violation and the administrative hearing officer may revoke, suspend or probate any license for such violation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-210, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-227. - Renewal. 
(a)  All licenses are issued only on a calendar year basis and shall come up for renewal each year following issuance. 
(b)  Each licensee shall make a written application for renewal by November 15 of each year following issuance. Each licensee shall swear to the truthfulness of such information that is the same as the prior application and shall set forth facts that are different from prior year's application. 
(c)  All applications for renewal of licenses for the ensuing year shall be treated as applications for new licenses, except that they need not be advertised or, except to the extent of any change in ownership or interested parties, the chief of police need not conduct an investigation. 
(d)  All such reapplications shall be acted on by the city council at its December meeting unless notice is given to any applicant pursuant to section 4-225. 
(e)  Each distilled spirits by the drink license renewal application shall be accompanied by the annual fee as established from time to time by city council resolution. In addition, there shall be a late penalty equal to 100 percent of the annual fee charged for filing a alcoholic beverage renewal application and license fee payment after November 15. If an alcoholic beverage license renewal application and license fee has not been filed with the city clerk's office by December 15, the license shall be declared to be abandoned and any relicensing shall require a new application. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-211, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-228. - Refusal. 
(a)  If an applicant is refused a license for cause as provided for in this division, no application for the same applicant will be accepted for one year from the date of filing such application. 
(b)  Any untrue or misleading information contained or material omission in the application for a license shall be cause for the denial thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-212, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-229. - Terminated upon sale of business. 
    In the event that a licensee sells the business at which a license issued under this division authorizes the sale of distilled spirits for beverage purposes for consumption on the premises, such license shall automatically terminate. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-213, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-230. - Nontransferable. 
(a)  No license granted under this division shall be transferable from one person to another. 
(b)  In the event that the holder of a license on behalf of a corporation or private club ceases to be an officer of such corporation or is no longer associated with such private club, such corporation or private club shall apply within 15 days after such event has occurred for a new license to be issued to the person holding the same office as the original applicant. In such event, a fee as established from time to time by city council resolution shall be paid to the city. 
(c)  No license shall be transferred from one location to another. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-214, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-231. - Display. 
    The city license shall at all times be posted in a conspicuous place within the building; if the license is not so posted, such business shall not be authorized to sell alcoholic beverages until same shall be posted. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-215, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-232. - Grounds for suspension, revocation and probation. 
(a)  In addition to and totally separate and distinct from punishment for violation of this chapter under general penalty section 1-9, any violation of any of the provisions of this division or the failure to comply with any of its requirements shall be grounds for the immediate suspension or revocation of any licenses, regardless of the number of locations involved, and regardless of whether or not the holder of the license knew or contributed to such violation. It is the intent of this section, without limiting the generality of this section, to grant to the city council the right to suspend or revoke any licenses held by a licensee when any violation of this division occurs at any place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold pursuant to a license issued under this division. 
(b)  The following shall be grounds for revocation of suspension of a license: 
(1)  The discovery by the city of any untrue or misleading information or a material omission in the application pursuant to which a license was issued. 
(2)  A conviction, plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a felony or a crime involving indecency or immorality. 
(3)  A conviction, plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any violation of the ordinances of the city relating to the use, sale, manufacture, taxability or possession of any distilled spirits, or violations of any state or federal laws pertaining to the use, sale, manufacture, taxability, transportation or possession of any alcoholic beverages. 
(4)  A violation of any city ordinance or state or federal law controlling the use, sale, manufacture, distribution or possession of alcoholic beverages. The determination of whether any such violation has occurred shall be made by the city council and a conviction or plea in court shall not be necessary in order to suspend or revoke the license. 
(5)  Conduct occurring on the premises detrimental to the welfare of the city or its citizens. 
(6)  Disturbances or altercations resulting in violence occurring on the premises. 
(c)  Any violation of general state law pertaining to alcoholic beverages shall constitute a violation of this division. 
(d)  The city council shall have the full power and authority to revoke, suspend or place on probation any license to sell distilled spirits for a violation of this division or any state or federal law that controls the sale or use of alcoholic beverages. 
(e)  When a licensee, agent or employee of the licensee is judged to have violated this chapter, such licensee's license shall be suspended for a minimum of 30 days. 
(f)  Whenever the state shall revoke, suspend or probate any license to sell any alcoholic beverage at retail, the city license to deal in such product shall thereupon be automatically revoked, suspended or probated accordingly without any action by the city council or any municipal officer. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-216, 1-7-2008) 
Secs. 4-233-4-244. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 4-245. - State law adopted. 
(a)  All provisions of O.C.G.A. title 3 applicable to the sale of distilled spirits are adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth in this section and shall control in case of conflict with this division. 
(b)  Any violation of general state law pertaining to distilled spirits for beverage purposes shall constitute a violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-101, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-246. - Hours and days of operation. 
(a)  No retail dealer shall engage in the sale of distilled spirits for beverage purposes except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight of weekdays and Saturdays; and shall not permit the sale of distilled spirits for beverage purposes on Sundays, Christmas Day or any other day on which state law prohibits the sale of distilled spirits for beverage purposes. Unless prohibited by state law, the sale of distilled spirits for beverage purposes on any city, county, state and/or national election day is hereby permitted. All persons shall be off the premises of retail dealers at 12:00 midnight on weekdays and Saturdays, at which time such retail dealer shall close for business. Lounges, restaurants or other retail dealers where the principal business is the sale of food, and the sale of distilled spirits for beverage purposes is incidental thereto, may remain open during other hours, but shall not sell distilled spirits for beverage purposes except during the time and hours specified in this section. 
(b)  The business hours of wholesale dealers shall be the same hours and days as retail dealers are allowed to engage in the sale of distilled spirits for beverage purposes by the terms of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-104, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-247. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  The distances set out in this section shall be measured in a straight line by the most direct route of travel on the ground. 
(b)  No licenses for retail sales of distilled spirits for beverage purposes for consumption on the premises shall be issued to any retailer under this division where the licensed establishment is located within 100 yards of any church building. 
(c)  No licenses for retail sales of distilled spirits for beverage purposes for consumption on the premises shall be issued to any retailer under this division where the licensed establishment is located within 200 yards of any school building, school grounds or college campus. 
(d)  A license for retail sales of distilled spirits for beverage purposes for consumption on the premises shall be issued only to the applicants that meet the requirements of this division for a hotel, motel, restaurant, private club or for other specific activities outlined in this division. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to grant a license for the sale of any distilled spirits for beverage purposes for consumption on the premises in any existing building or establishment having a history of, or reputation for: prostitution or other sex offense; fighting, shooting, stabbing or other violence; gambling; illegal dealing in alcoholic beverages or drugs, and other violations of the law; provided, however, that such business is at the time of application owned, operated, managed or in any way connected to the person operating such establishment during the time such offenses occurred. The term "by history or reputation" for a particular offense means that a finding has been made in a court of law, by verdict or plea, that within the 12 months immediately preceding the filing of such application, the particular offense has occurred. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful to grant a license for the sale of any distilled spirits for beverage purposes for consumption on the premises in any location at which the operation of the proposed business would be in violation of the city's zoning regulations. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful to grant a license for the sale of any distilled spirits for beverage purposes for consumption on the premises in a location not suitable in the city council's judgment and discretion because of traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood, or by reason of the effect which such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding properties, or on the neighborhood. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful to grant a license for the sale of any distilled spirits for beverage purposes for consumption on the premises in any location within an area where, in the city council's judgment, the number of alcoholic beverage licenses already granted makes it contrary to the public interest or welfare. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful to grant a license for the sale of any distilled spirits for beverage purposes for consumption on the premises in any location at which (and both of the following criteria must be present for a license to be denied based on this subsection): 
(1)  A previous alcoholic beverage license issued to a licensee for the sale of distilled spirits at such location has been revoked or suspended; and 
(2)  In the city council's judgment, the problems that have arisen from the operation of such a license at such location indicate that it is not in the interest of public health, safety, welfare or morals that the sale of alcoholic beverages be permitted at such location. 
(j)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, no applicant for a license under this division shall be denied such a license based on the restrictions set forth in subsection (b), (c) or (d) of this section, and no applicant for renewal of a license under this division shall be denied renewal of such license based on the restrictions set forth in subsections (b), (c) or (d) of this section, if the location for which such applicant seeks a license has been previously granted a license under this division for such location, such license has been in effect until the time of such application, and a private residence, church, school or public park have been established within the prescribed area since such license was granted. This section is intended to permit the continued operation of a business licensed under this division in a location which did not, at the time such licensee's business initially commenced operation, violate the restrictions set forth in this section, if a private residence, church, school or public park subsequently is established near a licensee' s business. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-105, 1-7-2008; Ord. No. 2008-05, § 1(3-105), 5-5-2008) 
Sec. 4-248. - Percentage of food sales requirement. 
(a)  Amount. All holders of licenses for consumption of distilled spirits on the premises shall maintain at least 61 percent of their annual gross income from the sale of food. All alcohol sales, to include beer and wine, shall not exceed 39 percent of total annual gross food and alcohol sales. 
(b)  Applicability. Additionally, all consumption on the premises of license holders as defined in this chapter shall be a post, chapter or club of a nationally chartered veterans or fraternal organization, a hotel, lounge, private club, restaurant, or sports facility as defined in section 4-203. 
(c)  Authority to examine records. Authorized city officials may examine the records of the premises licensed under this subsection at any reasonable time to ascertain that the requirements of this section and other provisions of this chapter are met. 
(d)  Certified public account's statement. Within 120 days after having been issued a consumption on the premises license, the licensee shall submit to the city a statement from a certified public accountant or a registered public accountant that the income requirements set forth in subsection (a) of this section have been met for the first 90 days after the applicant received the license for on the premises consumption. Thereafter at the time of license renewal, each consumption on the premises license holder shall submit to the city an annual statement from a certified public accountant or a registered public accountant that the income requirements set forth in subsection (a) of this section have been met. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-107, 1-7-2008; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 2(3-107), 3-3-2008; Ord. No. 2008-03, § 1(3-107), 4-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-249. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No holder of a license for wholesale or retail sales of distilled spirits for beverage purposes in the city nor any agent or employee of the licensee shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises and violation hereof shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license: 
(1)  Knowingly furnish or cause to be furnished or permit and other person in his employ to serve or furnish distilled spirits for beverage purposes to a minor. 
(2)  Knowingly sell distilled spirits for beverage purposes to any person while such person is in an intoxicated condition. 
(3)  Allow any minor to be in, frequent, or loiter on or within the licensed premises unless: 
a.  Such minor is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian; 
b.  Such minor is an employee; or 
c.  The minor does not sit at a bar or other area designed and used primarily for the serving of alcoholic beverages, but instead sits at a table or in some other area designed and used primarily for the serving of food. 
(4)  Permit any disturbances of the peace or obscenity or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practice on the licensed premises. 
(5)  Sell or offer for sale distilled spirits for beverage purposes by use of vending machines. 
(6)  Sell, offer for sale, posses or permit the consumption on the licensed premises of any kind of distilled spirits for beverage purposes, the sale, possession or consumption of which is not authorized under the license. 
(7)  Receive or cause to be delivered at the licensed premises any distilled spirits for beverage purposes by any means other than by a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesale dealer with a permit and a license from the city to make such deliveries. 
(8)  Permit or allow the consumption of distilled spirits for beverage purposes purchased elsewhere on the licensed premises. 
(9)  Make or allow to be made any false statement on any application, reapplication or other documents required to be furnished by federal, state or local law, regulations or ordinances. 
(10)  Violate, either personally or through an agent or employee, and federal, state or local law, regulation or ordinance, except traffic violations. The determination of whether any such violation has occurred shall be made by the city council and a formal accusation, indictment, charge or conviction by a governmental agency for such offense shall not be necessary in order to suspend or revoke the license. 
(11)  Knowingly permit or allow any person to bring on to the licensed premises a firearm or weapon. 
(12)  Make deliveries of any distilled spirits for beverage purposes beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
(13)  Store any distilled spirits for beverage purposes anywhere other than the premises for which the license is issued. 
(14)  The failure of the license holder or his employee to report promptly to the city police any violation of law or of this chapter, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence, occurring on the premises including, but not limited to, parking lots and parking areas. 
(15)  The failure of the license holder to adequately supervise and monitor the conduct of employees, patrons and others on the premises including, but not limited to, parking lots and parking areas in order to protect the safety and well being of the general public and of those utilizing the premises. 
(16)  Employ minors under 18 years of age on premises where distilled spirits for beverage purposes are sold. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow a minor in his employment to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any distilled spirits for beverage purposes, but only if the minor is under 18 years of age. It is the intention of the city to impose on licensees restrictions concerning employment of minors that are identical to and no more restrictive than the restrictions imposed by state law. 
(17)  Sell distilled spirits for beverage purposes upon the licensed premises on any day, or at any time, when such sale or consumption is prohibited by law. 
(18)  Permit any disturbance of the peace or obscenity or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practice on the licensed premises. Such misconduct shall be immediately reported to the city police department. 
(19)  Allow any other violation of this division to occur. 
(b)  Any alleged violation of this chapter shall be reported by any person to the city manager who shall have the power, in his discretion, to suspend the license for a period not to exceed ten days pending on a hearing before the city council on the question of whether or not the license shall be revoked for cause or suspended pursuant to section 4-225. 
(c)  The city council shall have the right to suspend any distilled spirits for beverage purposes license pending the hearing provided for in section 4-225 where in the judgment of the council, such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare or morals. 
(d)  Any suspension as provided in this division shall be in writing, with the reasons therefor stated and shall be delivered to a license holder or the person in charge of the place of business if the license holder cannot be located. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-103, 1-7-2008; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 1(3-103), 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 4-250. - Advertising signs prohibited. 
    Licensees at their places of business shall not display outside signs in their windows that advertise a brand, product or price relating to distilled spirits. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-102, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-251. - Compliance with health rules required. 
    All retail licensees under this division are hereby required to comply with all rules, regulations and requirements of the county board of health, state board of health and any other state, federal and local public health authorities having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-106, 1-7-2008) 
Secs. 4-252-4-263. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-264. - Display of price. 
    Retailers shall indicate plainly by tags or labels on the bottles or containers or on the shelf immediately below where the containers are placed, or on an exposed sign prominently placed, the price of all alcoholic beverages exposed to public view or offered for sale. 
(Comp. 1976, § 4-118-B; Code 1989, § 3-26; Ord. of 8-4-1986, § 20; Ord. of 2-6-1989) 
State Law reference- Advertisement by alcoholic beverage retailers, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-3; advertisement of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-2-15; advertisement of wine prices, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-25.1. 
Sec. 4-265. - Compliance with health rules required. 
    All retail licensees under this chapter are hereby required to comply with all rules and regulations and requirements of the county board of health, state board of health and any other state, federal and local public health authorities having jurisdiction. 
(Comp. 1976, § 4-118-B; Code 1989, § 3-27; Ord. of 8-4-1986, § 21; Ord. of 2-6-1989) 
Sec. 4-266. - Delivery of alcoholic beverages restricted to licensee's place of business. 
    No retail licensee of the city shall deliver alcoholic beverages at any location other than at the retail licensee's place of business. 
(Comp. 1976, § 4-118-B; Code 1989, § 3-24; Ord. of 8-4-1986, § 18; Ord. of 2-6-1989) 
Sec. 4-267. - Sale to incompetent persons prohibited. 
    No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or furnished to any person who is mentally incompetent. 
(Comp. 1976, § 4-118-B; Code 1989, § 3-24; Ord. of 8-4-1986, § 18; Ord. of 2-6-1989) 
Sec. 4-268. - Open containers prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic beverage from any open container, or to have in his possession any alcoholic beverage in any open container, while on a public street, roadway, boulevard, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way, or in any public or semipublic parking facility or parking lot, within the city, except as expressly allowed pursuant to section 4-269 or section 4-270 of this Code. 
(b)  All persons licensed to sell alcoholic beverages are hereby required to post in a conspicuous location inside the establishment a notice informing patrons that open containers are prohibited on the public streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way or in any public or semipublic parking facility within the city, except as expressly allowed pursuant to section 4-269 or section 4-270 of this Code. The notice shall state substantially as follows: 
NO ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE MAY BE CARRIED IN AN OPEN CONTAINER FROM THESE LICENSED PREMISES. THE CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND THE POSSESSION OF OPEN CONTAINERS ON STREETS, ALLEYS, AND PARKING LOTS IN THE CITY OF HARTWELL IS GENERALLY PROHIBITED. CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND THE POSSESSION OF OPEN CONTAINERS ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS IN THE CITY OF HARTWELL IS PROHIBITED EXCEPT IN SPECIFIC AREAS IN WHICH A LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT HAS OBTAINED A PERMIT TO SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from a place of business operated by a licensee any open container. 
(d)  No person licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, nor the employees or agents of the person shall permit any person to remove any open container from an area where the consumption of alcoholic beverages or the possession of open containers is permitted on the property where the business is located to an area where the consumption or possession is not permitted. 
(Code 1989, § 3-2; Ord. of 2-6-1989; Ord. No. 98-005, § 3-2, 6-1-1998; Ord. No. 2013-1, § 4, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 4-269. - Extension of sales areas; curb sales. 
(a)  Any holder of a Class A license for the sale of malt beverages and wine and any holder of a license for retail sales of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall be authorized to extend the area utilized by such licensee to an adjoining building addition, patio, deck area, sidewalk or other expansion, so long as: 
(1)  The business operation is under the same business management and the licensed area under the control of the licensee in some manner (either through common ownership or lease by the licensee or an entity affiliated with the licensee, in the case of private property, or through proximity to the licensed premises, in the case of a public sidewalk); and 
(2)  Entry of customers into such adjoining building, addition, patio, deck, sidewalk or other expanded area shall monitored or controlled by such licensee (for example, such designated areas may contain a gate or gates for ingress and egress of patrons into the place of business); and 
(3)  With respect to sidewalk areas: 
a.  Use of the sidewalk area shall not block or materially and substantially impede the flow of pedestrian traffic on such sidewalk, considering the actual width of the sidewalk in the vicinity of such area and also considering any other features of the walking surface, such as obstructions or uneven surfaces; 
b.  The licensee shall apply to the city and obtain a permit for the use of such sidewalk; 
c.  The city administrator or his designee shall inspect the application for completeness and, if complete, investigate the circumstances of the proposed use of a sidewalk, and upon completion of the investigation, the city administrator or his designee shall present the application to the city council for consideration, and the city council shall be authorized to deny the permit or to issue the permit subject to such terms and conditions as the city deems in the public interest; 
d.  In the application for such permit, the applicant shall agree to indemnify the city and hold the city harmless from and against any damage to the sidewalk area; 
e.  In the application for such permit, the applicant shall agree to indemnify the city and hold the city harmless from and against any personal injury or property damage to any person arising out of or in connection with the applicant's use of the sidewalk; 
f.  No later than the submission to the city of the application for such permit, the applicant shall obtain liability insurance coverage, in the amount of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and $2,000,000.00 in the aggregate, for such indemnification obligation, for the benefit of the city; 
g.  With the application for such permit, the applicant shall provide to the city a certificate of liability insurance, in a form acceptable to the city manager, confirming and certifying the existence of such liability coverage; and 
h.  Alcoholic beverages shall not be served in glass containers in any such area, but shall instead be served in containers made of plastic or some other similar material that does not pose the same risk of breaking as glass. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell alcoholic or malt beverages on the streets or sidewalks, or elsewhere, outside of the building, premises, or place of business licensed for such sale, unless the sale of alcoholic or malt beverages in such areas is permitted under this section. 
(c)  Businesses with licenses to dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises may serve such beverages only within the confines of the licensed building structure; provided, however, that any business with such license which has an outside designated area on private property or on privately leased public property that is actually and permanently attached to the main building, or on a public sidewalk that the city has granted the licensee a permit to use for the sale of such beverages, may serve alcoholic beverages in the designated area. No bar, however, whether permanent or temporary, may be set up in such outside designated area without prior written approval of the city council. 
(d)  The sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages to persons through windows, doors, or other openings to sidewalks, parking lots, or to any other area outside the licensed premises, except for designated areas described above, is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 5, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 4-270. - Temporary license for bona-fide non-profit civic organization. 
(a)  Upon the filing of an application, in such form as may be required by the city manager, and payment of a fee, which shall be set by resolution of the city council, by a bona-fide non-profit civic organization, the city may issue a permit authorizing the organization to conduct a wine tasting event pursuant to section 4-133 of this Code or to sell malt beverages or wine for consumption only on the premises for a period not to exceed two consecutive days, subject to provisions of this chapter regulating the time for selling such beverages. 
(b)  Each applicant for a permit under this section shall apply to the city administrator for a license by written application on forms approved by the city council. The city administrator or his designee shall inspect the application for completeness and, if complete, shall investigate the circumstances of the proposed wine tasting event or sale of malt beverages or wine, and upon completion of the investigation, shall present the application to the city council for consideration, and the city council shall be authorized to deny the permit or to issue the permit subject to such terms and conditions as the city deems in the public interest. 
(c)  No more than four permits for either one-day or two-day periods may be issued to an organization in any one calendar year pursuant to this section. 
(d)  Permits issued pursuant to this section shall be valid only for the place specified in the permit, and shall be issued only in conjunction with a street festival or other special event sponsored by the applicant or some other entity. The applicant may request permission to conduct a wine tasting event pursuant to section 4-133 of this Code or to sell malt beverages or wine for consumption only on the premises in conjunction with a street festival or other similar special event, or in an outdoor location or venue, which may include city property, such as a city street or public sidewalk, but in any such case, the applicant shall describe in detail the exact hours during which the wine tasting or sale shall occur, shall describe the area in which the wine tasting or sale shall occur, shall describe the purposes of the wine tasting or sale of malt beverages or wine, shall describe the means being utilized to secure or control access to the area in which the wine tasting or sale shall occur, and shall describe how the applicant shall ensure that the applicant and all persons involved in such event shall comply with all laws applicable to the sale of such beverages, and the city shall be authorized to deny the permit or to issue the permit subject to such terms and conditions as the city deems reasonably necessary to ensure such compliance and as the city deems in the public interest. 
(e)  No permit may be issued unless the sale of malt beverages or wine is lawful in the place for which the permit is issued. 
(f)  Any person who dispenses or serves alcoholic beverages pursuant to any such permit shall be a member or volunteer of the applicant. 
(g)  The zoning restrictions and distance restrictions contained in this Code and state law shall apply. 
(h)  The applicant shall provide and include with its application proof that the applicant has such non-profit status and describe the nature of its civic activities. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 5, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 4-271. - Requirements for caterers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on or conduct the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages off-premises and in connection with a catered event or function or to any location not licensed hereunder without first having obtained a caterer's license as provided herein. 
(b)  A caterer may apply for a license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption only on the premises (Class A license or license for retail sales of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises) of events for which such caterer is employed. 
(c)  In order to obtain a caterer's license, the applicant must apply for such license and pay a fee, which shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(d)  Each applicant for a caterer's license under this section shall apply to the city administrator for such license by written application on forms approved by the city council. The city administrator or his designee shall inspect the application for completeness and, if acceptable, shall note on the application the date and exact time of filing. Applications shall be presented and considered by the city council in the order of their filing; provided that no application shall be presented to the city council unless 30 days have elapsed after the date of filing and all necessary investigations have been completed, whichever is later. Upon acceptance of a completed application for a license under this chapter, the city administrator or his designee shall cause the character and reputation of the applicant and all relevant circumstances of the application to be fully investigated. Upon completion of the investigation required in this division, the city administrator shall present the application for a license to the city council for consideration. 
(e)  The applicant shall provide a physical address of the applicant's business, and if such applicant intends to sell alcoholic beverages from time to time at one location owned or controlled by the applicant in the corporate limits of the city, the applicant shall provide the physical address of that location in the application. Due to the nature of the catering business, however, the applicant shall not be required to provide in the application or anticipate all possible locations for all sales, and subject to the conditions and limitations of this section, a licensed caterer may sell alcoholic beverages at other locations while the caterer provides catering services at such location. 
(f)  A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may sell only that type of alcoholic beverage that is authorized by his or her alcoholic beverage license. 
(g)  Any person who dispenses or serves alcoholic beverages at events for which a licensed caterer is employed shall be required to obtain a server's license under article VII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 5, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 4-272. - Rental of licensed premises for private functions. 
(a)  A holder of a Class A license or a holder of a license for retail sales of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall be permitted to rent the licensed premises for private functions which have been scheduled in advance; provided, however, that: 
(1)  The licensee, its agents, managers, and employees, shall retain complete control over the licensed premises and over selling, serving, or furnishing alcoholic beverages during the private function to the same extent required as if the function were open to the public; 
(2)  The licensed premises shall remain open to all agents of the state and the City of Hartwell for law enforcement and inspection purposes during such private functions; and 
(3)  No doors to the licensed premises shall be locked preventing egress or ingress during such functions. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to waive the prohibition governing selling, furnishing, or delivering alcoholic beverages to underage persons by any other person within the licensed premises. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to waive any provisions of this chapter or state law governing the sale of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 5, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 4-273. - Brewpubs. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code is intended or shall be construed to prohibit brewpubs in the corporate limits of the city, provided that any such brewpub shall: 
(1)  Obtain and maintain a state brew pub license; 
(2)  Obtain and maintain a city license to sell only malt beverages on the premises only, or malt beverages and wine on the premises only; and 
(3)  Comply with all terms and conditions of any such state and city license and any and all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(b)  Nothing in this Code is intended or shall be construed to prohibit a brewpub from obtaining a license to sell distilled spirits for beverage purposes for consumption on the premises only, as long as such brewpub complies with all applicable requirements of state law and this Code for the issuance of such licenses. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 5, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 4-274. - Glass containers. 
    No glass bottle, containers or cans may be sold or distributed on any public right-of-way, and no patron may carry a glass bottle, container or can on any public right-of-way during a parade, event, performance or filming. It shall be unlawful for any vendor to sell beverages in glass containers at parades or events. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 5, 10-7-2013) 
Secs. 4-275-4-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITED ACTS INVOLVING UNDERAGE PERSONS 

Sec. 4-281. - Providing alcoholic beverages. 
    Except as otherwise authorized by law, no person knowingly, directly or through another person, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in the person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age. 
(Comp. 1976, § 4-118-B; Code 1989, § 3-24; Ord. of 8-4-1986, § 18; Ord. of 2-6-1989) 
State Law reference- Furnishing alcoholic beverages to minors, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 4-282. - Purchasing alcoholic beverages. 
    No person, knowingly or intentionally, shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person less than 21 years of age. 
(Comp. 1976, § 4-118-B; Code 1989, § 3-24; Ord. of 8-4-1986, § 18; Ord. of 2-6-1989) 
Sec. 4-283. - Purchase and possession of alcoholic beverage by minor. 
    No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or knowingly possess any alcoholic beverage. 
(Comp. 1976, § 4-118-B; Code 1989, § 3-24; Ord. of 8-4-1986, § 18; Ord. of 2-6-1989) 
State Law reference- Unlawful possession by minors of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23.1. 
Sec. 4-284. - Misrepresenting age; false identification. 
    No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverages. 
(Comp. 1976, § 4-118-B; Code 1989, § 3-24; Ord. of 8-4-1986, § 18; Ord. of 2-6-1989) 
Secs. 4-285-4-297. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-298. - Intoxication; consuming alcohol during work. 
    No employees of any business selling alcoholic beverages shall work in the place of business while intoxicated and no employees shall drink alcoholic beverages while working and employed in the business. 
(Comp. 1976, § 4-118-B; Code 1989, § 3-24; Ord. of 8-4-1986, § 18; Ord. of 2-6-1989) 
Secs. 4-299-4-302. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SERVER AND SIMILAR EMPLOYEE LICENSE 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 4-303. - Required. 
(a)  Except as expressly provided in this division, no person shall be employed in a retail establishment licensed under this chapter as a waiter, waitress, bartender, server or other similar employee who serves or sells alcoholic beverages by the drink, nor shall any person sell or serve alcoholic beverages by the drink, unless such person has obtained a server's license in accordance with this division. Except as expressly provided in this division, it shall be unlawful to be employed in a retail establishment that sells alcoholic beverages as a waiter, waitress, server or other similar employee who sells or serves alcoholic beverages by the drink, unless such person has obtained a server's license in accordance with this division. Notwithstanding any provision of this division, however, a person employed solely as a cashier shall not be required to obtain a license under this division in order to accept payment for alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, a person who has not obtained a server's license under this division may be employed in a retail establishment licensed under this chapter as a waiter, waitress, bartender, server or other similar employee who serves or sells alcoholic beverages by the drink, and may sell or serve alcoholic beverages by the drink, but only for a temporary period of 30 calendar days, beginning on the date on which such person's employment commences, and ending on the date which is 30 calendar days after such commencement date, and only if such person satisfies the following criteria and conditions: 
(1)  During the six-month period before the 30-day period commences, the person shall not have previously worked as a server for the retail establishment for whom such employee will work during the 30-day period; 
(2)  The person shall file with the city an application for a server's license under this division no later than ten calendar days after such person commences employment with the retail establishment, and shall diligently prosecute such application to completion, and promptly comply with all of the city's requests for information; 
(3)  The person is qualified, at the time such employment commences and during such employment, to obtain a server's license under this division; 
(4)  If the person previously held a server's license under this division, the person shall not have allowed such license to expire without renewal within the previous 60 calendar days; and 
(5)  The person shall not have violated this chapter during the previous three years. 
If the application is denied before the end of such 30-day period, the 30-day period shall terminate automatically upon such denial. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10, § 1(3-44), 10-6-2008) 
Sec. 4-304. - Duration; expiration. 
    Except for licenses issued in calendar year 2008, all licenses issued under the provisions of this division shall: 
(1)  Have a term of one calendar year; 
(2)  Expire at 12:00 midnight on December 31 of the year in which issued; and 
(3)  Be renewable at the city council's option. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 2, 10-1-2007; Ord. No. 2008-10, § 2(3-45), 10-6-2008) 
Sec. 4-305. - Category. 
(a)  There shall be one category of server's license, which shall authorize the licensee to serve beer and wine or distilled spirits; provided that the licensee is employed by an establishment that has a license to serve the particular type of alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  The city manager shall act upon each application separately. Applications for licenses under this division shall not be presented to the council, unless the applicant appeals, or the city manager desires direction from the council in a particular case. 
(c)  If an application is denied, the applicant may appeal the denial to the council by delivering to the city manager a written request to appeal. The city manager shall then notify the council and request that the appeal be placed on the agenda at the next available regular meeting for which an agenda has not yet been prepared or finalized. At the meeting at which the appeal is to be heard, the council may hear from the applicant and consider such evidence as the council deems appropriate. The council shall also be authorized to impose at the hearing such reasonable rules and procedures as it deems appropriate for consideration of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, § 1(3-46), 6-2-2008) 
Sec. 4-306. - No additional fee required. 
    Licensees under this division shall be required to be employed by a person or establishment that has obtained a beer and wine license under this chapter. No additional license fee shall be required for a server's license. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 2, 10-1-2007; Ord. No. 2007-06, § 1, 1-7-2008; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 2(3-47), 6-2-2008) 
Secs. 4-307-4-330. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Application 

Sec. 4-331. - Required. 
    The applicant for a license under this division shall make a written application under oath on the form as provided by the city manager or his designee. Such application shall be a public record and open to public inspection by any citizen at a reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 2, 10-1-2007; Ord. No. 2007-06, § 2, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-332. - Qualifications. 
(a)  Only natural persons shall be applicants for licenses under this division, and no corporation, limited liability company, limited partnership, general partnership or other corporate entity shall be entitled to obtain a license under this division. 
(b)  All applicants for licenses under this division must attach to their application evidence of their good character. 
(c)  Before applying for a server's license under this division, or no later than 90 days after applying for such license, all applicants for a server's license under this division shall complete a class concerning the serving and sale of alcoholic beverages and complying with the laws and ordinances applicable to the serving and sale of alcoholic beverages. In order for attendance at such class to satisfy this requirement, such class shall be offered by a manufacturer or wholesaler of alcoholic beverages, and shall have been approved by the city manager or his designee. All costs of any such class shall be paid by the applicant or licensed establishment which employs the applicant. Under no circumstances shall the city be required or in any way obligated to pay any such costs. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to grant a server's license to: 
(1)  Anyone who is not permitted to serve alcoholic beverages under state law. 
(2)  A person of unsound mind. 
(3)  A person who is not a citizen of the United States. 
(4)  A person who at the time of the application for renewal of any license would not be eligible for such license upon a first application. 
(5)  A person who has held a previous license that has been revoked for cause within a period of three years immediately prior to the filing of the application. 
(6)  Any person convicted under any federal, state or local law of a misdemeanor involving alcoholic beverages, if such conviction tends to indicate that the applicant will not comply with the laws applicable to sales of alcoholic beverages in performing his duties as a cashier, waiter, waitress or other server of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 2, 10-1-2007; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 3(3-49), 6-2-2008; Ord. No. 2008-10, § 3(3-49(d)), 10-6-2008) 
Sec. 4-333. - Procedure; criteria. 
(a)  All applications presented shall be noted as to the date and exact time of filing and, after filing, such applications shall be presented and considered by the city council in the order of their filing, provided 30 days have elapsed after the date of filing and all necessary investigation has been completed, whichever is later. 
(b)  The application shall be sworn and directed to the city manager who shall inspect the application. The city manager or his designee shall cause the character and reputation of the applicant to be fully investigated. 
(c)  The city manager or his designee shall submit the application within two business days after filing to the police department. The police department shall make an arrest and conviction investigation concerning any applicants under this division and shall submit the results of such investigation to the city manager within seven days of submission. 
(d)  In determining whether or not any server's license applied for under this division shall be granted, in addition to all the other provisions of this chapter, in the public interest and welfare, the following will be considered: 
(1)  The applicant's reputation, character and mental capacity. 
(2)  If applicant is a previous holder of a server's license or a license to sell any alcoholic beverage, whether or not applicant has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such license. 
(3)  If applicant is a previous holder of a server's license or a license to sell any alcoholic beverage, the manner in which applicant conducted the business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
(4)  Whether the person has previously had a server's license or an alcoholic beverage license suspended or revoked. 
(5)  The criminal record of the applicant. 
(6)  Evidence presented to the council for or against that application. 
(e)  All applicants for new licenses shall be passed upon by the city council and its action shall be taken within 60 days from the date of the filing of the application. 
(f)  Any change in the application's contents, which requires investigation by the city manager or city council prior to the issuance of a renewal license, shall be passed upon by the city council within 60 days from the date of filing of the change. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 2, 10-1-2007) 
Sec. 4-334. - Investigation. 
(a)  Applicants, by filing for a server's license, agree to furnish the date, information and records required by this article and also agree to submit under oath to interrogation by the city manager, city attorney and city council as to any facts considered pertinent to the application. Applicants, by filing the application, also agree to produce for oral interrogation by the city manager, city attorney and city council any person requested by the city manager and city council, as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to the granting of the license. Failure to furnish this date, information and records or failure to produce these persons within 30 days from the date of the request by the city shall automatically serve to dismiss with prejudice the application of the applicant failing to furnish the date, information and records or failing to produce these persons. 
(b)  All applications for new servers' licenses, and applications for renewals thereof, shall be investigated by the designee of the city clerk, and no new or renewal license shall be acted upon by the city council or issued by the city clerk until the designee has indicated in writing that in his opinion no violation exists upon the facts as stated and ascertained by such investigation as to any ordinance or law in effect as of the date of the rendering of the opinion. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 2, 10-1-2007) 
Sec. 4-335. - City council action. 
(a)  Before the city council shall deny any application or reapplication for a server's license, or shall revoke or suspend any existing server's license, the applicant or licensee, as the case may be, shall be given notice in writing by the city manager or the city clerk to show cause before the city council at a time and place specified and being not less than three days or more than 45 days from the date of service of the notice, why the application or reapplication for license should not be denied, or why the license should not be revoked or suspended, as the case may be. This notice shall set forth any objections to the application or reapplication and any possible grounds on which a denial of the application or reapplication or a revocation or a suspension of the license may be based as well as the names of any witnesses to be called in support of the denial or revocation. At the appointed time and place the applicant or licensee shall have an opportunity to present evidence, call witnesses, cross examine witnesses, make statements and otherwise show cause, if any exists, why the application or reapplication should not be denied or why the license should not be revoked or suspended. 
(b)  After this hearing, and based upon the evidence presented at this hearing, the city council shall take such action as it, in its judgment and discretion, shall deem warranted under the facts. 
(c)  The hearing provided for in this section need not be at a regular meeting of the city council but may be at such time and place as shall be fixed in the notice. 
(d)  The city council shall have the right to suspend any server's license pending the hearing provided for in this section where in the city council's judgment, such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare or morals of the community. Any such suspension shall not exceed ten days unless the licensee requests a continuance of the hearing before the city council, in which case the suspension will stay in effect until the time of the hearing. 
(e)  Penalties for any violation within a three-year period are as follows: 
(1)  First offense: $50.00 fine. 
(2)  Second offense: suspension of server's license for a period of one month. 
(3)  Third offense: revocation of the server's license. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 2, 10-1-2007) 
Secs. 4-336-4-358. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Enforcement 

Sec. 4-359. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  Any person making a false statement in any application for an server's license, or statement in connection with renewal thereof, shall be guilty of an offense and punished as provided by state law relating to false swearing, and further, a server's license, if previously granted or renewed, may be revoked for the violation. 
(b)  It shall be an offense for any person to give other than the true and correct legal name of the intended licensee. 
(c)  A conviction for a violation of this section shall be punished as provided by general penalty section 1-9, and in his discretion, the municipal court judge may revoke, suspend or probate any server's license for such violation and the administrative hearing officer may revoke, suspend or probate any server's license for such violation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 2, 10-1-2007; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 4(3-53), 6-2-2008) 
Sec. 4-360. - Renewal. 
(a)  All server's licenses are issued only on a calendar-year basis and shall come up for renewal each year following issuance. 
(b)  Each server licensee shall make a written application for renewal by November 15 of each year following issuance. Each licensee shall swear to the truthfulness of such information that is the same as the prior application and shall set forth facts that are different from prior year's application. 
(c)  All applications for renewal of servers' licenses for the ensuing year shall be treated as applications for new servers' licenses, except that that the chief of police need not conduct an investigation. 
(d)  All such reapplications shall be acted on by the city council at the December meeting of the city council unless notice is given to any applicant as provided in this chapter of the council's intent to deny renewal or to suspend or revoke the license. 
(e)  Each server's license renewal application shall be accompanied by the annual fee in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution. In addition, there shall be a late penalty equal to 100 percent of the annual fee charged for filing a server's license renewal application and license fee payment after November 15. If a server's license renewal application and license fee has not been filed with the city clerk's office by December 15, the license shall be declared to be abandoned and any relicensing shall require a new application. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 2, 10-1-2007) 
Sec. 4-361. - Refusal. 
(a)  If an applicant is refused a server's license for cause as provided for in this division no application for the same applicant will be accepted for one year from the date of filing such application. 
(b)  Any untrue or misleading information contained or material omission in the application for a server's license shall be cause for the denial thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 2, 10-1-2007) 
Sec. 4-362. - Nontransferable. 
    No server's license granted under this division shall be transferable from one person to another. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 2, 10-1-2007) 
Sec. 4-363. - Display. 
    The server's license shall at all times be posted in a conspicuous place within the building; if the license is not so posted, such licensee shall not be authorized to sell alcoholic beverages until same shall be posted. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 2, 10-1-2007) 
Sec. 4-364. - Grounds for suspension, revocation and probation. 
    A server's license shall be subject to suspension, probation, revocation and other similar action under the same terms and conditions, and pursuant to the same procedures, as provided in this chapter with regard to licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, § 2, 10-1-2007) 
Secs. 4-365-4-386. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - EXCISE TAXES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 4-387-4-415. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE 

Sec. 4-416. - Levied. 
    There is hereby imposed on malt beverages and wine an excise tax in the maximum amount allowed by law, as now exists or as hereafter amended. 
(Comp. 1976, § 4-118-B; Code 1989, § 3-21; Ord. of 8-4-1986, § 11; Ord. of 2-6-1989) 
State Law reference- Municipal excise tax on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80; municipal excise tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 
Sec. 4-417. - Due date; payment. 
    The tax shall be paid to the city by each wholesale dealer on all malt beverages and wine sold within the city not later than the tenth day of each month, based upon the units of malt beverage and wine sold during the previous calendar month by the wholesalers to retailers in the city. 
(Comp. 1976, § 4-118-B; Code 1989, § 3-21(1); Ord. of 8-4-1986, § 11; Ord. of 2-6-1989) 
Sec. 4-418. - Recordkeeping. 
    The wholesale dealer shall keep true and correct records of all sales and shipments and shall render a sworn statement of the same accompanying the monthly report to the city and the report shall show the exact quantities of malt beverages or wine, by size and type of container, and the amount of excise tax collected. 
(Comp. 1976, § 4-118-B; Code 1989, § 3-21(2); Ord. of 8-4-1986, § 11; Ord. of 2-6-1989) 
Sec. 4-419. - Audits. 
    The city council shall have the right to audit, and to require production of records from each wholesaler supplying retailers in the city, and also from each retailer so supplied. 
(Comp. 1976, § 4-118-B; Code 1989, § 3-21(3); Ord. of 8-4-1986, § 11; Ord. of 2-6-1989) 
Sec. 4-420. - Failure to file; delinquent payment. 
    Failure to make a timely report and remittance of the taxes shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty equal to ten percent of the total amount due, in addition to the amount due; and additionally, if the report is not filed or if the taxes are not remitted and paid within 30 days from the date that the same are due, the city council shall have the right to suspend or revoke any wholesale license, and further to prohibit the wholesaler from making any deliveries of any type whatsoever within the city. 
(Comp. 1976, § 4-118-B; Code 1989, § 3-21(4); Ord. of 8-4-1986, § 11; Ord. of 2-6-1989) 
Sec. 4-421. - Sale without tax payment prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at retail or otherwise within the city any malt beverage or wine on which the tax required in this section has not been paid to the wholesaler, distributor or to the city. 
(Comp. 1976, § 4-118-B; Code 1989, § 3-21(5); Ord. of 8-4-1986, § 11; Ord. of 2-6-1989) 
Secs. 4-422-4-468. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISTILLED SPIRITS BY THE DRINK 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Secs. 4-469-4-515. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Excise Tax 

Sec. 4-516. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agent means that person designated by a licensee in the licensee's application for a permit to sell distilled spirits by the drink in the city. 
    Drink means any distilled spirits not in its original package for consumption on the premises that may or may not be diluted by any other liquid. 
    Licensee means any person who holds a license from the city to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
    Monthly period means the calendar month of the year. 
    Purchase price means the consideration received for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee to the purchaser, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
    Purchaser means any person who orders and gives present or future consideration for any distilled spirits by the drink from a licensee. 
    Tax means the tax imposed by this division. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-300, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-517. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating this subdivision shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in general penalty section 1-9. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this subdivision is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-302, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-518. - Administration. 
(a)  Authority. The city manager or his designee shall administer and enforce this division. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The city manager or his designee shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this subdivision or other laws of the city, state or the constitution of this state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of this subdivision and the collection of the taxes under this subdivision. 
(c)  Recordkeeping. Every licensee for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink to any person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the city manager or his designee may require. 
(d)  Examination of records; audits. The city manager or his designee may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the licensee to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)  Authority to require reports; contents. In the administration of this subdivision, the city manager or his designee may require the filing of reports by any person having in such person's possession or custody information relating to sales of beverages that are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the license division, department of finance, when required and shall set forth the price charged for each sale, the dates of sales and such other information as may be required. 
(f)  Confidentiality. The city manager or his designee or any person having an administrative duty under this subdivision shall not make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty or the amount of source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof set forth or disclosed in any return or permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having such administrative duty under this subdivision, except for judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the tax levied and assessed. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-301, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-519. - Levied. 
    There is imposed and levied in addition to all other taxes imposed by law upon every purchase of distilled spirits by the drink in the city a tax in the amount of three percent of the purchase price. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-303, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-520. - Added to sales price. 
    Licensees shall, as far as practicable, add the amount of the tax imposed under this subdivision to the sales price or charge, which shall be a debt from the purchaser to the licensee until paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. If any licensee shall neglect, fail or refuse to collect such tax upon any, every and all retail sales made by the licensee or the licensee's agents or employees of alcoholic beverages that are subject to the tax imposed under this subdivision, the licensee shall be liable for and shall pay the tax. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-304, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-521. - Sales of distilled spirits itemized separately. 
    Every licensee for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink operating a place of business in the city shall, at the time of collecting for food and drinks served, itemize separately the price of distilled spirits served. If the charges for food and drink are satisfied by credit or deferred payment, the payment of the tax to the licensee may be deferred in a like manner; however, the licensee shall be liable therefor at the time and to the extent that such credits are incurred. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-305, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-522. - Due date. 
    All taxes collected by any licensee or agent under this subdivision shall be due and payable to the mayor or his designee monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period, as defined in section 4-516. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-306, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-523. - Monthly return. 
(a)  Required. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the licensing division of the department of finance in such form as the city manager or his designee may prescribe by every licensee or agent liable for the payment of tax under this subdivision. 
(b)  Contents. All returns shall show: 
(1)  The gross receipts from the sale of distilled spirits by the drink; 
(2)  The amount of tax due for the related period; and 
(3)  Such other information as the city manager or his designee may require. 
(c)  Delivery of return and remittance. The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the net amount of tax due, to the: 
City Manager, City of Hartwell 
P.O. Box 309 
Hartwell, Georgia 30643 
(d)  Collection; reimbursement to licensees. Licensees collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-307, 1-7-2008; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 5(3-307), 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 4-524. - Deficiency determinations-Generally. 
(a)  Recomputation. If the city manager or his designee is not satisfied with the return of the tax levied under this subdivision or the amount of the tax levied under this subdivision required to be paid to the city by any person, the city manager may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within the city manager's possession or that may come into the city manager's possession. More than one deficiency determination may be made on the amount due for any one-month period. 
(b)  Interest. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or any fraction of a month from the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(c)  Offsetting overpayments. In making a determination, the city manager or his designee may offset overpayments, for a period, against underpayments, for another period, against penalties and against the interest on underpayments. 
(d)  Penalty-Negligence or disregarding rules and regulations. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination has been made is due to negligence or disregard of rules and regulations, a penalty of 15 percent of the amount of such deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(e)  Same-Fraud or intent to evade. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination is made is due to fraud or an intent to evade any section of this subdivision or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(f)  Notice. The city manager or his designee shall give to the licensee written notice of the city manager's deficiency determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the licensee at the licensee's address as it appears in the records of the license division, department of finance. For service by mail or any notice required by this subdivision, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States post office. 
(g)  Time limits. Except for a fraud, the intent to evade this subdivision or authorized rules or regulations or the failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period shall last expire. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-308, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-525. - Same-When return not filed. 
(a)  Authority; estimate of gross receipts. If any licensee fails to make a return for the tax levied under this subdivision, the city manager or his designee shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee or, as the case may be, of the amount of the total sales in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the licensee failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information that is or may come into the possession of the city manager or his designee. Upon the basis of this estimate, the city manager or his designee shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid by the city, adding to the sum thus determined a penalty equal to 15 percent thereof. One or more determinations may be made for one or for more than one period. 
(b)  Offsets; interest. In making a determination, the city manager or his designee may offset overpayments for a period or penalties and against the interest on the underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Interest on amount due. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or any fraction of a month from the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(d)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If the failure of any person to file a return is due to fraud or an intent to evade this subdivision or rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount required to be paid by the person, exclusive of penalties, shall be added thereto in addition to the 15 percent penalty provided in section 4-526. 
(e)  Notice. Promptly after making a determination, the city manager or his designee shall give to the person written notice to be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-309, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-526. - Delinquency-Penalties and interest. 
    Any licensee who fails to pay the tax imposed under this subdivision to the city or who fails to pay any amount of such tax required to be collected and paid to the city within the time required shall pay a penalty of 15 percent of the tax or amount of the tax, in addition to the tax or amount of the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as set forth in section 4-525(c). 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-310, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 4-527. - Same-Collection. 
(a)  Action. At any time within three years after any tax levied under this subdivision or any amount of tax required to be collected under this subdivision become due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city manager or his designee may bring an action in the courts of this state, any other state or of the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Successors or assigns of operator to withhold tax from purchase. If any licensee liable for any amount under this subdivision sells or terminates the business, the licensee's successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the license division, department of finance, showing that the amount has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase price as required, the purchaser becomes personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by the purchaser to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within 30 days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, the license division of the department of finance shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchase at the purchaser's address as it appears on the records of the license division, department of finance, of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells the business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event shall last occur. 
(d)  Tax credit; penalty or interest erroneously collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously collected or received by the city under this subdivision, it may be offset as provided in section 4-223(c). If the operator or person determines that such person has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city manager or his designee, such person will have three years from date of payment to file claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts due and payable from the person by whom it was paid or such person's successors or assigns. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3-311, 1-7-2008) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Licensing and registration of animals by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-3; livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; disposal of diseased, disabled or dead animals, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq.; dogs generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1; dangerous dog control, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; vicious dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-40 et seq.; animal protection, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; cruelty to dogs; authorized killing of dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-5; rabies control, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Enforcement. 
    All city police officers shall have, and are hereby declared to have, full authority and power to impound animals, prosecute violations and violators in the municipal court and to otherwise enforce this chapter. 
(Comp. 1976, § 16-204; Code 1989, § 4-21; Ord. of 5-3-1982, § 2; Ord. No. 2001-002, § 1, 3-4-2002) 
Sec. 6-2. - Interfering with, hindering or molesting city agents prohibited. 
    No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest any city agent in the performance of any duty as provided in this chapter. 
(Comp. 1976, § 16-204; Code 1989, § 4-25; Ord. of 5-3-1982, § 6) 
Sec. 6-3. - Unlawful to keep livestock, fowl, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any hog, cow, sheep, goat, pony, mule, horse, fowl, or other livestock, within the city. 
(Comp. 1976, § 16-105; Code 1989, § 4-2; Ord. of 2-3-1975(1)) 
Sec. 6-4. - Slaughter pens and butchering stock prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a slaughter pen or to butcher stock for market within the city. 
(Comp. 1976, § 16-101; Code 1989, § 4-3; Ord. of 5-6-1912(1)) 
Secs. 6-5-6-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BIRD SANCTUARY 

Sec. 6-35. - Designated. 
    The entire area embraced within the corporate city limits is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(Comp. 1976, § 16-104; Code 1989, § 4-1; Ord. of 3-4-1957) 
Sec. 6-36. - Trapping, shooting, etc., birds prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to trap, shoot, hunt, or attempt to hunt or shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests except as provided in this article. 
(Comp. 1976, § 16-104; Code 1989, § 4-1; Ord. of 3-4-1957) 
Sec. 6-37. - Nuisances; abatement. 
(a)  If starlings or similar birds congregate in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property in the city health authorities' opinion, the city health authorities shall meet with the representatives of the clubs that instigated the bird sanctuary or any of them to discuss an appropriate solution. 
(b)  If as a result of the meeting no satisfactory alternative is found to abate the nuisance, the birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by the health authorities under the chief of police's supervision. 
(Comp. 1976, § 16-104; Code 1989, § 4-1; Ord. of 3-4-1957) 
Secs. 6-38-6-62. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ANIMALS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-02, § 1, 2, adopted Oct. 7, 2013, deleted the former Arts. III and IV, §§ 6-63-6-121, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to dogs and Art. IV pertained to impoundment. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete history of former Arts. III and IV. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-63. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandon means the act of placing an animal on public property or within a public building, unattended or uncared for, or on or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of the private property. An animal shall also be considered abandoned when it has been unattended and without adequate food or water for a period in excess of 36 continuous hours regardless of where such animal may be found or kept. 
    Adequate food means sufficient quantity of non-contaminated and nutritionally healthy sustenance that is sufficient to prevent starvation, malnutrition, or risk to the animal's health. Garbage, spoiled, rancid, or contaminated food is not adequate food. 
    Adequate water means sufficient quantity of potable water. 
    Animal control facility means and includes any vehicle, building, structure, pasture, paddock, pond, impoundment area or premises where any animal is kept or housed by the animal control unit for the purpose of impounding or harboring stray, homeless, abandoned, unwanted, neglected or abused animals. 
    Animal control officer means an employee of the county duly empowered under the legal authority of the county to enforce the rules and regulations of this article. 
    Animals running at-large means any animal not under immediate control, not on a leash, not at heel, not beside a competent person, not in a vehicle driven or parked, or not confined within the property limits of the animal's owner. Hunting dogs, tracking dogs, and dogs used for agriculture are under the control of the owner when hunting or used with the landowner's permission. 
    Domestic animal means an animal that, through long association with humans, has been adapted to human living conditions. 
    Impoundment means the act of taking physical possession and control of an animal by an animal control officer or other officer empowered to act by law and transporting it to the animal control facility. 
    Owner means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, and/or other legal entity, who or which owns, possesses, harbors, keeps, feeds, maintains, or knowingly causes or knowingly permits an animal to be harbored or kept, or has an animal in his care, or who permits an animal to remain on or about his premises. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, any adult at whose residence a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal is kept or found shall be presumed to be an owner of such animal and shall have the burden of rebutting such presumption. If an animal has more than one owner, any one of such owners may be prosecuted for violations whether or not any other owners are also prosecuted. 
    Provocation means committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or possessor of the animal, or teasing, tormenting, or abusing the animal or committing or attempting to commit a crime against a person. 
    Vicious dog as defined in O.C.G.A. Title 4, Chapter 8. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, §§ 1, 2, 10-7-2013) 
Secs. 6-64-6-69. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DUTIES, POWERS AND PROHIBITIONS RELATING TO CONTROL OF ANIMALS 

Sec. 6-70. - Rabies vaccinations. 
    The owners and possessors of all animals in the city are hereby required to have such animals vaccinated against rabies by some licensed veterinarian in accordance with the latest "Compendium of Animal Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization" published by the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians. No person shall own, keep or harbor any animal over four months of age within the city unless such animal is vaccinated. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, §§ 1, 2, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 6-71. - Restraint, running at large prohibited; duty of owner or custodian. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or possessor of any animal to fail to keep the animal under restraint or control as provided for in this section for animals covered in subsequent sections. 
(b)  A animal is considered not under restraint or control when it is running at large off the owner's property whether wearing a collar and tag or not. Reasonable care and precautions shall be taken to prevent the animal from leaving the real property limits of its owner, possessor, or custodian. 
(c)  Animals found running at-large or in violation of this section may be immediately impounded by officers of the animal control unit or any police officer. The officers may pursue the animal onto private property to effect capture of such animal. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, §§ 1, 2, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 6-71.5. - Howling or barking declared nuisance. 
(a)  The howling or barking of any dog to such an extent or so continuously as to materially interfere with or affect the health, comfort, peace and quiet of the public is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(b)  Any person who harbors, keeps in such person's possession, or has control of, any dog, the howling or barking of which constitutes a nuisance, and who also fails or refuses to abate such nuisance when requested in writing to do so by the chief of police, shall be charged with a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2015-07, § 1, 1-4-2016) 
Sec. 6-72. - Tethering of animals prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to tether, fasten, chain, tie, restrain, or cause an animal to be fastened, chained, tied or restrained, to houses, trees, fences, garages or other stationary or highly immobile objects by means of a rope, chain, strap or other physical restraint for the purpose of confinement, except in circumstances where all of the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The tethering shall not be for more time than is necessary for the animal owner or custodian to complete a task that requires the animal to be physically restrained for no more than a four-hour period; 
(2)  Any tether used to confine an animal temporarily must not be attached to a choke chain or a pinch/prong chain; 
(3)  The tether shall be at least three times the body length of the animal, measured from the animal's nose to the back of the hindquarters; 
(4)  The tether shall be free from entanglement; 
(5)  The animal must have access to food, water and shelter; and 
(6)  The animal shall be monitored periodically. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, §§ 1, 2, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 6-73. - Abandoned animals. 
(a)  Except as expressly permitted in this section, it shall be unlawful for anyone knowingly to abandon or to aid in the abandonment of any animal. 
(b)  An animal relinquished through written agreement with animal control, licensed rescue group, licensed shelter, licensed veterinarians, individual, or other entity shall not be deemed abandoned but shall be considered relinquished to the entity. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of this section may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or 30 days in jail. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, §§ 1, 2, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 6-74. - Transient animals. 
    Any animal shipped or transported through the city or entering the city only for the purpose of a temporary stay, when such stay shall not exceed 15 days, shall be exempt from collar and tag sections of this article; however, all other provisions of this article are applicable to such transient animals. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, §§ 1, 2, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 6-75. - Public nuisance animal. 
(a)  A public nuisance animal shall mean and include any animal that: 
(1)  Is repeatedly found at-large; 
(2)  Damages the property of anyone other than the owner; 
(3)  Is vicious; 
(4)  Attacks without provocation; or 
(5)  Chases vehicles, bicycles, or people outside of the owner's property. 
(b)  Any such public nuisance animal may be impounded and the owner or possessor charged for a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, §§ 1, 2, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 6-76. - Disposition of impounded animals. 
(a)  Any animal seized or impounded by an animal control officer or any officer empowered to act by law may be temporarily detained at a local animal control facility and/or detained at the animal shelter facility the city is currently in contract with. Custody of seized animals will be transferred from the city to the animal shelter facility the city is currently in contract with upon release of the animal to that animal shelter. 
(b)  For any animal that is impounded for law enforcement purposes, at the owner's request and expense, such impoundment may be at a veterinary or licensed kennel of the owner's choosing as long as the owner cannot cause the animal to be released from the boarding facility without the approval of the prosecuting officer or agent and the owner pays all costs of such impoundment. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, §§ 1, 2, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 6-77. - Tags. 
    It shall be the duty of each animal owner or possessor to provide a collar with an identification tag and current rabies vacation attached for each animal listing the owners name and phone number within 15 days of the owner's or possessor's taking possession of the animal. Such collar shall be on the animal at all times when the animal is not under the immediate control of the owner or possessor of the animal. Animals without tags may be considered in violation of section 6-71. Animals participating in organized or controlled competitions are exempt from this subsection only for the duration of the competition. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, §§ 1, 2, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 6-78. - Interference with animal control officers. 
    It shall be unlawful to interfere with any animal control officer or other officer empowered to act by law, or to take or attempt to take any animal from the county vehicle used to transport the animal, or to take or attempt to take any animal from the animal control facility, or by any other method which would block or hinder any officer referred to in this section from performing his duties. 
    It shall also be unlawful for any person to relocate, alter, or interfere with the operation of any device, trap, equipment or item belonging to the County of Hart's animal control unit. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, §§ 1, 2, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 6-79. - Duty of animal owners to be responsible owners. 
    It shall be the duty of every owner or custodian of any animal to exercise reasonable care and take all necessary steps and precautions to protect other people, property, and animals from injuries or damage which might result from their animal's behavior. If the owner or custodian of any animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible to ensure compliance with all provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, §§ 1, 2, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 6-80. - Removal [of] feral animal packs. 
    The animal control officer has the right to immediately seize and remove all or parts of any feral animal pack for public safety and public health concerns, including rabies, other zoonotic disease epidemics, and certain animal-to-animal diseases as identified by the animal control officer. The method of removal may be in the form of trapping or extermination that shall be designed to be as humane as possible under the circumstances as allowed by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4(f)(2). 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, §§ 1, 2, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 6-81. - Prohibition on feeding stray and feral animals. 
(a)  Feral and stray animals constitute public safety, health, and environmental risks to domesticated animals, wildlife, and persons. Except as expressly permitted by this section, no person shall feed or harbor feral or stray animals. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the general prohibition in subsection (a), a person may feed or harbor a feral or stray animal if such feeding is done as part of a good faith effort to capture the animal humanely for the purpose of surrender to the animal control unit within 48 hours of capture. When feeding for this purpose, the person shall notify the city before feeding starts and utilize proper city-approved capture devices. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, §§ 1, 2, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 6-82. - Permitting animals in heat to roam free. 
    No owner or custodian of any animal in heat shall permit the animal to roam or run free beyond the limits of such owner's or custodian's property. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, §§ 1, 2, 10-7-2013) 
Sec. 6-83. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article, with the exception of section 6-73, shall be first issued a warning for the first offense. Subsequent offenses for failure to comply with any provision of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-13, and in addition may be liable to pay all costs and expenses involved in such case. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, §§ 1, 2, 10-7-2013) 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; standards and requirements for construction, alteration, etc., of buildings and other structures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; building trade contractors, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-1 et seq.; enforcement of adopted codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; state minimum standards codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-21; county building, electrical, and other codes, O.C.G.A. § 36-13-1 et seq.; local government code enforcement boards, O.C.G.A. § 36-74-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, terms used in this chapter shall be defined as set forth in the city zoning regulations (chapter 42), unless otherwise defined by the codes adopted in this chapter. 
(Comp. 1976, § 20-106; Code 1989, § 5-1; Ord. of 8-13-1984, § 5) 
Sec. 8-2. - Fire district established. 
    An official fire district is hereby established, to comprise the following area: 
    All of that area included inside a point of beginning at the center of the intersections of the rights-of-way of Webb Street and West Franklin Street continuing eastward along West Franklin Street and Carolina Street; then north to West Johnson Street and Carolina Street; then east to Carter Street and East Johnson Street; then south to Benson Street and Carter Street; then west on Railroad Street and west on Alvins Alley to the corner of Alvins Alley and Webb Street; thence north to the point of beginning at West Franklin Street and Webb Street. This district boundary may be modified from time to time and shall be further described by maps available to the public and found in the building inspector's office. 
(Comp. 1976, § 20-106; Code 1989, § 5-5; Ord. of 8-13-1984, § 4) 
Sec. 8-3. - Conflicts. 
    In the event of a conflict between the city's technical codes, any provision of this chapter, or any provision of any other chapter of this Code the most stringent standard shall govern. In the event of a conflict between a general and specific provision of the city's technical codes and any provision of this Code, the specific shall prevail over the general. 
(Comp. 1976, §§ 20-106-20-111; Code 1989, § 5-6; Ord. of 8-13-1984, § 9) 
Sec. 8-4. - State minimum standard codes adopted. 
(a)  The city adopts and incorporates by reference as if fully set forth in this section, the following state minimum standard codes, copies of which shall be available in the office of the city clerk and/or the city building official: 
(1)  International Building Code (ICC), 2006 Edition, with Georgia State Amendments, adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs in 2007, 2009 and 2010; 
(2)  National Electrical Code (NFPA), 2011 Edition, with no Georgia State Amendments; 
(3)  International Fuel Gas Code (ICC), 2006 Edition, with Georgia State Amendments, adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs in 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, and 2012; 
(4)  International Mechanical Code (ICC), 2006 Edition, with Georgia State Amendments, adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs in 2007, 2008, 2010, 2011, and 2012, and with Errata to 2007 Amendments; 
(5)  International Plumbing Code (ICC), 2006 Edition, with Georgia State Amendments, adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs in 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2012; 
(6)  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (ICC), 2006 Edition, with Georgia State Amendments, adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs in 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2012; 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code (ICC), 2009 Edition, with Georgia State Supplements and Amendments, adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs in 2011 and 2012; 
(8)  International Fire Code (ICC), 2006 Edition, with Georgia State Amendments, adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs in 2007 and 2010; 
(9)  International Existing Building Code (ICC), 2006 edition, with Georgia State Amendments, adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs in 2009; and 
(10)  International Property Maintenance Code (ICC), 2006 edition, with Georgia State Amendments, adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs in 2009. 
(b)  It is the city's intent at all times to enforce the latest edition of each and every code adopted by the city in this section, as such code may be adopted, amended, revised or supplemented from time to time by the state board of community affairs, and all such amendments and subsequent editions and revisions shall be deemed applicable to and enforceable in the city as notice of the adoption of such amended and revised codes by the state department of community affairs is received by appropriate city officials, and as each such notice is received by city officials, each new code edition, amendment, revision or supplement shall be held to be in full force and effect as if it were the original adopted code described in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 1, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-5. - Building official to determine requirements not covered by codes. 
    Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this Code or other technical codes shall be determined by the building official. 
Secs. 8-6-8-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION I. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-29. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes for Construction as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Hereinafter, the [Georgia] State Minimum Standard Codes for Construction shall be referred to as "the construction codes". 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-30. - Codes to be remedial; designed to secure public interests. 
    These construction codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the following beneficial interests and purposes: 
(1)  The public safety, health, and general welfare through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation; 
(2)  The safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment, including any alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises; and 
(3)  The regulation, installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-31. - Quality control not covered by codes. 
    Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-32. - Disclaimer of liability for permitting and inspections. 
    The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of construction codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the city nor any employee thereof shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-33. - Applicability. 
(a)  General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(b)  Building. The provisions of the International Building Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(c)  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(d)  Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(e)  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related systems, except in one and two family dwellings. 
(f)  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
(g)  Fire prevention. The provisions of the International Fire Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(h)  Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(i)  One- and two-family dwellings. The provisions of the International Residential Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every one- or two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-34. - Federal and state authority. 
    The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-35. - Appendices integral part of codes. 
    Appendices referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-36. - Referenced standards integral part of codes. 
    Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where construction code provisions conflict with a standard, the construction code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-37. - Buildings, structures, etc. to be maintained in safe, sanitary condition. 
    All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the construction codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his/her designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-38. - Unsafe buildings or systems prohibited; abatement. 
    All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-39. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  General. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the construction codes provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. 
(b)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the building official. 
(c)  Special historic buildings. The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-40. - Building official to approve alternate materials and methods. 
    The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Secs. 8-41-8-68. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 8-69. - Established; building official to supervise; personnel qualifications. 
    There is hereby established a department to be called the building department and the person in charge shall be known as the building official or building inspector. The city shall establish the qualifications for the building official and other code enforcement personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-70. - Restrictions on employees. 
    An officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board of adjustment and appeals, established in this article, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work, which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interests of the department. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-71. - Recordkeeping. 
(a)  Required. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(b)  Annual report. The building official shall submit annually, or more frequently, as the building official may elect, a report covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. He may incorporate in said report a summary of the decisions of the board of adjustments and appeals during said year. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-72. - Employees not personally liable; city to defend suits. 
    Any officer or employee, or member of the board of adjustments and appeals, charged with the enforcement of the construction codes, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of the construction codes shall be defended by the governing jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Secs. 8-73-8-102. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING OFFICIAL 

Sec. 8-103. - Authority. 
    The building official, who may also be referred to as the building inspector, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes, which are consistent with their intent and purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-104. - Right of entry. 
(a)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the Construction codes, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Building Official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the Building Official by these construction codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(b)  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the construction codes. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-105. - Stop work orders. 
    Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-106. - Grounds for permit revocation. 
(a)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the construction codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(b)  Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the construction codes. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Secs. 8-107-8-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS 

Sec. 8-126. - Composition; qualifications. 
(a)  Number; qualifications. The board of adjustments and appeals shall consist of a minimum of three members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to property maintenance and who are not employees of the jurisdiction. The code official shall be an ex officio member but shall have no vote on any matter before the board. The board shall be appointed by the city council, and shall serve staggered and overlapping terms. 
(b)  Alternates. The city council shall appoint two or more alternate members who shall be called by the board chairperson to hear appeals during the absence or disqualification of a member. Alternate members shall possess the qualifications required for board membership. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-127. - Personal, professional or financial interest to disqualify member. 
    A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has a personal, professional or financial interest. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-128. - Compensation. 
    Compensation of members shall be determined by law. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-129. - Election of officers. 
(a)  Chairperson. The board shall annually select one of its members to serve as a chairperson. 
(b)  Secretary. The board chairperson shall designate a qualified person to serve as secretary to the board. The secretary shall file a detailed record of all proceedings in the city council's office. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Secs. 8-130-8-156. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - APPEAL PROCEDURE 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 8-157. - Application required; time limit. 
    Any person directly affected by a decision of any code official or a notice or order issued under this Code shall have the right to appeal to the board of adjustments and appeals; provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that: 
(1)  The true intent of this Code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted; 
(2)  The provisions of this Code do not fully apply; or 
(3)  The requirements of this Code are adequately satisfied by other means. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Secs. 8-158-8-182. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Hearing 

Sec. 8-183. - Open to public; quorum of members required. 
    All hearing before the board of adjustments and appeal shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the code official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. A quorum shall consist of not less than two-thirds of the board membership. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-184. - Notice. 
    The board of adjustments and appeals shall meet upon notice from the chairperson, within 20 days of the filing of an appeal or at stated periodic meetings. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-185. - Procedure adopted. 
    The board of adjustments and appeals shall adopt and make available to the public through the secretary procedures under which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with the strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be received. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-186. - Request for postponement. 
    When the full board is not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant's representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Secs. 8-187-8-210. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Board Decision 

Sec. 8-211. - Majority vote needed to modify or reverse code official's decision. 
    The board of adjustments and appeals shall modify or reverse the decision of the code official only by a concurring vote of a majority of the total number of appointed board members. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-212. - Records to be kept; copies. 
    The decision of the board of adjustments and appeals shall be recorded. Copies shall be furnished to the appellant and code official. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-213. - Duty of code official to implement board's decision. 
    The code official shall take immediate action in accordance with the board's decision. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-214. - Right to writ of certiorari. 
    Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. An application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of the chief administrative officer. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-215. - Stays. 
    Appeals of notices and orders (other than imminent danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the board of adjustments and appeals hears the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Secs. 8-216-8-238. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ADMINISTRATIVE SEARCH WARRANTS 

Sec. 8-239. - Definitions. 
    As used in this division, the term "administrative search warrant" means a warrant authorizing a search or inspection of private property located in the corporate city limits where such a search or inspection is one that is necessary for the enforcement of any state law or city ordinance regulating the use, occupancy, maintenance, and condition of buildings, structures, premises and other real property located in the corporate city limits. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 1, 1-7-2008; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-240. - Issuance-Generally. 
(a)  An administrative search warrant may be issued only upon the sworn application of a city officer, charged with the duty of enforcing city ordinances, and engaged in the course of his or her official duties. 
(b)  An administrative search warrant shall not be issued upon the application of a private citizen or for his aid in the enforcement of personal, civil, or property rights. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 1, 1-7-2008; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-241. - Same-Grounds. 
(a)  Only a city municipal court judge shall issue an administrative search warrant. 
(b)  The issuing judge shall issue the administrative search warrant when he or she is satisfied that the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The person seeking the administrative search warrant must establish under oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection which includes that property or that there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of that property; and 
(2)  The issuing judge determines that this article authorizes the issuance of the administrative search warrant. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 1, 1-7-2008; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-242. - Contents. 
    The administrative search warrant shall be validly issued only if it meets the following requirements: 
(1)  Has the required affidavit attached to it; 
(2)  Describes, either directly or by reference to the affidavit, the property upon which the inspection is to occur and is sufficiently accurate that the executor of the warrant and the owner or possessor of the property can reasonably determine from it the property of which the warrant authorizes an inspection; 
(3)  Indicates the conditions, objects, activities, or circumstances that the inspection is intended to check or reveal; 
(4)  Refers, in general terms, to the statutory or regulatory provisions sought to be enforced; and 
(5)  The administrative search warrant states the time and date of issuance. 
Such warrants need not bear the seal of the court or clerk thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 1, 1-7-2008; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-243. - Filing. 
    The administrative search warrant, the complaint on which the warrant is issued, the affidavit supporting the warrant, and the returns shall be filed with the municipal court clerk, or with the court if there is no clerk, at the time the warrant has been executed or has been returned "not executed"; provided, however, the judicial officer shall keep a docket record of all warrants issued by him and upon issuing any warrant he shall immediately record the same, within a reasonable time, on the docket. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 1, 1-7-2008; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-244. - Applicability. 
    An administrative search warrant shall command the officer directed to execute the same to search the place or person particularly described in the warrant. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 1, 1-7-2008; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-245. - Officers authorized to execute. 
    The administrative search warrant shall be issued in duplicate and shall be directed for execution to all city officers, including the city building official and his designee, the city fire official and his or her designee, and all police officers; however, the judicial officer may direct the search warrant to be executed by any officer named specially therein. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 1, 1-7-2008; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-246. - Execution-Generally. 
    The administrative search warrant shall be executed at any reasonable time within ten days from the time of issuance. If the administrative search warrant is executed, the duplicate copy shall be left with any person found at the location searched; or, if no person is available, the copy shall be left in a conspicuous place on the premises searched. Any administrative search warrant not executed within ten days from the time of issuance shall be void and shall be returned to the court of the judicial officer issuing the same as "not executed." 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 1, 1-7-2008; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-247. - Same-Use of force. 
    All necessary and reasonable force may be used to effect an entry into any building or property or part thereof to execute an administrative search warrant if, after verbal notice or an attempt in good faith to give verbal notice by the officer directed to execute the same of his authority and purpose: 
(1)  He is refused admittance; 
(2)  The person within the building or property or part thereof refuses to acknowledge and answer the verbal notice or the presence of the person therein is unknown to the officer; or 
(3)  No person is then occupying the building, property or part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, § 1, 1-7-2008; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Secs. 8-248-8-272. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 8-273. - Criminal. 
    Any person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if he: 
(1)  Violates a provision of the construction codes, or fails to comply therewith, or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof; or 
(2)  Erects, constructs, alters, installs, demolishes or moves any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-274. - Continuing violations. 
    Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any provision of the construction codes is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Secs. 8-275-8-296. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMIT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-297. - Required; exceptions. 
(a)  Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
(b)  Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
(1)  Any portable heating appliance; 
(2)  Any portable ventilation equipment; 
(3)  Any portable cooling unit; 
(4)  Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by the construction codes; 
(5)  Replacements of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
(6)  Any portable evaporative cooler; 
(7)  Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten lb.(4.54 kg.) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-298. - Work authorized. 
    A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-299. - Not required for minor repairs. 
    Ordinary minor repairs may be made with building official's approval without a permit; provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-300. - Application-Contents. 
    Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The owner or his authorized agent shall sign the application. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-301. - Same-Time limits; extensions. 
    An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-302. - Posting. 
    Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such a position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. The permit holder shall maintain the permit card in such a position until the building official issues the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Secs. 8-303-8-322. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DRAWINGS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 8-323. - Requirements. 
    When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information shall be specific, and the construction codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-324. - Additional data; seal. 
    The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-325. - Design professional required; exceptions. 
    The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
(1)  All Group A, E, and I occupancies. 
(2)  Buildings and structures three stories or more in height. 
(3)  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 m^2) or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
(b)  Single family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-326. - Structural and fire resistance integrity. 
    Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-327. - Site drawings. 
    Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-328. - Additional requirements for hazardous occupancies. 
    The building official may require the following additional information for hazardous occupancies: 
(1)  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
(2)  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Secs. 8-329-8-359. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EXAMINATION OF DOCUMENTS 

Sec. 8-360. - Plan review. 
    The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-361. - Affidavits. 
(a)  The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the construction codes. For buildings and structures the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the construction codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. 
(b)  The building official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit; provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes. 
(c)  Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the construction codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Secs. 8-362-8-380. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ISSUANCE 

Sec. 8-381. - Satisfaction of building official required. 
    The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-382. - Refusal. 
    If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the construction codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-383. - Special foundation permits. 
    When application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit proceeds at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the construction codes. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-384. - Public right-of-way. 
    A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the director of public works for the lines of the public street on which he/she proposes to build, erect or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for in chapter 22 of the standard building code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Secs. 8-385-8-411. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CONDITIONS 

Sec. 8-412. - Duty of contractor to comply with codes and show proof of license. 
    It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-413. - Intent. 
    A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the construction codes. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the worked is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-414. - Issued on basis of affidavit. 
    Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-415. - Plans. 
    When the building official issues a permit, he/she shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "Reviewed for Code Compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his/her authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-416. - Duration of building permits. 
(a)  A building permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance, and reapplication for a new building permit and all ancillary permits shall be required after the expiration of the one-year period, except for the following limitations: 
(1)  Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by the permit is commenced within six months after its issuance. 
(2)  Every permit issued shall become invalid if the work authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months, after the time the worked is commenced. 
(3)  If a required foundation inspection has not been completed during the first six months, the building permit shall stand revoked. 
(4)  Final inspection must be completed within one year from the date of issuance or the building permit shall stand revoked. 
(b)  One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
(Comp. 1976, § 20-106; Code 1989, § 5-7; Ord. of 8-13-1984, § 6; Ord. of 10-7-1991; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Secs. 8-417-8-445. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - FEES 

Sec. 8-446. - Required. 
    A permit shall not be issued until the fees as prescribed from time to time by city council resolution have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, etc. has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-447. - Penalty for work commenced before permit issued. 
    Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing, etc. system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-448. - Recordkeeping. 
    The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-449. - Paid at time of application; schedule established. 
    On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing such application, in accordance with the fee schedule established by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-450. - Valuations. 
    If, in the building official's opinion, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Secs. 8-451-8-468. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 8-469. - Existing buildings. 
    Before issuing a permit the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-470. - Manufacturers and fabricators. 
    When deemed necessary by the building official he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-471. - Use of service permitted. 
    The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by this article. He may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he/she is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the construction codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-472. - Prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. 
    The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-473. - Required. 
    The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical codes: 
(1)  Building. 
a.  Foundation. The foundation inspection is to be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. 
b.  Frame. The frame inspection is to be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place, all concealing wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. 
c.  Final. The final inspection is to be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
(2)  Electrical. 
a.  Underground. The underground inspection is to be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in. The rough-in inspection is to be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final. The final inspection is to be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(3)  Plumbing. 
a.  Underground. The underground inspection is to be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in. The rough-in inspection is to be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to this installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final. The final inspection is to be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
Note: See section 311 of the standard plumbing code for required tests. 
(4)  Mechanical. 
a.  Underground. The underground inspection is to be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in. The rough-in inspection is to be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final. The final inspection is to be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(5)  Gas. 
a.  Rough piping. The rough piping inspection is to be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
b.  Final piping. The final piping inspection is to be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
c.  Final. The final inspection is to be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to insure compliance with all the requirements of the construction codes and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
(6)  Energy. 
a.  Foundation. The foundation inspection shall be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
b.  Frame. The frame inspection is to be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
c.  Final. The final inspection is to be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-474. - Written release required. 
    Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-475. - Covering reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation and service systems. 
    Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, electrical and mechanical work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-476. - Plaster fire protection. 
    In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Secs. 8-477-8-505. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CERTIFICATES 

Sec. 8-506. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
(b)  Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the construction codes. 
(c)  A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building, which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
(d)  For any existing building, a person may apply to the building official to obtain a certificate of occupancy and supply the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the construction codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the building official's opinion, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-507. - Certificate of completion. 
    Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Secs. 8-508-8-536. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CONNECTIONS, FLOOR LOADS AND TESTS 

Sec. 8-537. - Service utilities. 
(a)  Permanent connection. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
(b)  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Authority to disconnect. The building official shall have the power to authorized disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the construction codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-538. - Discontinuance of city services to violator. 
(a)  In the event that the building inspector or other inspectors duly appointed by the governing body shall determine that there is a violation of the city's technical codes or of this Code of Ordinances, the inspector shall give written notice to the person in possession of the premises in violation or, if there is no person in possession of the premises, then the notice shall be affixed to the front of the premises near the main entrance. 
(b)  Five days from the giving or posting of notice, and if the violation has not been corrected within the five days, the building inspector or other inspectors may, in addition to other remedies, refuse city utility services until the violation has been corrected. The city services withheld shall be only those directly related to the system that is in violation and necessary to ensure correction of the violation. 
(Comp. 1976, § 20-105; Code 1989, § 5-3; Ord. of 8-13-1984, § 2; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-539. - Posting floor loads. 
(a)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose, which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(b)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(c)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 8-540. - Tests. 
    The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his/her agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 11-5-2012) 
Chapter 10 - BUSINESS REGULATION AND TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Professions and businesses, O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrative fee means the component of the occupation tax that approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
    Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax or state income tax from the individual's compensation or whose employer issues to the individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2, but not a form IRS 1099. 
    Insurer means a company that is authorized to transact business in a class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
    Location or office. 
(1)  The term "location or office" includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession or occupation is conducted. 
(2)  The term "location or office" does not include: 
a.  A temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project; or 
b.  A vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession. 
    Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business and enacted by a local government as a revenue-raising article for the city. 
    Occupation tax certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of the occupation tax and administrative fee. 
    Practitioners of professions and occupations. 
(1)  The term "practitioners of professions and occupations" means those individuals listed in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(b)(1) through (31) and O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (22). 
(2)  The term "practitioners of professions and occupations" does not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if the business pays an occupation tax. 
(Code 1989, § 11-1; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1) 
Sec. 10-2. - Ready-mix concrete plants prohibited. 
    No ready-mix concrete plant shall be operated within the city. 
(Comp. 1976, § 19-104; Code 1989, § 11-21; Ord. of 11-6-1978) 
Secs. 10-3-10-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAX 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-23. - Administrative fee. 
    A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution is required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial registration and reopening of any closed accounts. 
(Code 1989, § 11-2; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1) 
Sec. 10-24. - Certificate required; display. 
    Every business, practitioner and location subject to payment of the occupation tax levied by this article shall display a current occupation tax certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which the certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the occupation tax certificate shall be shown to any police officer upon request. 
(Code 1989, § 11-4; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1) 
Sec. 10-25. - Levied. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, an occupation tax based upon the number of employees in the state is levied upon businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate city limits and, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, upon out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the city but with employees or agents engaging in substantial efforts to solicit business or serve customers or clients in the state in accordance with the following schedule: 
Number 
of Employees Fee 1-4 $50.00 5-9 $75.00 10-14 $100.00 15-20 $150.00 Over 20 $200.00  
(Code 1989, § 11-3; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1; Ord. No. 2008-11, § 2, 10-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-26. - For revenue purposes only. 
    The occupation tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any profession, trade or calling. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 3, 10-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-27. - Compliance with article not precondition to practice of profession licensed by state. 
    Compliance with this article shall not be a precondition to the practice of any profession listed in this article or licensed by the state. The sole purpose for the imposition of all fines, penalties and interest provided in this article is to support and enhance the collection of the taxes levied by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 3, 10-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-28. - Responsibility of taxpayer to notify city of status as practitioner of state-licensed profession. 
    It shall be the taxpayer's responsibility to inform the city of his claim of entitlement to be treated as a practitioner of a profession under state law where the interpretation of this article in such a manner would entitle such taxpayer to a different application of this article or rules and regulations promulgated by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 3, 10-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-29. - Limitations. 
(a)  One location or practitioner. The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupation tax for each location of a business or practitioner. 
(b)  Proof of payment to another local government. A business or practitioner which is subject to an occupation tax by another local government and claiming an exemption from or limitation to the occupation tax imposed by this article shall submit documentation as to current payment of the occupation tax to the other local government and the basis of the tax. 
(c)  Exemption. If a business or practitioner with no location or office in the state provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state that purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sales or services in this state, the business or practitioner shall be exempt from this occupation tax. 
(Code 1989, § 11-3; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1) 
Sec. 10-30. - Businesses-Not located in state. 
    A business or practitioner with no location or office in the state that is not exempt under the provisions of this article shall only be required to pay occupation tax to the local government in the state where the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by the business or practitioner. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of the applicability of this subsection. 
(Code 1989, § 11-3; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1) 
Sec. 10-31. - Same-Located within and outside the city. 
(a)  A business or practitioner that has locations in the state subject to the occupation tax by more than one local government in the state shall only be subject to occupation tax by the city for the number of employees who are employed within the corporate city limits. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of current payment of the occupation tax of the other local governments. 
(b)  If an employee works for the same business or practitioner in more than one municipal corporation or county and the business or practitioner submits proof of this, the employee shall be counted as an employee in the city only if the city is the jurisdiction where the employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year. 
(Code 1989, § 11-3; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1) 
Sec. 10-32. - Proration. 
    If a business or practitioner commences business in the city on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The administrative fee shall not be reduced. 
(Code 1989, § 11-3; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1) 
Sec. 10-33. - Estimating number of employees. 
(a)  Return required. If a business or practitioner does not know how many employees who are the basis of this occupation tax will be employed by the business or practitioner during the current calendar year, the business or practitioner shall file a return estimating the number of employees that are the basis of this occupation tax. 
(b)  Amending return. If the estimate is not accurate, then no later than November 30 the business or practitioner shall file an amended return indicating the actual number of employees during the previous calendar year. 
(c)  Overpayments; offsets. Any overpayment of the occupation tax may be credited to the business' or practitioner's account for future tax liability, offset against other amounts due and owing to the city for any reason or paid to the business or practitioner at the city clerk's discretion. 
(Code 1989, § 11-3; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1) 
Sec. 10-34. - Real estate brokers subject to tax if principal office located within city. 
    Real estate brokers shall be subject to occupation tax pursuant to this article only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the city. 
(Code 1989, § 11-3; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1) 
Sec. 10-35. - Elections by practitioners of professions and occupations. 
    Practitioners of professions and occupations shall pay the occupation tax in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution. Upon filing the first occupational tax return with the city, the practitioner shall elect a method of taxation. The election shall be changed for subsequent calendar years only by a written request filed by the practitioner on or before February 1 of the year in which the election is to be changed. 
(Code 1989, § 11-5; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1) 
Sec. 10-36. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No occupation tax shall be levied on the following: 
(1)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state; 
(2)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
(3)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.; 
(4)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including, any agribusiness; 
(5)  Nonprofit, agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105; 
(6)  Motor common carriers pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15; 
(7)  Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed or cottonseed meal or hulls in carload lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355; 
(8)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356, for persons selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock, including animal products raised in the state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is made within 90 days of the introduction of the product into the city; 
(9)  Depository institutions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; or 
(10)  Any business where the levying of the occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the state or United States. 
(b)  The exemptions and limitations contained in this article shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way any franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes allowed by law. 
(Code 1989, § 11-6; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1) 
Sec. 10-37. - Evidence of state registration required. 
    Each person who is licensed under O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq. by the examining boards of the secretary of state's office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before any city occupation tax certificate may be issued. 
(Code 1989, § 11-7; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1) 
Sec. 10-38. - When evidence of qualification applicable. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of an occupation tax certificate, show evidence of the qualification. 
(b)  Any business required to submit an annual application for the continuance of the business shall do so before the registration is issued. 
(Code 1989, § 11-8; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1) 
Sec. 10-39. - Filing returns; other information required. 
(a)  On or before November 30 of each year, an individual, business or practitioner subject to the occupation tax article shall file with the city clerk on a form approved by and available from the city a signed return attesting to the number of employees of the business or practitioner during the calendar year. 
(b)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners doing business in the city shall submit to the city clerk or make available within 30 days the information as may be required or requested by the city to determine the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or facilitate levying or collection of the occupation tax. 
(Code 1989, § 11-9; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1) 
Sec. 10-40. - Confidentiality required; exceptions. 
    Information provided by a business or practitioner to the city for the purpose of determining the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or levying or collecting the occupation tax is confidential and exempt from disclosure under O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. The information may be provided to the governing authority of another local government: 
(1)  For occupation tax purposes; 
(2)  Pursuant to a court order; 
(3)  For the purpose of collecting the occupation tax; or 
(4)  For any prosecution for failing to pay the occupation tax. 
(Code 1989, § 11-10; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1) 
Sec. 10-41. - Date due; late payment penalty. 
(a)  Any occupation tax due under this article shall be due and payable annually on January 1 of each year. In the event that any person commences business in the city after January 1 in any year, the tax shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business. 
(b)  Any individual, business or practitioner subject to any occupation tax under this article that is unpaid for 90 days after the date on which the payment was due shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the tax or fee due. 
(Code 1989, § 11-11; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1) 
Sec. 10-42. - City clerk to enforce article; interest; liens. 
(a)  It is the city clerk's duty to administer and enforce the provisions of this article, to perform all functions necessary to administer and enforce this article and to summon violators of this article to appear before the municipal court. The city clerk may issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. 
(b)  The city clerk shall issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. 
(c)  The executions shall bear interest at the rate authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40 or, if the statute should be repealed, at the rate of one percent per month. The lien shall cover the property of the individual, business or practitioner liable for the payment of the delinquent occupation tax and become fixed as of the date and time the occupation tax became delinquent. 
(d)  The execution shall be levied by the city clerk upon property of the delinquent taxpayer or fee payer located in the city and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalty, interest and costs. 
(e)  All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by this Code, the city Charter and state law. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit or illegality of the tax or otherwise as provided by the city Charter and state law in regard to tax executions. 
(f)  When a nulla bona entry has been entered upon an execution, the person against whom the entry is made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the nulla bona entry has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due to the person as if the person had never defaulted in the payment of the tax. 
(g)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail to pay any occupation tax charged pursuant to this article shall not be subject to the general penalties set out in section 1-9, but shall be subject only to such penalties as are set out in this article. Notwithstanding any provision of this Code, however, individuals, businesses and practitioners who are not attorneys may be summoned to the municipal court in an enforcement proceeding for failure to pay the occupation tax, and ordered to pay such tax and a civil fine in an amount to be set by the municipal court, in the municipal court's discretion, but not to exceed $500.00, and any such order may be enforced through the municipal court's contempt powers. 
(h)  Except for attorneys, individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail to make a timely or truthful tax return or make available truthful and accurate information the city requests or requires for determining the applicability or amount of the occupation tax or for levying or collecting such occupation tax, shall be subject to suspension of the right to conduct business. 
(i)  All persons subject to the occupation tax imposed by this article shall be required to file for and pay the tax. For failure to do so, any officers or agents soliciting for or obtaining business for the person, business or practitioner shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons, businesses or practitioners who fail to make a return or pay the applicable occupation tax. 
(Code 1989, § 11-11; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1; Ord. No. 2008-11, § 4, 10-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-43. - Applicability to attorneys. 
    Notwithstanding any language to the contrary in this section or any other section of this article: 
(1)  Attorneys shall be subject only to the penalties and sanctions set forth in division 2 of this article; 
(2)  The failure of an attorney to pay an occupational tax or to file with the city any return or other document which an individual, business or practitioner generally may be required to file in connection with the levy, assessment, collection and administration of the occupation tax shall not be cause for the suspension of the right to practice law in the city; 
(3)  An attorney shall not be summoned to appear before the municipal court for the failure to pay any tax levied by this article; 
(4)  The use of tax executions and the reporting of any alleged misrepresentations as set forth in section 10-82 shall be the sole mechanism for enforcement of the occupation tax levied against attorneys; and 
(5)  The entry of a nulla bona shall not be cause for the suspension of an attorney's right to collect fees or charges for services rendered. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 5, 10-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-44. - Information to be provided to the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
(a)  The City of Hartwell, Georgia, shall participate in the Georgia Department of Revenue's program to verify that businesses paying occupation taxes and regulatory fees are also paying their state and local sales tax. 
(b)  Upon adoption of the resolution from which this section derives, any person who performs any business, occupation or profession subject to an occupation tax or regulatory fee under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. shall be required to provide the city the following information when paying such occupation tax or regulatory fee: 
(1)  The legal name of the business; 
(2)  Any associated trade names for the business; 
(3)  The mailing address for the business; 
(4)  The actual physical address of each location of the business, if it is different than the mailing address; 
(5)  The North American Industry Classification System Code (NAICS) applicable to such business; and 
(6)  The sales and use tax identification number assigned to the business by the Georgia Department of Revenue, if the business is required by law to have such a number. 
(c)  The information obtained pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be provided to the Georgia Department of Revenue. If the person refuses or fails to provide the required information, the city shall notify the Georgia Department of Revenue of this fact. 
(d)  The city shall provide written notice to all persons subject to the city's occupation taxes or regulatory fees that: 
(1)  The information obtained pursuant to subsection (a) of this section will be provided to the Georgia Department of Revenue; and 
(2)  If the person refuses or fails to provide the required information, the city will notify the Georgia Department of Revenue of this fact. 
(e)  Within 30 days after receiving the payment of occupation taxes or regulatory fees under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-20, the city shall electronically submit the information received from each business to the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
(Res. No. 02-07-11, §§ 1-5, 2-7-2011) 
Secs. 10-45-10-74. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ATTORNEYS 

Sec. 10-75. - Definitions. 
    As used in this division, the terms "lawyer," "lawyers," "attorney" and "attorneys" mean an attorney at law, licensed by the State Bar of Georgia, and actively engaged in the practice of law. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 6(11-20), 10-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-76. - Conflicts. 
(a)  For all years including and after the calendar year 2008, this division shall apply to the occupation tax imposed on attorneys engaged in the practice of law in the city's jurisdiction. Where any part of division 1 of this article is in conflict with the language of this division, the more specific language of this division shall control. 
(b)  As of the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, an occupation tax is imposed on the professional classification of lawyers for income earned within the city's jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 6(11-21), 10-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-77. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
    The occupation tax levied in this division is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. Compliance with this article shall not be a precondition to the practice of any profession licensed by the state. The sole purpose for the imposition of all fines, penalties and interest provided by this article is to support and enhance the collection of the taxes levied by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 6(11-22), 10-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-78. - Attorneys not required to register or obtain certificates. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any language to the contrary elsewhere in this article, an attorney shall not be required to register with the city. Attorneys may be requested to provide certain information at the time of the initial payment of the tax for the purpose of the orderly administration of the business tax ordinance and the collection of the taxes levied by this article. Information reported with any occupation tax payment may be retained by the city and used for those purposes allowed by applicable law. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any language to the contrary elsewhere in this article, an attorney shall not be required to obtain, display or maintain any city-issued certificate showing that any payment or information has been submitted to the city. 
(c)  A refusal to submit a notarized affidavit or other written information stating whether a person engages in the practice of law at a particular location or stating the dates of operation at a location shall not be a violation of this article and shall not prevent an attorney from practicing law in the city. The city clerk shall document this refusal for use in any later proceeding. Where an attorney fails or refuses to provide information as to the location where he may be served with notices or citations issued in support of the enforcement of this article, the city shall direct the notices or citations to the address listed with the State Bar of Georgia and shall consider the failure or refusal of the attorney to provide current address information to be consent to this method of service. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 6(11-23), 10-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-79. - Calculation of tax amount. 
    An attorney who practices law in the city's jurisdiction shall at his option have his tax rate, but not the time of payment, determined in the manner set forth in section 10-25 or 10-35. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 6(11-24), 10-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-80. - Tax due date; delinquency; interest and penalties. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any language to the contrary elsewhere in this article, an attorney shall not be required to pay the occupation tax on the income generated from the practice of law in any calendar year beginning with and including the year 2008 until April 1 of the year following. The tax may be paid in person at city hall or by mailing the tax to the city. Any tax payment made by mail shall include the name and address of the person or law firm paying the tax and the name of each attorney whose tax is being paid, so that the city may process the payment. An attorney who pays the occupation tax on his own behalf shall include the name of the law firm with which he practices, if any. Any tax paid pursuant to the option of section 10-25 shall include a written submission containing sufficient information to enable the city to determine the accuracy of the taxpayer's information. 
(b)  Taxes due from attorneys shall not be considered delinquent until June 1. An attorney who does not pay the tax prior to June 1 shall incur a penalty of ten percent of the tax due. Any taxes not paid by the due date shall accrue interest at the rate of 11/2 percent per month from June 1 until the date such taxes are paid. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 6(11-25), 10-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-81. - Billing. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any language to the contrary elsewhere in this article, the city clerk may choose to send bills to attorneys who list their address with the State Bar of Georgia as being located within the city, including those attorneys who list only post office boxes as their addresses. 
(b)  An attorney who prepares and signs a notarized affidavit that they did not practice law within the city's jurisdiction during some part of the tax year for which the tax bill was generated may have their bill adjusted for the time period stated in the affidavit when such attorney did not maintain an office within the city's jurisdiction and/or states such other reasons why the occupation tax should be adjusted. Such adjustment shall not be made for those attorneys who elect to pay the $100.00 per practitioner fee as set forth in section 10-35 unless the affidavit states that the attorney did not practice law in the city's jurisdiction at any time during the year for which the tax bill was generated. The city clerk is authorized to inquire whether such affidavit matches the information maintained by the State Bar of Georgia in connection with the directives of State Bar Rule 1-207 and/or to take such other steps as deemed necessary to determine the accuracy of the affidavit. The submission of an affidavit requesting adjustment shall not act to prevent the imposition of penalties and interest should the city clerk deny the request for adjustment. 
(c)  The city clerk's option to send bills shall not relieve attorneys from the obligation to pay any tax due for any calendar year including 2008 by April 1 of the following year. 
(d)  The city clerk may include in any bills the unpaid tax balance from other years, including all fees and penalties and the amount of interest, which has accrued on any unpaid tax liability. The city clerk's failure to list any unpaid balance on any bill shall not operate to relieve the taxpayer from liability for any balance due. 
(e)  It shall be a violation of this section for any attorney willfully and intentionally to misrepresent a material fact in an affidavit to avoid the payment of the occupation tax imposed by this division, and the sole enforcement action to be taken is set forth as follows: When the city clerk has reason to believe that an attorney has willfully and intentionally misrepresented a material fact in any affidavit submitted to the city for the purposes of avoiding full payment of the occupation tax, he shall consult with the city attorney to determine whether such conduct should be referred to the State Bar of Georgia for investigation as to whether a violation of the Georgia Rules of Professional Conduct has occurred. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 6(11-26), 10-6-2008) 
Sec. 10-82. - Tax execution imposed for failure to pay the occupation tax. 
(a)  An attorney required to pay the occupation tax, and who fails to do so in the manner provided by this article, shall be liable to have the tax and any penalties and interest collected by the issuance of execution by the city clerk, ex officio marshal or deputy pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-26. Further proceedings concerning the execution procedure employed in the enforcement of this section shall be as provided by state law. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any language to the contrary in this section or any other section of this article: 
(1)  Attorneys shall be subject only to the penalties and sanctions set forth in this division; 
(2)  The failure of an attorney to pay an occupational tax or to file with the city any return or other document which an individual, business or practitioner generally may be required to file in connection with the levy, assessment, collection and administration of the occupation tax shall not be cause for the suspension of the right to practice law in the city; 
(3)  An attorney shall not be summoned to appear before the municipal court for the failure to pay any tax levied by this article; 
(4)  The use of tax executions and the reporting of any alleged misrepresentations as set forth in this section shall be the sole mechanism for enforcement of the occupation tax levied against attorneys; and 
(5)  The entry of a nulla bona shall not be cause for the suspension of an attorney's right to collect fees or charges for services rendered. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 6(11-27), 10-6-2008) 
Secs. 10-83-10-107. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INSURANCE COMPANIES 

Sec. 10-108. - Annual license fee-Required. 
    There is hereby levied for each year an annual license fee upon the following insurers, in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution: 
(1)  Upon each insurance company doing business within the city; 
(2)  For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by subsection (c) of this section, operating on behalf of the insurers within the city; 
(3)  For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee under this article, operated and maintained by a business organization engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with the loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes an application for insurance through a licensed agent of a life insurer for life insurance; and 
(4)  With respect to independent agencies and brokers, for each separate business location from which a life insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by this section per location within the city. 
(Comp. 1976, § 3-104-A; Code 1989, §§ 11-13-11-15; Ord. of 11-7-1983(5), §§ 1-3; Ord. of 9-7-1993) 
Sec. 10-109. - Same-Due date. 
    License fees imposed in this article shall be due and payable on January 15 of each year. 
(Comp. 1976, § 3-104; Code 1989, § 11-18; Ord. of 11-7-1983, § 6) 
Sec. 10-110. - Gross premiums tax levied. 
(a)  There is hereby levied for each year an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums on each life insurance company doing business within the city in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. As used in this subsection, the term "gross direct premiums" means gross direct premiums as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The tax does not apply to annuity considerations. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed in the city fee schedule. 
(b)  There is hereby levied for each year an annual tax upon each insurance company, other than life insurance companies, doing business within the city in an amount equal to 21/2 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. As used in this subsection, the term "gross direct premiums" means gross direct premiums as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Comp. 1976, § 3-104-A; Code 1989, §§ 11-16, 11-17; Ord. of 11-7-1983, §§ 4, 5; Ord. of 9-7-1993) 
Secs. 10-111-10-133. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 10-134. - Annual business license tax levied. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for each year an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations, at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of the institutions. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "gross receipts" means gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the minimum amount of the business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this section shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Comp. 1976, § 3-105-A; Code 1989, § 11-19; Ord. of 11-7-1983(1), § 1) 
Sec. 10-135. - Return required; payment due date. 
(a)  Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which the gross receipts are measured. 
(b)  The returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). 
(c)  The tax assessed in this section shall be calculated and collected based upon the information provided in the return. 
(d)  The due date of the taxes shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Comp. 1976, § 3-105-A; Code 1989, § 11-20; Ord. of 11-7-1983(1), § 2) 
Secs. 10-136-10-153. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HOTEL-MOTEL TAX 

Sec. 10-154. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a contrary meaning. 
    Due date means the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
    Guestroom means a room occupied, or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
    Hotel-motel means: 
(1)  Any structure or any portion of structure, including any lodginghouse, studio, hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin or private club containing guestrooms and which is occupied; or 
(2)  Any other place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are regularly furnished for value. 
    Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or apartment in a hotel or motel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room or apartment. 
    Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess, any room in a hotel or motel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, agreement or otherwise. 
    Operator means any person operating a hotel-motel in the city including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The owner or proprietor of the premises; 
(2)  Lessee; 
(3)  Sublessee; 
(4)  Lender in possession; 
(5)  Licensee; or 
(6)  Any other person otherwise operating the hotel-motel. 
    Permanent resident means any occupant who as of a given date shall have occupied, or has or shall have the right of occupancy, of any guestroom in a hotel-motel for more than ten consecutive days. 
    Person. 
(1)  The term "person" means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust receiver, trustee, syndicate, business entity, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, to include the plural as well as the singular number. 
(2)  The term "person" does not include the federal or state government or any political subdivision thereof the taxing of which is beyond city authority. 
    Rent means: 
(1)  The considerations or value received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature; and 
(2)  The amount allowed for credit by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom. 
    Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
    Seminar or training group means any group, association, party, class, family, business, school, religious group or other aggregation of room occupants where each of the following criteria is present: 
(1)  The group size is equal to or greater than eight individuals; 
(2)  The length of stay is equal to or greater than two days; 
(3)  The rooms and meeting rooms are furnished as a single contract price, either on a group basis or a per-individual basis; and 
(4)  The purpose of the contract for accommodations and meeting rooms is to bring the aggregation of individuals together for a business purpose of training, meeting, convening or other business purpose. 
(Code 1989, § 11-50; Ord. of 10-12-1992) 
Sec. 10-155. - Levied. 
(a)  Amount; due date. There is hereby set and levied on each occupant of a guestroom of any hotel located within the city a tax in the amount of eight percent of the rent for the occupancy. The tax imposed in this section shall be paid upon any occupancy occurring on or after December 1, 2014, although the occupancy was had pursuant to a contract, lease or other agreement entered into prior to the date. 
(b)  Exemptions. [No] tax shall be levied under this section for the use of: 
(1)  Charges made for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided to any persons who certify that they are staying in such room, lodging, or accommodation as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty; 
(2)  The use of meeting rooms and other such facilities or any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided without charge; 
(3)  Any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more days for use by Georgia state or local governmental officials or employees when traveling on official business. Notwithstanding the availability of any other means of identifying the person as a state or local government official or employee, whenever a person pays for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations with a state or local government credit or debit card, such rooms, lodgings, or accommodations shall be deemed to have been furnished for use by a Georgia state or local government official or employee traveling on official business for purposes of the exemption provided by this paragraph. For purpose of the exemption provided under this paragraph, a local government official or employee shall include officials or employees of counties, municipalities, consolidated governments, or county or independent school districts; or 
(4)  Charges made for continuous use of any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations after the first 30 days of continuous occupancy. 
(Code 1989, § 11-51; Ord. of 10-12-1992; Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 10-6-14) 
Sec. 10-156. - Duty of operator to collect. 
    It shall be the duty of every operator of a hotel located within the incorporated area of the city to collect the tax on occupants as imposed in this article. 
(Code 1989, § 11-52; Ord. of 10-12-1992) 
Sec. 10-157. - Exemption for permanent residents and government employees. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no tax shall be imposed under this article upon permanent residents, state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business, or seminar or training groups. 
(Code 1989, § 11-53; Ord. of 10-12-1992) 
Sec. 10-158. - Operator registration required. 
    Every person engaging in or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel-motel in the city shall immediately register the business with the city manager on a form provided by the city manager for the purpose. 
(1)  Contents. The required registration under this section shall set forth the name under which the operator transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place of business, and the other information as would facilitate the collection of the tax by the city. 
(2)  Signatures. The registration shall be signed by the owner (if a natural person), by an officer (if a corporation) or a partner (if a partnership). 
(3)  For each place of business. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. 
(Code 1989, § 11-54; Ord. of 10-12-1992) 
Sec. 10-159. - Due date; report required. 
    All taxes levied by this article shall be due and payable to the city monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective month in which the taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross taxable rent, and the other information as may be required by the city. 
(Code 1989, § 11-55; Ord. of 10-12-1992) 
Sec. 10-160. - Recordkeeping. 
    Each operator collecting a tax under the provisions of this article shall keep for a period of at least three years all records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent documents of whatever media, setting forth: 
(1)  The rental charged for each occupancy; 
(2)  The date of occupancy; and 
(3)  Any other information as the city may require. 
(Code 1989, § 11-55; Ord. of 10-12-1992) 
Sec. 10-161. - Operator permitted deduction as reimbursement for collection. 
    Operators collecting the tax levied under this article shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and payment of the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount collected. 
(Code 1989, § 11-56; Ord. of 10-12-1992) 
Sec. 10-162. - Penalty and interest. 
    The operator, in the event of operator's failure to pay tax when due, shall pay a penalty of 15 percent of the amount due plus interest on the total amount of delinquent taxes at the rate of 81/2 percent per annum. 
(Code 1989, § 11-57; Ord. of 10-12-1992) 
Sec. 10-163. - Disposition of proceeds to comply with state law. 
    The proceeds of the tax collected pursuant to this article shall be expended as follows: 
(a)  An amount equal to the amount of total taxes collected which would have been collected at a rate of five percent shall be expended in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3); 
(b)  An amount equal to not less than 50 percent of the total amount of taxes collected that exceed the amount of taxes that would be collected at the rate of five percent shall be expended for promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows by a destination marketing organization designated by the City of Hartwell pursuant to ordinance or resolution; and 
(c)  The remaining amount of taxes collected that exceed the amount of taxes that would be collected at the rate of five percent which are not otherwise expended under paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section shall be expended for tourism product development. 
    As used in this section, the terms "destination marketing organization" and "tourism product development" shall have the definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50.2. 
(Ord. No. 2005-04, § 1(11-58), 6-6-2005; Ord. No. 2014-03, § 2, 10-6-14) 
Sec. 10-164. - Amendments submitted to state department of community affairs. 
    Any amendments to this article shall be submitted to the state department of community affairs within 30 days of the date on which the ordinance implementing such amendment is approved and adopted. 
(Ord. No. 2005-04, § 1(11-59), 6-6-2005) 
Secs. 10-165-10-181. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - YARD SALES 

Sec. 10-182. - Penalties. 
    The owner of any residence or the person to whom a permit is issued for the purpose of having a garage sale who shall fail to comply with any part of this article shall be subject to a fine of not more than $100.00 and imprisonment of not more than 30 days for each offense. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-120; Code 1989, § 11-12) 
Sec. 10-183. - Permit required. 
    Any person desiring to conduct a yard or garage sale must first obtain a permit from the city. The permit shall be in the form prescribed by the city council and shall be prominently posted at the sale site for the entire duration of the sale. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-120; Code 1989, § 11-12) 
Sec. 10-184. - Limitation on number and duration. 
    The maximum period for each yard or garage sale is two days consecutively. The maximum number of permits allowed per year to one applicant for a yard or garage sale is two per family or eleemosynary organization. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-120; Code 1989, § 11-12) 
Sec. 10-185. - Location restriction. 
    Yard and garage sales may be held only at the home of the family or organization conducting the sale. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-120; Code 1989, § 11-12) 
Sec. 10-186. - Hours and days of operation. 
    The hours of the sale shall be during daylight hours. No Sunday sales will be allowed. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-120; Code 1989, § 11-12) 
Sec. 10-187. - Parking. 
    Parking shall be conducted in a manner that does not interfere with traffic flow or create traffic congestion. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-120; Code 1989, § 11-12) 
Sec. 10-188. - Sale items to be owned by family member or organization. 
    No new or used merchandise may be purchased or brought in for the sale. All merchandise shall be that owned by the family or members of the eleemosynary organization conducting the sale. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-120; Code 1989, § 11-12) 
Sec. 10-189. - Advertising restrictions. 
    Only one sign may be posted advertising the sale. The sign shall be located on the private property of the person conducting the sale, and not on utility poles, street or traffic signs. No public address system may be used. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-120; Code 1989, § 11-12) 
Sec. 10-190. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
    No alcoholic beverages of any type shall be served or given on or near the premises. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-120; Code 1989, § 11-12) 
Sec. 10-191. - Inspection; citation and termination. 
    If upon inspection by any lawful officer or city official the officer/official finds that in the officer's/official's opinion any of the requirements of this article are being violated, a citation will be issued and the right to continue with the sale will be terminated at once. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-120; Code 1989, § 11-12) 
Secs. 10-192-10-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PRIVATE TRESPASS TOWING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-221. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Attendant means any person who is authorized by the impoundment facility to release a vehicle from the facility when presented with proper documentation of ownership and payment of the appropriate fees. 
    Department means to the state department of motor vehicle safety, or any successor, department or agency responsible for regulating towing of trespassing vehicles on private property. 
    Maximum rate tariff means to the publication containing the maximum rates as prescribed by the department that a wrecker company can assess for the towing and storage of vehicles removed pursuant to the authority granted in the nonconsensual towing permit. 
    Nonconsensual towing means towing without the prior consent or authorization of the owner or operator of the motor vehicle being towed. 
    Nonconsensual towing carrier means to a wrecker service engaged in the towing of trespassing vehicles on private property without prior consent or authorization of the owner or operator of the vehicle and having a secure impoundment facility. 
    Nonconsensual towing permit means to a permit issued by the department authorizing removal of improperly parked vehicles and trespassing personal property from private property. 
    Normal business hours means the department-approved operating hours of the nonconsensual towing carrier. 
    Receipt means a document issued by the attendant to the owner of the vehicle stating all charges have been paid for the towing and storage of vehicle. 
    Secure impoundment facility means a facility owned or leased by a towing company for the purpose of providing secure storage of towed vehicles. 
    Wrecker means an automotive vehicle with hoisting apparatus and equipment for towing vehicles. The term "wrecker" includes any vehicle otherwise equipped and used for the purposes of towing vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-101), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-222. - Penalties. 
    In addition to general penalties provided in section 1-9, the city manager is authorized to impose a civil penalty for a violation of any provision of this article in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-150), (16-151), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-223. - Findings; purpose. 
    The city finds that a number of different businesses currently tow vehicles from private property at the property owner's request, and without the prior consent or authorization of the owner or operator of the vehicle. These different towing companies charge different rates, subject to different terms and conditions. Regulating private trespass towing within the corporate city limits benefits the city's citizens and other affected parties. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-100), 9-7-2004) 
Secs. 10-224-10-254. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 10-255. - Required. 
    No person shall engage in any nonconsensual towing from or on any location in the city without first obtaining from the city a nonconsensual towing permit duly issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-110), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-256. - Application; contents. 
    An applicant for a nonconsensual towing permit shall file with the city manager or his designee a written application on a form provided for that purpose. The applicant, who must be the owner of the business seeking licensure, shall sign the application. The following information shall be required in the application: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant, including the trade name by which the applicant does business and the street address of the premises, and if incorporated, the name registered with the secretary of state; 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of the nonconsensual towing carrier to be permitted; 
(3)  Whether a previous license of the applicant, or if applicable, a corporate officer of the applicant, under this article, has been revoked within two years of the filing of the application; 
(4)  A statement under oath that all the facts contained in the application are true; and 
(5)  Such other information as the city manager deems necessary or expedient. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-111), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-257. - Fees; proration. 
(a)  The fee for the issuance of a nonconsensual towing permit, the annual renewal fee, and the fee for a replacement permit in the event the original is lost, damaged or destroyed shall be in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(b)  For original license applications, filed between January 1 and June 30 of each year, the total annual fee shall be due. For original license applications filed between July 1 and December 31 of each year, the fee for the first year shall be one-half. Renewal applications delinquently filed are not subject to prorated fees. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-112), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-258. - Form. 
    A nonconsensual towing permit shall be in such form as the city manager shall determine; provided, however, that the permit shall bear: 
(1)  The name and address of the permittee; 
(2)  The term of the permit; and 
(3)  A permit number. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-113), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-259. - Display. 
    The nonconsensual towing permit or a copy thereof shall be kept in the wrecker vehicle that conducts any nonconsensual towing within the city and shall be available for review by any police officer or other city official upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-114), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-260. - Grounds for refusal to issue or renew. 
    The city clerk shall refuse to approve the issuance or renewal of a nonconsensual towing permit for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  A false statement as to a material fact or matter made in an application for a permit. 
(2)  The revocation of a permit issued pursuant to this article to the applicant, the permit holder, or corporate officer of the applicant or permit holder within two years preceding the filing of the application. 
(3)  The conviction of the applicant or permit holder in any federal or state court of a crime involving moral turpitude during a period beginning ten years prior to the applicant or permit holder's initial application for licensure under this division and continuing for so long as the permit holder is licensed pursuant to this article. 
(4)  Failure to comply with any provision of this article by the applicant, permittee or any employee or agent of such applicant or permittee. 
(5)  Any license or permit issued to the permittee by the department or any other municipality or local government is revoked or suspended. 
(6)  A violation of any provision of state or federal law or any provision of this Code that the city manager determines warrants revocation or suspension of the permit for purposes of protecting the public peace and order. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-115), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-261. - Authority to suspend or cancel due to indebtedness. 
    The city manager or his designee shall suspend or cancel a nonconsensual towing permit if it is determined that the applicant or permittee is indebted to the city of any fee, cost, penalty or delinquent tax. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-116), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-262. - Replacement. 
    A replacement nonconsensual towing permit may be issued for a lost, destroyed or mutilated nonconsensual towing permit upon an application on a form provided by the city clerk. A replacement nonconsensual towing permit shall have the word "REPLACEMENT" stamped across its face and shall bear the same number as the one it replaces. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-117), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-263. - Nonassignable; nontransferable. 
    Nonconsensual towing permits are not assignable or transferable. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-118), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-264. - Revocation and cancellation. 
(a)  Authority; notice. If any person who owns, operates, manages or controls any nonconsensual towing business permitted pursuant to this article violates any provision of this article, the city manager shall have the authority to revoke and cancel all nonconsensual towing permits issued to such person by giving written notice to the address set forth on the application, stating the reason for revocation and cancellation. The nonconsensual towing permit shall be revoked and cancelled ten days from the date of notice. 
(b)  One-year waiting period. Upon revocation or cancellation of a permit issued pursuant to this article, no permit shall be reissued to the former permit holder, or to any person, corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other entity with which the permit holder was or becomes affiliated for business purposes, within a period of one year from the date of revocation or cancellation, except at the city council's discretion. 
(c)  New permit required. Upon revocation or cancellation of a permit issued pursuant to this article, the former permit holder shall not be permitted to own, operate, manage or control a towing business within the city until a new permit is granted. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-119), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-265. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  If the city manager refuses to approve the issuance or renewal or revokes and cancels a nonconsensual towing permit, the city manager shall notify the applicant or permittee in writing. The city manager's determination shall be final unless the applicant or permittee, within ten days of the receipt of the written notice, files a written appeal to the municipal court, which shall, within 30 days after the appeal is filed, consider all the evidence in support of or against the action appealed and render a decision either sustaining or reversing the action. 
(b)  If the municipal court sustains the action, the applicant or permittee may, within ten days of the court's decision, file with the city manager a written appeal to the city council setting forth the specific grounds for the appeal. 
(c)  The city council shall within 60 days of the filing of the written appeal grant a hearing to consider the action. Following the hearing, the city council shall sustain, reverse or modify the city manager's determination. The city council's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-120), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-266. - Responsibility of permittee. 
    Any permittee under this article shall not violate or permit any employee or agent to violate any provision of this article or Code, or of any state or federal law with respect to any nonconsensual towing conducted within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-121), 9-7-2004) 
Secs. 10-267-10-295. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS 

Sec. 10-296. - Office location and telephone number required. 
    A nonconsensual towing carrier shall maintain an office with normal business hours and a listed public business telephone number. A nonconsensual towing carrier may maintain a maximum of two telephone numbers to be called for dispatching calls. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-200), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-297. - Duty to provide reasonable access to towed vehicles. 
    A nonconsensual towing carrier shall provide reasonable access to any towed vehicle six days per week. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-201), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-298. - Proof of registration. 
(a)  Required. A nonconsensual towing carrier shall maintain proof of registration with the department for each wrecker used by the company. 
(b)  Cab card and identification stamp to be maintained. A nonconsensual towing carrier shall maintain in the cab of each wrecker a department cab card with the current year's identification stamp for intrastate carriers or appropriate registration receipt for interstate carriers. 
(c)  Copies kept with wrecker. Each vehicle operating under authority of a nonconsensual towing permit shall carry a copy of the permit in the cab of the vehicle. The copy shall be presented to any police officer or other agent or official of the city upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-202), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-299. - Compliance with safety regulations and article required. 
    A nonconsensual towing carrier shall comply with the department's safety rules and regulations and the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-203), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-300. - Personnel records to be kept. 
    A nonconsensual towing carrier must maintain and provide to the city upon request a list of all personnel operating, wrecker equipment and a current motor vehicle report for each driver. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-204), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-301. - Valid driver's license required for each driver. 
    Drivers must maintain a valid driver's license of the appropriate class and with the appropriate endorsements required to operate the nonconsensual towing carrier's vehicles under state law. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-205), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-302. - Written contract with property owner required. 
    It shall be unlawful for a nonconsensual towing carrier to engage in nonconsensual removal of vehicles without an authorized written contract. The contract shall contain the name, address and phone number of the nonconsensual towing carrier, and the location of the impoundment facility, hours of operation, and the cost for removal of the vehicle and the charges for storage of the towed vehicle. The contract shall be in the form prescribed by the department and shall be between and signed by: 
(1)  The owner or other authorized agent for the owner of the real estate from which vehicles are to be towed; and 
(2)  An authorized agent of the nonconsensual towing carrier. 
A copy of the contract shall be made available, upon request, to officials and representatives of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-206), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-303. - Required equipment. 
    All wreckers utilized by permittees under this article for nonconsensual towing shall be equipped with the following: 
(1)  Valid registration tag; 
(2)  Fire extinguisher; and 
(3)  Tow away lamps (tail, stop and turn signal lights for vehicles being towed). 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-207), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-304. - Decals. 
    All wreckers utilized by permittees under this article for nonconsensual towing shall bear painted lettering or decals as follows: 
(1)  The name, city and telephone number of the nonconsensual towing carrier shall be permanently affixed to both sides of the vehicle in letters of sufficient size and form to be readable at a distance of 50 feet from the vehicle when the vehicle is stationary. 
(2)  A state department of transportation (GDOT) number shall be affixed to the outside of the vehicle, if the vehicle is operating within the state only. 
(3)  If a nonconsensual towing carrier transports vehicles across state lines (interstate), a U.S. DOT number or U.S. Motor Carrier (MC) number shall be affixed to the outside of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-208), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-305. - Maximum towing and storage fees; payment. 
(a)  Any wrecker service engaged in the business of providing nonconsensual towing shall charge vehicle owners no more than the maximum rates published in the "Nonconsensual Towing Maximum Rate Tariff" prescribed by the department. The fees stated in the maximum rate tariff shall be all inclusive. No additional fees may be charged for the use of dollies, trailers, lifts, slim-jims or any other equipment or service. Additional charges will apply only when the vehicle being towed weighs in excess of 26,000 GWVR. 
(b)  No storage fees shall be charged for the first 24-hour period beginning with the time the motor vehicle is removed. No additional charges shall be assessed for storage of the vehicle once the vehicle has been claimed and payment is tendered to the towing company and the vehicle is removed from the impoundment facility. 
(c)  Towing and storage fees shall be payable by cash, commonly recognized travelers checks, money orders, certified checks or cashier's checks at no additional charge to the vehicle owner. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-209), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-306. - Sign specifications. 
(a)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to an owner of private residential property containing not more than four residential units. 
(b)  Other than as expressly excepted in subsection (a) of this section, owners of private property who enter into nonconsensual towing contracts shall be required to place warning signs at each designated entrance to a parking lot or parking area from which the owner intends to tow vehicles without the consent of the owner or operator. 
(c)  If there is no designated entrance, warning signs shall be posted so as to be clearly visible from each and every parking space. 
(d)  The warning signs shall be a minimum of 12 inches by 18 inches with a minimum of three-fourths-inch lettering. 
(e)  The warning signs required by this section must include: 
(1)  The wording "Private Parking" in bold type with a minimum of 11/2-inch-lettering; 
(2)  A warning that unauthorized vehicles will be towed; 
(3)  The towing company's name, address, telephone number and storage location; 
(4)  Towing fees and daily storage fees; 
(5)  Hours of operation; and 
(6)  Method of payment accepted. 
(f)  Signs located at a designated entrance to a parking lot shall be at least four feet above the site grade. Where there is no designated entrance, signs shall be six feet above site grade. 
(g)  Posted signs must be free of any natural or manmade visual obstruction and must be clearly visible. 
(h)  No vehicle shall be relocated from private property that does not, at the time of the tow and for at least 24 hours prior thereto, have signs posted in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(i)  All signs must be removed from private property within 15 days from the expiration or termination of the contract or within 15 days from the date that authorization from the property owner or his agent is withdrawn. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-210), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-307. - Authorized attendant. 
(a)  Required; availability. An attendant shall be available at the impoundment facility to provide reasonable access to any towed vehicle a minimum of six days each week. The attendant shall be available by telephone 24 hours per day. 
(b)  Authority. The attendant shall have the authority to release any impounded vehicle upon the owner's meeting the legal requirements for release. 
(c)  Required information. A nonconsensual towing carrier shall provide to the city the current telephone number of the attendant or other person responsible for releasing towed vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-211), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-308. - Redemption procedure. 
(a)  Any person claiming a vehicle impounded under a nonconsensual towing permit shall produce evidence of identity and ownership or right of possession and shall pay all towing and accrued storage fees. No storage fees shall be charged for any days the secure impoundment facility is closed and the owner is unable to claim the vehicle. 
(b)  The owner or his agent shall produce a valid driver's license plus an ignition key that operates the vehicle or indicia of ownership, such as: 
(1)  A certificate of title; 
(2)  A valid and current registration card; 
(3)  A bill of sale; or 
(4)  A lease or rental contract. 
(c)  Upon payment, a written receipt listing the specific charges for towing and storage shall be issued to the owner or his agent claiming the vehicle. The receipt shall contain a complete description of the vehicle and shall be signed by the owner or agent claiming the vehicle and by the attendant. The nonconsensual towing carrier shall retain a copy of the receipt as part of the records required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-212), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-309. - Recordkeeping. 
(a)  Records, as specified in this article, shall be: 
(1)  Maintained by each nonconsensual towing carrier holding a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article; and 
(2)  Available for inspection by any designated city official during normal business hours. 
(b)  Upon impoundment of any vehicle, the nonconsensual towing carrier shall create and maintain, for a period of not less than three years from the date of towing, a record of each nonconsensual vehicle removal that includes: 
(1)  The date and time of the initial towing. 
(2)  The place of the initial towing. 
(3)  The date and time of arrival at the impoundment lot. 
(4)  The date and time of release to the owner. 
(5)  The name of the towing company driver and helper. 
(6)  The cost for towing the vehicle. 
(7)  The cost of storing the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-213), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-310. - Secure impoundment facility to be maintained. 
(a)  A nonconsensual towing carrier must maintain a secure impoundment facility for towed vehicles at a location that is no more than 30 miles from the city limits. 
(b)  A nonconsensual towing carrier shall provide effective and efficient security for the secure impoundment facility at all times including, minimally and not by way of limitation, fencing at least six feet high and a locked gate or enclosed building storage. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-214), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-311. - Required insurance. 
(a)  A nonconsensual towing carrier shall maintain the minimum liability insurance prescribed by the department and the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration on all vehicles used in its business as follows: 
(1)  For wreckers with an origin and destination wholly within the state (interstate), the nonconsensual towing carrier shall maintain public liability and property damage insurance with the following limits: 
a.  $100,000.00 limit for bodily injury to or death of one person; 
b.  $300,000.00 limit for bodily injuries to or death of total persons in one accident; and 
c.  $50,000.00 loss or damage in any one accident to property of others. 
(2)  For wreckers with an origin and destination outside the state (interstate), the nonconsensual towing carrier shall maintain public liability and property damage insurance with the following limits: 
a.  $750,000.00 liability; and 
b.  MCS-90 (proof of liability insurance). 
(b)  Liability insurance that covers stored vehicles and contents shall be maintained on the storage lot sufficient to cover the actual value of all stored vehicles. The minimum amount of liability insurance for coverage of the storage vehicles shall be at least $25,000.00. 
(c)  A copy of the certificates of insurance shall be furnished to the city on an annual basis. A 30-day advance cancellation notice shall be provided prior to insurance cancellation. No lapse in insurance coverage will be allowed. 
(d)  Failure to procure the insurance required in this section or any lapse in the required coverage shall result in the immediate revocation of the permit issued under this article. A nonconsensual towing permit issued by the city shall be in effect only while the nonconsensual towing carrier is in compliance with all requirements for the filing proof of insurance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-215), 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 10-312. - Right of owner to remove vehicle prior to towing. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, no vehicle shall be towed from private property and no fee shall be charged by the towing company if the operator or owner of the vehicle returns, produces the ignition key to the vehicle and immediately removes the vehicle from the private property. 
(b)  If, upon the vehicle owner or operator's return, the vehicle has been hooked with hoisting apparatus or loaded by the nonconsensual towing carrier and the vehicle has not left the premises, an operator's fee as prescribed in the maximum rate tariff may apply. 
(c)  Once the nonconsensual towing carrier has left the location to which it was summoned with the vehicle that it was dispatched to remove, charges may be assessed in accordance with the maximum rate tariff. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004, § 1(16-216), 9-7-2004) 
Secs. 10-313-10-342. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH COMPANIES 

Sec. 10-343. - City to be paid due compensation. 
(a)  The city hereby requires from telephone and telegraph companies due compensation of three percent of the actual recurring local service revenues, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1(b)(8) and (9); provided, however, that any company which pays in excess of three percent of the actual recurring local service revenues pursuant to an existing franchise agreement shall continue to pay in accordance with the agreement until the expiration of the franchise agreement or December 31, 2012, whichever occurs first, and any company which pays in excess of three percent of the actual recurring local service revenues in accordance with an occupational license tax arrangement shall continue to pay in accordance with such payment schedule until December 31, 2012. 
(b)  Regarding any telephone company that maintains and operates lines and facilities occupying municipal streets and rights-of-way and does not have retail, end user customers located within the city's municipal boundaries, the payment by such company to a municipal authority in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the state department of transportation (GDOT) for the use of its rights-of-way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1(10-200), 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 10-344. - Authority of city manager; duties. 
    The city manager shall, on the city's behalf, exercise day-to-day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the city's regulatory authority under O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1 et seq. and shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Review application information submitted by a telephone company to the city and, if an application is incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within 15 business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies. 
(2)  Report the receipt of a completed application to the council within 60 calendar days of the receipt of such completed application. 
(3)  Review payments of due compensation submitted by the company to ensure compliance with the provisions of the amended law and this article. 
(4)  Provide a coordination function between a telephone company and all city departments on any matter relating to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1 et seq. and this article. 
(5)  Arrange and evaluate, no more than once a year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company which is reasonably related to the calculation and payment of due compensation. 
(6)  Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located within its rights-of-way written notice of annexations and changes in the city's corporate boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1(10-201), 9-8-2009) 
Secs. 10-345-10-381. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - AMUSEMENT GAME ROOMS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, adopted Jan. 6, 2014, amended Art. IX in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IX, §§ 10-382-10-385, pertained to Games rooms, and derived from Ord. No. 2001-010, §§ 2, 4, adopted Aug. 6, 2001. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-382. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Amusement game room means any location as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(b), (c) or (d) where one or more bona fide coin operated amusement machines are operated that permit non-cash redemption as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d)(l)(B), (C), or a combination thereof. 
    Bona fide coin operated amusement machine means the same as this term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70(b)(2)(A) and (B) and any applicable regulations of the State of Georgia. Examples of bona fide coin operated amusement machines include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Pinball machines; 
(2)  Console machines; 
(3)  Video games; 
(4)  Crane machines; 
(5)  Claw machines; 
(6)  Pusher machines; 
(7)  Bowling machines; 
(8)  Novelty arcade games; 
(9)  Foosball or table soccer machines; 
(10)  Miniature racetrack, football or golf machines; 
(11)  Target or shooting gallery machines; 
12)  Basketball machines; 
(13)  Shuffleboard machines; 
(14)  Kiddie ride games; 
(15)  Skee-Ball&reg; machines; 
(16)  Air hockey machines; 
(17)  Roll down machines; 
(18)  Coin operated pool table or coin operated billiard table as defined in paragraph (3) of O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1; and 
(19)  Any other similar amusement machine which can be legally operated in Georgia. 
    The term "coin operated amusement machine" does not include the following: 
(1)  Coin operated washing machines or dryers; 
(2)  Vending machines which for payment of money dispense products or services; 
(3)  Gas and electric meters; 
(4)  Pay telephones; 
(5)  Pay toilets; 
(6)  Cigarette vending machines; 
(7)  Coin operated vending machines; 
(8)  Coin operated scales; 
(9)  Coin operated gumball machines; 
(10)  Coin operated television sets which provide cable or network programming; 
(11)  Coin operated massage beds; and 
(12)  Machines which are not legally permitted to be operated in Georgia. 
(c)  Location means a business within the city that has complied with the provisions of the ordinances of the city relating to occupation taxes and business licenses. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-6-2014) 
Sec. 10-383. - Enforcing officer. 
    The chief of police or his designee is hereby designated as the enforcement officer and shall execute all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-6-2014) 
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITION OF GAMBLING DEVICES AND PLACES 

Sec. 10-384. - Gambling devices prohibited. 
    Gambling devices, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20(2), are prohibited in the city, and the ownership, use, or transport thereof shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to state law, except as exempted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(a) through (k). 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-6-2014) 
Sec. 10-385. - Gambling places prohibited. 
    Gambling places, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20(3), are prohibited in the city, and the operation thereof shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-6-2014) 
DIVISION 3. - LICENSES 

Sec. 10-386. - License required. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of an amusement game room, as the term is herein defined, without first having obtained a license under this article and complying with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-6-2014) 
Sec. 10-387. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Application for a license for operating an amusement game room within the corporate limits of the city shall be made to the city clerk upon a form to be supplied by the city clerk for this purpose. The license application shall include the following information, which shall be made under oath of a natural person submitting the application: 
(1)  If the applicant is a natural person, the name, address, phone number, and age of the applicant and the date of the application; 
(2)  If the applicant is a partnership, cooperative, joint venture, association, corporation or nonresident, the application shall be in the name of the resident officer, partner or associate who owns a substantial interest in the applicant or in the name of the principal resident managing officer or managing agent and the application shall show that the license is for the use of the applicant and the application shall include the name and address of the applicant, as well as the name, address, phone number, and age of the resident officer, partner or associate, managing officer, or managing agent, and the date of the application; 
(3)  Address or place where the bona fide coin operated amusement machine or machines are to be offered to the public for play and the other business or businesses operated at that place or places; 
(4)  Name and address of the owner of the machine or machines and a copy of the owner's master license; 
(5)  Copy of the applicant's location license for the place where the bona fide coin operated amusement machine or machines are to be offered to the public for play; 
(6)  Name and address of any other business owned or operated by applicant within the corporate limits of the city; and 
(7)  List of any other licenses or permits from the city held by the applicant. 
(b)  Upon request of a the holder of a license for an amusement game room, the city official or employee shall provide such licensee with a copy of this article. 
(c)  The city shall not require a fee for licensure or registration of an amusement game room. 
(d)  A license issued in accordance with this article shall be valid until December 31 of the year in which the license was issued. 
(e)  An application for the renewal of a license must be made to the city by December 31 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-6-2014) 
Sec. 10-388. - Payment of occupation tax required. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of amusement game room, as the term is herein defined, or shall be entitled to a license under this article, without first having completed the occupation tax certificate form and paid the required occupational tax in accordance with article II of chapter 10 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-6-2014) 
Sec. 10-389. - Refusal to issue or renew license. 
    The city shall be entitled to refuse to issue or renew a license under this article under any of the following circumstances: 
(a)  The licensee or applicant has failed or refused to comply with any provision of this article; 
(b)  The licensee or applicant has intentionally violated a provision of this article; 
(c)  Any license or permit that is material to the operation of the amusement game room and that is issued by the Georgia Lottery Commission or any other governmental agency is revoked, suspended or no properly maintained in good standing; or 
(d)  The licensee or applicant has intentionally failed to provide requested information or answer a question, intentionally made a false statement in or in connection with his or her application or renewal, or omitted any material or requested information. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-6-2014) 
Sec. 10-390. - Revocation of license. 
    In the event that it comes to the attention of the city manager that an amusement game room has created a nuisance to the surrounding community or the operator or proprietor has violated any provision of this article, the following procedure will be followed: 
(a)  The city manager shall issue a notice of objection which shall include the address of the location and the specific reasons why the amusement game room in question is alleged to be a nuisance or alleged to be in violation of any provision of this section. 
(b)  The city manager will then notify the proprietor that a notice of objection has been filed and will set a date for a hearing before the mayor and council. Extensions and necessary investigations will be granted and conducted at the discretion of the city clerk. 
(c)  At the time of the hearing, any resident, the operator, the proprietor and the city manager or other witnesses may be heard. 
(d)  After the hearing, the mayor and council shall issue a notice of decision which will call for the dismissal of the objection, removal of the machines, or such other remedy as they deem appropriate under the circumstances that are consistent with the purpose of this section. 
(e)  The decision of the mayor and council shall be in writing, shall state the reasons for their decision, and shall be based upon the merits of the case. 
(f)  The decision of the mayor and council shall be binding upon the proprietor and operator of the amusement game room under consideration, subject to appeal to the Superior Court of Hart County, Georgia, by petition for writ of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-6-2014) 
Sec. 10-391. - No property right; licenses nontransferable. 
(a)  A license issued pursuant to this article: 
(1)  Shall vest no property or right in the holder of the license except to conduct the licensed or permitted business during the period the license or permit is in effect, subject to the conditions and limitations of this article and applicable law; 
(2)  Shall be nontransferable and nonassignable; 
(3)  Shall not be transferred or assigned to any other person, including, but not limited to, another owner at the same site within the city; and 
(4)  Expires upon the death of an individual holder of a license or permit or upon the dissolution of any other holder of a license or permit. 
(b)  A new owner or proprietor of an amusement game room must first obtain a new license if such owner or proprietor desires to operate an amusement game room in the same or different location in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-6-2014) 
Sec. 10-392. - Display of license. 
    All businesses that have bona fide coin operated amusement machines on the premises shall display, in plain view, the current license issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-6-2014) 
DIVISION 4. - SUBSTANTIVE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 10-393. - Distance. 
(a)  Every amusement game room in the city shall comply with the proximity provision for a business licensed to sell alcohol set out in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. After a hearing, the mayor and council may waive the application of this provision to an individual location if no alcohol is served or sold at such location. 
(b)  Every amusement game room in the city shall comply with the proximity provision for businesses licensed to sell alcohol as set out in sections 4-130 and 4-247 of this Code. After a hearing, the mayor and council may waive the applicability of these provisions to an individual location if no alcohol is served at such location. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-6-2014) 
Sec. 10-394. - Number of bona fide coin operated amusement machines at a location. 
    No amusement game room in the city shall offer to the public more than nine bona fide coin operated amusement machines offering non-cash redemption in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(c) and (d)(1)(2), or both, at the same location. After a hearing, the mayor and council may, after consideration of the nature and character of the business, waive the applicability of this provision to an individual location. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-6-2014) 
Sec. 10-395. - Gross receipts from bona fide coin operated amusement machines and from business. 
(a)  Every amusement game room shall keep records available for inspection by city officials that set out separately annual gross receipts for the amusement games and the other products and services sold at the location. 
(b)  Income from the amusement game or games shall not constitute more than 50 percent of the income from the location. 
(c)  Compliance with this section requires both the availability of records for inspection and compliance with the 50 percent of income requirement. 
(d)  Every owner or operator of an amusement game room who is subject to O.C.G.A. § 50-27-84(b)(l) must provide to the city a copy of each verified monthly report prepared in accordance with such Code section. 
(e)  Every owner or operator of an amusement game room who is subject to O.C.G.A. § 50-27-84(b)(l) shall allow the local government annually to audit the reports from the owner or operator to the Georgia Lottery Corporation. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-6-2014) 
Sec. 10-396. - Notice requirements. 
(a)  Every amusement game room shall post a conspicuous sign with the following or similar words: 
GEORGIA LAW PROHIBITS GIVING OR RECEIPT OF ANY MONEY FOR WINNING A GAME OR GAMES ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR FREE REPLAYS WON ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY WON ON ANY AMUSEMENT MACHINE; OR AWARDING ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY OF A VALUE EXCEEDING $5.00 FOR A SINGLE PLAY OF AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE. 
(b)  Every amusement game room shall conspicuously and permanently post the license issued by the city pursuant to this article. 
(c)  The owner or proprietor of each amusement game room shall inform every employee of the acts and omissions prohibited by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and by this article, and of the penalties for violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-6-2014) 
Sec. 10-397. - Compliance with O.C.G.A. provisions relating to master licenses, location licenses, and stickers for individual machines. 
(a)  Bona fide coin operated amusement machines may be used in an amusement game room within the city only if: 
(1)  The machines are owned by a person who holds a valid master license in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-71; 
(2)  Each machine offered to the public for play has a valid permit sticker in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-78; and 
(3)  The business owner where the machines are available for play by the public has paid a location license fee in order to obtain a valid location license in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-71(a.l) and (b). 
(b)  The city official in charge of issuing business licenses shall notify the state commissioner of revenue of any observed violation of O.C.G.A. § 50-27-71 or § 50-27-78. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-6-2014) 
Sec. 10-398. - Operating regulations. 
    All businesses operating as an amusement game room hereunder shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(a)  Devices to be kept in plain view; gambling devices prohibited. All machines shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of and open and accessible to any person(s) who may frequent or be in any place of business where such machines are kept or used. Bona fide coin operated amusement machines shall be placed so that the decal issued to show payment of the permit fee is in plain view. Nothing in this article shall be construed to authorize, permit or license any gambling device of any nature whatsoever. 
(b)  Inspection. The licensee shall permit the chief of police or his designee to inspect or cause the inspection of any place or building in which any bona fide coin operated amusement machines are operated or set up for operating, and to inspect, investigate and test such bona fide coin operated amusement machines and inspect any records concerning such bona fide coin operated amusement machines as needed. 
(c)  Attendant required. It shall be unlawful for any proprietor to open his business to the public unless an attendant is present. Said attendant shall be of sufficient mental and physical capacity so as to be able to provide aid to patrons if needed or desired. Said attendant shall not be less than 18 years of age. 
(d)  Loitering. As used in this section, "loitering" shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation licensed to operate an amusement game room to permit loitering on or in the immediate vicinity of any machine or business premises regulated hereunder in such a manner as to: 
(1)  Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace; 
(2)  Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person; 
(3)  Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; or 
(4)  Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in a public place. 
(e)  Shirt and shoes required. All proprietors shall require shirts and shoes to be worn at all times by any person frequenting their premises. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-6-2014) 
Sec. 10-399. - Payment of city taxes required. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of amusement game room, as the term is herein defined, or shall be entitled to a license under this article, unless such person, firm or corporation shall pay any and all taxes owed to the city in a timely manner. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-6-2014) 
Sec. 10-400. - Compliance with state law. 
(a)  A licensee shall comply with any and all laws and regulations of the State of Georgia applicable to bona fide coin operated amusement machines, including the provisions of Article 3 of Chapter 27 of Title 50 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, and any and all regulations promulgated thereunder, and any and all directives and orders of the Georgia Lottery Commission and any other governmental agency. 
(b)  A licensee shall maintain all licenses required by the State of Georgia for the operation of an amusement game room. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-6-2014) 
DIVISION 5. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 10-400A. - Penalties for violations by owners or operators of amusement game rooms. 
(a)  In addition to penalties set out in the O.C.G.A. for failure to comply with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(a) through (k), the owner or operator of an amusement game room, after a hearing before the mayor and council, may be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  First Offense: Suspension for not more than six months of the owner or proprietor's license for offering any amusement game at the location where the violation occurred. 
(2)  Second Offense: Suspension for not more than 12 months of the owner or proprietor's license for offering any amusement game at the Location where the violation occurred. 
(3)  Third Offense: Suspension or permanent revocation of the owner or proprietor/operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location where the violation occurred, and suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the city for not more than six months. 
(b)  Penalties for violation of any of the provisions of this article by the owner or operator of an amusement game room, after conviction in the municipal court of the city, are as follows: 
(1)  First Offense: Fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation. 
(2)  Second Offense: Fine not to exceed $750.00 for each violation, suspension of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location for not more than three months, or both. 
(3)  Third offense: Fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation, suspension or permanent revocation of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location, or suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the city for not more than six months, or any combination of these penalties. 
(c)  The fines listed in the penalties for violation of this article may be imposed by the judge of the municipal court of the city. 
(d)  Suspension or revocation of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location where the violation occurred, and suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the city, may be imposed by the mayor and council after a hearing before the mayor and council. The mayor and council shall be authorized to make their own findings concerning any violations of this article and to suspend or revoke any license issued by the city, as the mayor and council deem appropriate, in the discretion of the mayor and council, consistent with this article, without a conviction in municipal court, and it shall not be necessary for the municipal court or any court to make any finding concerning any alleged violation for the mayor and city council to make a finding concerning such alleged violation and to suspend or revoke any license issued by the city. 
(e)  Offering one or more bona fide coin operated amusement machine games in violation of an order suspending or revoking the license for the offering of any amusement game at the location is punishable, after conviction in the municipal court of the city, by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-6-2014) 
Sec. 10-400B. - Penalties for violations by those who play bona fide coin operated machines in violation of law or ordinance. 
    The municipal court of the city is authorized to impose the following penalties on any person convicted of receiving money as a reward for the successful play or winning of any bona fide coin operated amusement machine from any person owning, possessing, controlling or overseeing such bona fide coin operated amusement machine or any person employed by or acting on behalf of a person owning, possessing, controlling or overseeing a bona fide coin operated amusement machines: 
(1)  First offense: Fine not to exceed $250.00 for each violation. 
(2)  Second and subsequent offense: Fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-6-2014) 
ARTICLE X. - BILLIARD ROOMS 

Sec. 10-401. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Billiard room means and refers to any public place where a person is permitted to play the game of billiards and for which a charge is made for use of equipment. 
    Billiards means and refers to any of the several games played on a table surrounded by an elastic ledge of cushions with balls which are impelled by a cue and shall include all forms of the game known as "carom billiards," "pocket billiards," and "English billiards." 
    Owner means and refers to any person owning or having the care, control, management or possession of any billiard room in the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2001-010, § 6(11-47A), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 10-402. - Permit required. 
    No person shall maintain or operate a billiard room without first obtaining a permit issued under the terms and conditions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-010, § 6(11-47B), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 10-403. - Application for permit. 
    An applicant for a permit under the provisions of this article shall file with the city manager or designee a written application on a form provided for that purpose which shall be signed by the applicant, who shall be the owner of the business sought to be licensed. A separate application shall be filed for each location sought to be permitted. The following information shall be required in the application: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant, including the trade name by which applicant does business and the street address of the premises, and if incorporated, the name registered with the secretary of state; 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of the operator of the premises to be permitted; 
(3)  Number of billiard tables in the premises to be permitted; 
(4)  Whether a previous license of applicant, or if applicable, corporate officer of applicant, has been revoked within two years of filing of the application; and 
(5)  A statement that all the facts contained in the application are true. 
(Ord. No. 2001-010, § 6(11-47C), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 10-404. - Nature of permit. 
(a)  A permit issued under this article expires December 31 of each year unless it is rescinded or canceled earlier. 
(b)  A permit issued under this article is effective for a single place of business only. 
(c)  A permit issued under this article vests no property right in the permittee except to maintain and operate a billiard room in accordance with the terms and conditions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-010, § 6(11-47D), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 10-405. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Every person who owns, controls, manages, or operates a billiard room in the corporate limits of the city shall pay for, and there is hereby levied on, each such billiard room, a permit fee per billiard table in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution and shown in the city's fee schedule (but tables which constitute coin operated amusement machines shall not be counted for purposes of this section). The fee for issuing a replacement permit for a lost, destroyed or mutilated permit is as established from time to time by city council resolution and shown in the city's fee schedule. 
(b)  Fees for permits granted in the second half of the licensing year shall be reduced by one-half from the fee required by subsection (a) of this section. No other proration or reduction shall be allowed, regardless of the date on which such permit is applied for. 
(Ord. No. 2001-010, § 6(11-47E), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 10-406. - Display of permit. 
    A permit issued under this article shall be displayed at or near the entrance of the business premises, and such display shall be permanent and conspicuous. 
(Ord. No. 2001-010, § 6(11-47F), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 10-407. - Refusal to issue or renew permit. 
    The city clerk shall refuse to approve issuance or renewal of a permit for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  A false statement as to a material matter made in an application for a permit; 
(2)  Revocation of a permit, pursuant to this article, of the applicant or corporate officer of the applicant within two years preceding the filing of the application; 
(3)  The applicant for such permit has, within the past ten years, been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(4)  The game room will be in a location which does not comply with section 10-408. 
(Ord. No. 2001-010, § 6(11-47G), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 10-408. - Restrictions on the location of billiard rooms. 
(a)  A billiard room which either sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or engages in package sales of such beverages or allows alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises shall not be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of the property line of a private residential dwelling; 
(2)  Within 750 feet of the property line of any public library or branch thereof; 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet from the property line of any church, shrine, chapel, mortuary or other place used exclusively for religious purposes; 
(4)  Within 1,000 feet of the property line of any school or college campus; 
(5)  Within 750 feet of a regular stop where a school bus for the transportation of school children in the public schools of the county shall board or discharge passengers; 
(6)  Where the proposed location is 11/2 miles or less from an existing location for which the city has issued a game room license; or 
(7)  Within 750 feet of a location for which a license to sell beer or wine has been issued by the city, the county, or any other governmental jurisdiction. 
(b)  The distance requirements set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall apply in any and all directions from the property lines of the proposed location of the game room, as measured in a straight line. Notwithstanding any provision of this section, nothing in this article shall be applied in such as manner as to prohibit the operation of a billiard room in a particular location if such billiard room is fully in operation in such location on the date the ordinance from which this article is derived became effective. 
(Ord. No. 2001-010, § 6(11-47H), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 10-409. - Effect of indebtedness to city on permit. 
    The city manager or designee shall not issue or renew a permit under this article and shall suspend or cancel a permit if it is determined that the applicant or permittee is indebted to the city for any fee, cost, penalty, or delinquent tax. 
(Ord. No. 2001-010, § 6(11-47H), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 10-410. - Replacement of permit. 
    A replacement permit may be issued for a lost, destroyed, or mutilated permit upon application on a form provided by the city clerk. A replacement permit shall have the word "REPLACEMENT" stamped across its face and shall bear the same number as the one it replaces. 
(Ord. No. 2001-010, § 6(11-47I), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 10-411. - Transferability of permit. 
    A permit issued under the provisions of this article shall not be assignable or transferable. 
(Ord. No. 2001-010, § 6(11-47J), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 10-412. - Cancellation of permit. 
    If any person who owns, operates, manages, or controls any billiard room in the corporate limits of the city shall violate any provision of this article, the city manager shall have the power and authority to cancel all permits issued under this article to any of the foregoing by giving written notice, stating the reason justifying such cancellation, and the same shall be canceled ten days from such date of notice. No permit shall be issued within a period of one year to anyone whose permit has been canceled, except at the discretion of the governing body. If the permit of a person owning, operating, managing, or controlling any billiard room in the corporate limits of the city is canceled, such person shall not be permitted to own, operate, manage or control a billiard room until a new permit is granted. 
(Ord. No. 2001-010, § 6(11-47K), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 10-413. - Appeal from refusal to issue or renew permit or canceling permit. 
    If the city manager refuses to approve the issuance of a permit or the renewal of a permit to an applicant or permittee or cancels a permit, the action is final unless the applicant or permittee, within ten days of the receipt of written notice of the action, files a written appeal with the recorder of the municipal court, who shall, within ten days after the appeal is filed, consider all the evidence in support of or against the action appealed, and render a decision, either sustaining or reversing the action. If the recorder of the municipal court sustains the action, the applicant or permittee may, within ten days of that decision, file a written appeal with the city manager to the governing body setting forth specific grounds for the appeal. The governing body shall, within 30 days, grant a hearing to consider the action. The governing body has authority to sustain, reverse, or modify the action appealed. The decision of the governing body is final. 
(Ord. No. 2001-010, § 6(11-47L), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 10-414. - Responsibility of permittee. 
    The permittee under this article shall not permit any of the following on the premises of any billiard room for which such person holds a permit: 
(1)  The sale, purchase, possession or consumption of any alcoholic beverages as the same are defined by the laws of the state; provided, however, that if such billiard room is an establishment which is authorized to sell alcoholic beverages and derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross revenues from the sale of products or services other than alcoholic beverages, this prohibition shall not apply; and provided further, however, that if alcoholic beverages are sold by the drink for consumption on the premises of a billiard room, then the sale, serving or use of alcoholic beverages therein shall be prohibited unless the establishment derives at least 75 percent of its revenue from the sale of products or services other than alcoholic beverages; 
(2)  The sale, purchase, possession or use of any drugs, including heroin, cocaine, marijuana, opium, morphine, codeine and any drugs that are cited under O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq., known as the Controlled Substances Act; 
(3)  Any boisterous conduct; 
(4)  Any loitering; 
(5)  A person 16 years or younger currently enrolled in primary or secondary school to frequent a billiard room until after such person is released from school each day during a school term, except on Saturdays and school holidays; 
(6)  Any gambling; 
(7)  Any animals, except Seeing Eye dogs; 
(8)  Any person under the influence of intoxicating liquors or drugs; 
(9)  Any soliciting; 
(10)  Any credit; 
(11)  The operation of a billiard room by someone other than an adult 21 years or older in attendance at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2001-010, § 6(11-47M), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 10-415. - Hours. 
    A billiard room can be open from 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday, except that school-age children shall be required to vacate the premises at 11:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday. This section shall not be construed so as to prohibit the operation of a business, which includes a billiard room, outside the hours set forth herein, as long as the billiard room is not operated during the prohibited hours, and as long as the operation of such business is not otherwise prohibited under some other provision of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2001-010, § 6(11-47N), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 10-416. - Inspections. 
(a)  The premises on which a billiard room is located shall conform to all building and fire prevention codes of the city and the fire inspectors of the city and such fire inspectors' assistants and the building inspector may enter into the premises where such billiard room is located at any time during normal business hours for the purpose of inspecting such premises for fire hazards. 
(b)  All law enforcement personnel of the city shall have the right to enter into the premises of permittee at any time during normal business hours for the purpose of enforcement of the terms of this article. 
(c)  With respect to any permittee which also sells alcoholic beverages on the premises of a billiard room or any place operated in connection therewith, the city manager or his or her designee, and other appropriate city officials shall be entitled to inspect any and all financial records of such permittee to establish that such permittee derives the required percentage of its revenue from the sale of products or services other than alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2001-010, § 6(11-47O), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 10-417. - Existing laws; violations not authorized. 
    Nothing herein shall be construed or have the effect to license, permit, authorize or legalize any machine, device, billiard table, the keeping, exhibition, operation, display or maintenance of which is now illegal or in violation of any ordinance of the city, of the penal code of the state, or the constitution of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2001-010, § 6(11-47P), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 10-418. - Return for taxes. 
    Each operator shall return on the city tax return, every machine located in such operator's establishment on January 1 of each year for city taxes. Such return must be made between January 1 and March 31 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 2001-010, § 6(11-47Q), 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 10-419. - Exclusions. 
    This article shall not apply to billiard tables or billiard rooms operated by private industrial concerns, Young Men's Christian Associations, religious orders, charitable institutions, state, county or city institutions, fraternal orders, or bona fide clubs using such tables for members or employees only. 
(Ord. No. 2001-010, § 6(11-47R), 8-6-2001) 
Chapter 12 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; local organizations for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27; authority to promulgate local rules and regulations, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-28; mutual aid, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; dispatch centers to have trained communications officers on staff, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-19; mutual aid, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; war on terrorism local assistance, O.C.G.A. § 36-75-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1-12-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-19. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the term "emergency management" means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation: 
(1)  Firefighting services; 
(2)  Police services; 
(3)  Emergency medical services; 
(4)  Rescue; 
(5)  Engineering; 
(6)  Warning services; 
(7)  Communications; 
(8)  Defense from radiological, chemical, biological and other special weapons, including weapons of mass destruction; 
(9)  Evacuation of persons from stricken areas; 
(10)  Emergency welfare services; 
(11)  Consequence management functions, including victim services; 
(12)  Emergency transportation; 
(13)  Plant protection; 
(14)  Temporary restoration of public utility services; and 
(15)  Other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
(Comp. 1976, § 22-101(1); Code 1989, § 6-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(1). 
Sec. 12-20. - Prohibited acts. 
    It shall be a misdemeanor punishable as provided in general penalty section 1-9, during an emergency, to: 
(1)  Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management corps, or any enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed by virtue of this chapter. 
(2)  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this chapter if such act is of such a nature as to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the life or property of any inhabitants of this city or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof. 
(3)  Wear, carry or display without authority any mark or identification specified by the emergency management agency. 
(Comp. 1976, § 22-101(8); Code 1989, § 6-8) 
Sec. 12-21. - Volunteers. 
(a)  Composition. All persons other than officers and employees of the city volunteering in service pursuant to emergency management shall serve without compensation. 
(b)  Immunity. While engaged in such service they shall have the same immunities as persons and employees of the city performing similar duties. 
(Comp. 1976, § 22-101(7); Code 1989, § 6-7) 
Sec. 12-22. - Assisting neighboring city. 
(a)  City official determination. In the event that the city is called upon to furnish supplies, equipment, machinery and personnel to a neighboring city in distress, the general manager of the city utilities or in such manager's absence, the mayor shall be authorized to furnish said requested equipment, machinery, supplies and personnel in such official's discretion without further approval of the city council. 
(b)  Liability insurance. The city is hereby requested to contact the liability insurance carrier of the city and to work out the necessary details to be sure that such liability insurance coverage will be in force on any equipment and machinery which may be furnished under this plan by the city, and carrier is further requested to take such other action as is necessary to protect any key personnel who may be furnished to a requesting city under such emergency plan. 
(Comp. 1976, § 22-101; Code 1989, § 6-9; Res. of 5-6-1974) 
Secs. 12-23-12-47. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY 

Sec. 12-48. - Created; composition. 
    The city emergency management agency is hereby created and shall include the following persons: 
(1)  Mayor. 
(2)  Director of emergency management, as appointed. 
(3)  Police chief. 
(4)  County health officer. 
(5)  American Red Cross representative. 
(6)  Others, including representatives of business, labor and patriotic agencies as appointed by the city council. 
(Comp. 1976, § 22-101(2); Code 1989, § 6-2) 
State Law reference- Authority, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 12-49. - Powers and duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the emergency management agency and it is hereby empowered: 
(1)  To develop a city emergency management plan. This plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all city resources, both private and public. 
(2)  To prepare and recommend for consideration by the city council ordinances necessary to implement the emergency management plan. 
(3)  To consider and recommend to the city council for approval mutual aid plans and agreements. 
(4)  To perform any other function as determined locally. 
(Comp. 1976, § 22-101(3); Code 1989, § 6-3) 
Sec. 12-50. - Director's office established; duties. 
    There is hereby created the office of city emergency management director. The mayor shall appoint the director. The director is hereby appointed: 
(1)  To represent the mayor on all matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  To require and direct the cooperation of city officials in the preparation and implementation of emergency management plans. 
(3)  During periods of emergency, to direct the services of any city officers or employees. 
(4)  During periods of emergency, to obtain vital supplies and equipment lacking, needed for the protection of life and property of people and bind the city for the value thereof and if required immediately, requisition it. 
(Comp. 1976, § 22-101(4); Code 1989, § 6-4) 
Secs. 12-51-12-73. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT CORPS 

Sec. 12-74. - Composition. 
    Officers and employees of the city with volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency and all groups, agencies and persons who make the agreements on operation of law to be charged with the duties necessary for the protection of the life and property in the city during such an emergency shall constitute the emergency management corps. 
(Comp. 1976, § 22-101(5); Code 1989, § 6-5) 
Sec. 12-75. - Divisions established. 
    The functions and duties of the city emergency management corps shall be distributed among the divisions as listed in subsections (1) through (8) of this section. Each division shall be under the direction of a chief and deputy chief appointed by the emergency management agency. The chief of the divisions will include public officials, such as sheriffs, chiefs of police and fire departments, and heads of agencies dealing with transportation, communications and other sundry services as well as private business persons who through their profession, knowledge and experience are particularly qualified to head divisions requiring specialized knowledge and experience. The divisions are established as follows: 
(1)  Law enforcement. 
(2)  Fire services. 
(3)  Transportation. 
(4)  Medical and health. 
(5)  Communications. 
(6)  Welfare. 
(7)  Information and education. 
(8)  Others as determined locally. 
(Comp. 1976, § 22-101(6); Code 1989, § 6-6) 
Chapter 14 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 

Sec. 14-19. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the term "land disturbing activity" means any activity that may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into any body of water with the state or onto lands within the state including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavation, transporting and filling of land. The term "land disturbing activity" does not include agricultural practices described in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17. 
State Law reference- Similar definition, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-3. 
Sec. 14-20. - Compliance with state law required. 
    Any person undertaking any land disturbing activity within the territorial city limits shall comply with all applicable state laws, rules and regulations including, but not limited to, the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.). 
Secs. 14-21-14-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOODS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-44. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application: 
    Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
    Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered new construction. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the building official's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate and where velocity flow may be evident. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), areas of special Flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 14-157. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
    Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building means any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
    Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. The term "critical facility" includes: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants and other principal points of utility lines. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations and storage of materials or equipment. 
    Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
    Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before September 26, 2008. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, is completed before April 7, 1997. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
    Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufacture home" includes park trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel, or contiguous parcels, of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean seal level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain; for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) means as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    New construction. 
(1)  For the purposes of determining insurance rates, means structures for which the start of construction commenced after September 26, 2008, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
(2)  For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced after April 7, 1997, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, is completed after April 7, 1997. 
    North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
    Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued; provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. 
(1)  The term "actual start" means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. 
(2)  For a substantial improvement, the term "actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
(3)  The term "permanent construction" does not include: 
a.  Initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; 
b.  The installation of streets and/or walkways; 
c.  Excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; or 
d.  The installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. 
Note- Accessory structures are not exempt from any requirements of this article. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home or a gas or liquid storage tank. 
    Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the start of construction of the improvement. 
(1)  This term "substantial improvement" includes structures, which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
(2)  Substantial improvement occurs when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
(3)  The term "substantial improvement" does not include: 
a.  Those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or 
b.  Any alteration of a historic structure; provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Note- The market value of the structure should be the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
    Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-250, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 2009-01, 2-2-2009) 
Sec. 14-45. - Penalties. 
    Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing in this article contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as are necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-217, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 14-46. - Authority. 
    Article IX, section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council does hereby adopt this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-200, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 14-47. - Findings. 
    The city council hereby finds and declares as follows: 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation that results in the loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in the floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-201, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 14-48. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development that may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers that are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-202, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 14-49. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize the damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, 
(4)  Minimize the expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the general public's expense; 
(6)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-203, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 14-50. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the city's jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-210, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 14-51. - Basis for special flood hazard areas. 
(a)  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated September 26, 2008, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth in this section. 
(b)  For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated September 26, 2008, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Hart County, Georgia are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth in this section. 
(c)  Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
(d)  The repository for public inspection of the (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at: 
City Hall 
Office of City Clerk 
500 East Howell Street 
Hartwell, Georgia 30643 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-211, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 14-52. - Development permit required prior to commencement of activities. 
    A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-212, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 14-53. - Compliance with article and other regulations required. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-213, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 14-54. - Conflicts. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-214, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 14-55. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-215, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 14-56. - Warning; disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the city's part or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-216, 12-1-2008) 
Secs. 14-57-14-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 14-86. - Building official to administer article. 
    The building official is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-220, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 14-87. - Permit procedures. 
    An application for a development permit shall be made to the building official on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 14-121(2); and 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage. 
a.  For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by the same. 
b.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
c.  The building official shall review the certification data submitted. The permit holder shall correct deficiencies detected by such review immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-221, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 14-88. - Duties and responsibilities of building official. 
    The duties of the building official shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Review the proposed development to ensure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review the proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (33 USC 1334). Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 14-51, the building official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer the provisions of division 4 of this article. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 14-87(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 14-87(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the building official shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with section 14-87(1)c and section 14-121(2) or section 14-123(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Ensure the flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the building official shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the building official's office and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-222, 12-1-2008) 
Secs. 14-89-14-119. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 14-120. - Minimum requirements. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be: 
a.  Anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
b.  Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; and 
c.  Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(2)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.  So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(3)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(4)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(5)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(8)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-230, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 14-121. - Specific requirements. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data is available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of section 14-120(2). All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions stated in this subsection, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth in this subsection and section 14-88(5). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: 
1.  Individual lots or parcels; 
2.  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.  A site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood; 
must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers, or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength, of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (See section 14-120(4)). 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either be: 
1.  On the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
2.  Fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
the recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections (3)a. and c. of this section. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-157, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted, however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (4)a. of this section is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 4 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-231, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 14-122. - Streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-Zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-51, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 14-51, the building official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 4 of this article. Only if data are not available from these sources, then subsections (2) and (3) of this section shall apply. 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one-foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement, elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note the requirement that the lowest floor is to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-Zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of section 14-120(2). All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. The building official shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-232, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 14-123. - Areas of special flood hazard (Zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-51, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (Zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 14-121. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-233, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 14-124. - Areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones). 
    The areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-51 may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 14-120(2). The building official shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above highest adjacent grade with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions stated in this subsection, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth in this subsection and as required in section 14-87(1)c and (2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-234, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 14-125. - Subdivisions. 
    The requirements for subdivisions are as follows: 
(1)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted in this article and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-235, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 14-126. - Critical facilities. 
(a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-236, 12-1-2008) 
Secs. 14-127-14-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 14-151. - Planning commission to hear requests. 
    The planning commission as established by the city shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variances from the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-240, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 14-152. - Appeals. 
(a)  The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision or determination is made by the building official in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by a planning commission decision may appeal such decision to the county superior court as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-241, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 14-153. - Historic structures. 
    Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-242, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 14-154. - Functionally dependent uses. 
    Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this division 4 are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-243, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 14-155. - Designated floodways. 
    Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-244, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 14-156. - Technical evaluations, relevant factors and standards to be considered. 
    In reviewing such requests, the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors and standards specified in this section and other sections of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-245, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 14-157. - Criteria for issuing variance. 
(a)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
(1)  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
(2)  A determination that the failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(3)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not: 
a.  Result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public expense; 
b.  Create a nuisance; 
c.  Cause fraud on or victimization of the public; or 
d.  Conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(b)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefor any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(c)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(d)  The building official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-246, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 14-158. - Conditions. 
    Upon consideration of the factors listed in section 14-157 and the purposes of this article, the planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5-247, 12-1-2008) 
Chapter 16 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Fire prevention and protection generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-1-1 et seq.; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; minimum requirements for local fire departments, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-20 et seq.; authority of local government units to enact fire prevention regulations, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; firefighter standards and training, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1; regulation of blasting generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-8-1 et seq.; regulation of fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; volunteer firefighters for counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-23. 

Sec. 16-1. - International Fire Code and state amendments adopted. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion the International Fire Code, 2006 edition, with Georgia Amendments (2007). 
(b)  It is the city's intent to at all times enforce the latest edition of the fire code adopted in subsection (a) of this section, as it may be adopted and amended from time to time by the state department of community affairs, and all such amendments and subsequent editions and revisions shall be deemed applicable to and enforceable in the city as notice of the adoption of such amended and revised codes by the state department of community affairs is received by appropriate city officials. 
(Comp. 1976, § 6-109; Code 1989, § 7-30; Ord. of 8-7-1978, § 1) 
State Law reference- Mandatory state minimum standards codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-21. 
Sec. 16-2. - Authority of fire chief to modify code. 
    The chief of the fire department shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon an application in writing by the owner or lessee, or the owner's or lessee's duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code; provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modifications when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Comp. 1976, § 6-109; Code 1989, § 7-31; Ord. of 8-7-1978, § 7) 
Chapter 18 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - State department of community health rules adopted. 
    The following rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Community Health (DCH), including all subsequent amendments, revisions or modifications thereto expressly adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth in this section, and are further approved for enforcement: 
(1)  Control of Rabies (Comp. R. & Regs. § 290-5-2). 
(2)  Food Service (Comp. R. & Regs. § 290-5-14). 
(3)  Tourist Accommodations (Comp. R. & Regs. § 290-5-18). 
(4)  Land Disposal of Domestic Septage (Comp. R. & Regs. § 290-5-25). 
(5)  On-Site Sewage Management Systems (Comp. R. & Regs. § 290-5-26). 
(6)  Drinking Water Supply (Comp. R. & Regs. § 290-5-55). 
(7)  Solid Waste (Comp. R. & Regs. § 290-5-56). 
(8)  Swimming Pools and Recreational Water Parks (Comp. R. & Regs. § 290-5-57). 
(9)  Special On-Site Sewage Management Systems (Comp. R. & Regs. § 290-5-59). 
(10)  The Georgia Smokefree Air Act of 2005 (Comp. R. & Regs. § 290-5-61). 
Copies of those DCH rules and regulations are on file in the city clerk's office where the same are available for inspection and copying by the public during regular city operating hours. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 1-4-2010) 
Sec. 18-2. - State laws and city ordinances adopted. 
    Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1 et seq., in addition to the rules and regulations of the DCH mentioned in section 18-1, the following rules and regulations have been enacted by the county board of health, and are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth in this section by the city in accordance with state law, and are further approved for enforcement: 
(1)  Rules and regulations concerning body art and tattooing, enacted by the resolution dated August 9, 2001, which are hereby set forth verbatim in this section and adopted by the city council upon lawful adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(2)  Rules and regulations concerning rabies control, enacted by the resolution dated November 12, 2009, which are hereby set forth verbatim in this section and adopted by the city council upon lawful adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
Copies of those rules and regulations enacted by the county board of health and having been adopted by city council ordinance are on file in the city council clerk's office, where the same are available for inspection and copying by the public during regular city operating hours. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 2, 1-4-2010) 
Sec. 18-3. - Minimum lot sizes adopted. 
    In addition, the rules and regulations concerning minimum lot sizes for the orderly and safe development of property utilizing on-site sewage management systems, having been enacted by the county board of health are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth in this section. The city council may, however, require larger minimum lot sizes for utilization of on-site sewage management systems in zoning or land use districts providing for septic service, and in the event there is a conflict between the minimum lot sizes established by the county board of health and that established by the city council, the larger lot sizes established by the city council shall control and take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3, 1-4-2010) 
Sec. 18-4. - Fee schedule established. 
    A fee schedule for the implementation and confirmation of compliance with the referenced state promulgated rules and regulations and local board of health enactments mentioned in sections 18-1 through 18-3, including permit and inspection fees, has been established by the county board of health, and is hereby approved and adopted by the city council. A copy of this fee schedule, including all subsequent amendments, revisions or modifications thereto, is on file in the city clerk's office and is available for inspection and copying by the public during regular city operating hours. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 4, 1-4-2010) 
Sec. 18-5. - Compliance with chapter required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any natural person or any legal entity including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, firm or trust, to violate any of the rules and regulations identified in sections 18-1 through 18-3, and/or to fail or refuse to pay any fee established by the county board of health, and approved and adopted by the city council, for the implementation and confirmation of compliance with the rules and regulations identified in sections 18-1 through 18-3, including all permit and inspection fees. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 6, 1-4-2010) 
Secs. 18-6-18-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 18-29. - Penalties. 
    Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20, any person or any legal entity including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, firm or trust, violating any provision of the rules and regulations identified and adopted in this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 60 days, or both. Each day during which a violation of any provision of the rules and regulations identified and adopted in this article shall occur or continue shall constitute, and shall be considered, a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 7, 1-4-2010) 
Sec. 18-30. - Authority of city, state and county board of health. 
    The enforcement and prosecution of this article shall be within the jurisdiction of the city, state and the county board of health, and their authorized designees or agents, and all law enforcement personnel of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 5, 1-4-2010) 
Sec. 18-31. - Municipal court jurisdiction. 
    The city municipal court shall have original jurisdiction upon any offense charged pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 8, 1-4-2010) 
Sec. 18-32. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
    In addition to the rights and remedies set forth in this chapter, or as otherwise authorized by law, the city, state and county boards of health retain and reserve the right to seek equitable relief, injunction, abatement or any appropriate action or proceeding to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Failure or refusal to pay any fee approved for the implementation and confirmation of compliance with the rules and regulations identified in sections 18-1 through 18-3, including all permit and inspection fees, may result in suspension and/or revocation of any permit issued by the county board of health. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 9, 1-4-2010) 
Sec. 18-33. - Prosecution for violations. 
(a)  Violations of all state DCH promulgated rules and regulations and all local board of health enactments identified and adopted in this chapter may be prosecuted by an accusation or citation with or without a prosecuting attorney in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63, and any successor statute. 
(b)  The city council authorizes the city attorney or his designee to prosecute violations of this chapter, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-66, and any successor statute. 
(c)  The county solicitor and his assistants shall also have the authority to prosecute all citations or accusations issued for violation of the rules and regulations identified and adopted in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 10, 1-4-2010) 
Sec. 18-34. - Chapter not to prohibit state DCH from initiating other actions. 
    This chapter, and the enforcement and prosecution of this chapter by the city and county boards of health, and their authorized agents or designees, does not in any way effect, estop, prescribe, regulate, limit, or in any way control or prohibit the state DCH, and its agents or designees, from initiating or undertaking any action or proceeding to enforce compliance with its rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 11, 1-4-2010) 
Chapter 20 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
    Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of the building or other structure including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The kind or texture of the building material; and 
(2)  The type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
    Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape of the development of a site that affect the property's historical character. 
    Historic district means a historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, landscape features and works of art or a combination thereof, that: 
(1)  Have a special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
(2)  Represent one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and 
(3)  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the city or county. 
    Historic property means a historic property is a building, structure, site, object, work of art, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the city, state or local region, for one of the following reasons: 
(1)  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
(2)  It is one of the few remaining examples of past architectural style; 
(3)  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the city, state or region; or 
(4)  It is a site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the city, county, state or region. 
    Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, landscape feature or work of art within a historic district, such as: 
(1)  Reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including the relocation of any doors or windows or the removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements or other appurtenant features. 
(Comp. 1976, §§ 5-90, 5-111, 5-112; Code 1989, § 38-90; Ord. of 2-3-1986, §§ 3(B), (C), 11) 
Sec. 20-2. - Compliance with existing building and zoning codes required. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city or county building and zoning codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-152; Code 1989, § 38-89; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 6(C)) 
Sec. 20-3. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this chapter are: 
(1)  To support and further the city's findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the city is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; 
(2)  To stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business in order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; 
(3)  To provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same; and 
(4)  To establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, landscape features and works of art having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-91; Code 1989, § 38-91; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 1) 
Secs. 20-4-20-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 20-25. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a commission, the title of which shall be "Hartwell Historic Preservation Commission," hereinafter called "commission." 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-92; Code 1989, § 2-95; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 2(A)) 
Sec. 20-26. - Part of planning functions. 
    The commission shall be part of the city's planning functions. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-96; Code 1989, § 2-96; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 2(B)) 
Sec. 20-27. - Composition; qualifications; terms; compensation. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city council. All members shall be residents of the city. A majority of the members shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. 
(b)  To the extent available in the city, at least three members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology or related disciplines. 
(c)  Members shall serve three-year terms. Members may succeed themselves and may serve any number of consecutive terms. In order to achieve staggered terms the initial appointments shall be: one member for one year, one member for two years and three members for three years. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-97; Code 1989, § 2-97; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 2(C); Ord. of 10-2-1995; Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1(5-97), 8-4-2008) 
Sec. 20-28. - Powers. 
    The commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as historic property; 
(2)  Recommend to the city council specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects or works of art to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
(3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness and grant or deny the same in accordance with the provisions of this article; 
(4)  Recommend to the council that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, objects or work of art as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
(5)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city; 
(6)  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.); 
(7)  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city and on general historic preservation activities; 
(8)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with historic preservation experts, as the city council or commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
(9)  Seek out local, state, federal and private funds for historic preservation and make recommendations to the city council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
(10)  Submit to the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources a list of historic properties or historic districts designated; 
(11)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city historic preservation program; 
(12)  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission; 
(13)  Receive donations, grants, funds or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The commission shall not obligate the city without prior consent; 
(14)  Review and make comments to the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources concerning the nominations of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; 
(15)  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the city council's consent enter into agreements to do the same; and 
(16)  Review the change in exterior architectural appearance of any city-owned property within its preservation jurisdiction. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-98; Code 1989, § 2-98; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 2(D)) 
Sec. 20-29. - Adoption of rules and standards; meetings; election of officers; quorum. 
    The commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of applications for designations and certificates of appropriateness, such as bylaws, removal of membership provisions and design guidelines and criteria. The commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this article. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. The affirmative vote of a majority of those members present shall be sufficient to decide matters before the commission, as long as a quorum is present. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-99; Code 1989, § 2-99; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 2(E)) 
Sec. 20-30. - Conflicts. 
    At any time the commission reviews a project in which a member of the commission has ownership or other vested interest, that member will be forbidden from presenting, voting or discussing the project, other than answering a direct question. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-100; Code 1989, § 2-100; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 2(F)) 
Sec. 20-31. - Authority to receive funding and charge fees. 
    The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds and to charge fees for certificates of appropriateness to cover the cost of administering this article. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-101; Code 1989, § 2-101; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 2(G)) 
Sec. 20-32. - Recordkeeping. 
    A public record shall be kept of the commission's resolutions, proceedings and actions. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-102; Code 1989, § 2-102; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 2(H)) 
Secs. 20-33-20-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURE FOR DESIGNATING HISTORIC DISTRICTS 

Sec. 20-53. - Preliminary research and report. 
    The historic preservation commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city. The commission shall present to the council recommendations for historic districts and properties. Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the council for designation, the commission shall prepare a report consisting of: 
(1)  A physical description; 
(2)  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
(3)  A map showing the district boundaries and classifications (i.e., historic, nonhistoric, intrusive) of individual properties therein, or showing the boundaries of individual historic properties; 
(4)  A statement justifying the district or individual property boundaries; and 
(5)  Representative photographs. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-110; Code 1989, § 38-110; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 3(A)) 
Sec. 20-54. - Property classifications. 
    Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the official zoning map. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
(1)  Historic, which means the property contributes to the district; 
(2)  Nonhistoric, which means the property does not contribute but does not detract from the district; or 
(3)  Intrusive, which means the property detracts from the district. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-111; Code 1989, § 38-111; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 3(B)) 
Sec. 20-55. - Designating historic properties. 
    Historic properties shall meet the definition provided in this chapter. Boundaries shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such properties and shall be shown on the official zoning map. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-112; Code 1989, § 38-112; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 3(C)) 
Sec. 20-56. - Proposals. 
(a)  The mayor, city council, historical preservation commission, a historical society, a neighborhood association, or a group of property owners may make proposals for the designations of historic districts and properties. A single property owner may apply for the designation of a historic property. 
(b)  If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-113; Code 1989, § 38-113; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 3(D)) 
Sec. 20-57. - Contents of designating ordinances. 
    Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
(1)  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; 
(2)  Set forth the name of the owner of the designated property; 
(3)  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
(4)  Require the property or district to be shown on the official zoning map. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-113; Code 1989, § 38-114; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 3(D)) 
Sec. 20-58. - Public hearing; notice. 
(a)  The commission and the council shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. 
(b)  Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in a newspaper of general circulation within the city and the commission shall mail a written notice of the hearing to all owners and occupants of such properties. 
(c)  All notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten or more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. 
(d)  A notice sent via the United States mail to the address of the last known owner of the property shown on the city tax roll and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-113; Code 1989, § 38-115; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 3(D)) 
Sec. 20-59. - Recommendations sent to city council for determination. 
    A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the city council. Following receipt of the commission's recommendation, the city council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary or reject the ordinance. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-113; Code 1989, § 38-116; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 3(D)) 
Sec. 20-60. - Report to be filed with state department of natural resources. 
    Not less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the commission must submit the report required in section 20-53 to the historic preservation section of the state department of natural resources. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-113; Code 1989, § 38-117; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 3(D)) 
Sec. 20-61. - Notice of adopting ordinance. 
(a)  Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the city council, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of necessity of obtaining a certificate and appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. 
(b)  A notice sent via the United States mail to the address of the last known owner of the property shown on the city tax roll and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(c)  The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the city of the ordinance for designation, including the local historical organization. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-113; Code 1989, § 38-118; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 3(D)) 
Secs. 20-62-20-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-81. - Approval of exterior alterations required. 
    After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or district, no exterior material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a structure, site, object or work of art within such historic district shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-120; Code 1989, § 38-120; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 4(A)) 
Sec. 20-82. - Approval of new construction within designated districts required. 
    The commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness to new structures and signs constructed within designated historic districts if these structures and signs conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and landscaping to the character of the district specified in the design criteria developed by the commission. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-121; Code 1989, § 38-121; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 4(B)) 
Sec. 20-83. - Federal guidelines and commission criteria to govern issuance. 
    When considering applications for certificates of appropriateness to existing buildings, the "Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Historic Preservation Projects," published by the U.S. Department of Interior, including the "Standards for Rehabilitation" shall be used as a guideline along with any other criteria adopted by the commission. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-122; Code 1989, § 38-122; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 4(C)) 
Secs. 20-84-20-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICATION 

Sec. 20-110. - Accompanied by plans, drawings, etc. 
    An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, plans or other documentation as the commission may require. Applications involving demolition or relocation shall be accompanied by post-demolition or post-relocation plans for the site. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-123; Code 1989, § 38-123; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 4(D)) 
Sec. 20-111. - Factors considered; determination. 
(a)  In making its determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural value and significance, architectural style, general design arrangement, texture and material of the architectural features involved, and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style, and pertinent features of the other structures in the immediate neighborhood. The commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. The commission may seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(b)  The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material changes in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. 
(c)  The commission shall deny a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material changes in appearance would have substantial adverse effects on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. 
(Comp. 1976, §§ 5-124, 5-126, 5-127; Code 1989, § 38-124; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 4(E), (G), (H)) 
Sec. 20-112. - Public hearings; notice. 
    At least seven days prior to review of a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected by reason of the application, and shall give the applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. In cases where the commission deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the application. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-125; Code 1989, § 38-125; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 4(F)) 
Sec. 20-113. - Deadline for determination. 
(a)  The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of an historic property, or of a structure, site, object or work of art located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
(b)  Failure of the commission to act within such 45 days shall constitute approval and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-128; Code 1989, § 38-126; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 4(I)) 
Sec. 20-114. - Rejection; resubmission. 
    In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reason for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if such applicant so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-129; Code 1989, § 38-127; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 4(J)) 
Sec. 20-115. - Determination binding on building department. 
    In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-129; Code 1989, § 38-128; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 4(J)) 
Secs. 20-116-20-143. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VARIANCES, APPEALS, ETC. 

Sec. 20-144. - Variances. 
(a)  When by reason of unusual circumstances the strict application of any provision of this article would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon such applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to such provisions, or to interpret the meaning of said variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of such provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. 
(b)  In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this article. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-130; Code 1989, § 38-129; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 4(K)) 
Sec. 20-145. - Work to conform to certificate; preventing material change. 
(a)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(b)  The city council or commission shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with this article or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-131; Code 1989, § 38-130; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 4(L)) 
Sec. 20-146. - Duration of certificate; renewal. 
    A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within 12 months of the date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable. 
(Comp 1976, § 5-132; Code 1989, § 38-131; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 4(M)) 
Sec. 20-147. - Recordkeeping. 
    The commission shall keep a public record of: 
(1)  All applications for certificates of appropriateness; and 
(2)  All commission's proceedings in connection with such application. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-133; Code 1989, § 38-132; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 4(N)) 
Sec. 20-148. - Commission authority to acquire property. 
    The commission may, when such action is authorized by the mayor or council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange or otherwise of the property or any interest therein. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-134; Code 1989, § 38-133; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 4(O)) 
Sec. 20-149. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the city council. Any such appeal must be filed with the council within 15 days after the issuance of the determination or, in the case of a failure of the commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for commission action. 
(b)  The city council may approve, modify or reject the determination made by the commission, if the city council finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. 
(c)  Appeals from city council decisions may be taken to the superior court in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for ordinance violations. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-135; Code 1989, § 38-134; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 4(P)) 
Secs. 20-150-20-166. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEMOLITION OR RELOCATION OF HISTORIC PROPERTY 

Sec. 20-167. - Application; public hearing. 
    The commission shall have the authority to grant or deny certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. A public hearing shall be scheduled for each such application. The commission shall not grant certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation without reviewing at the same time the post-demolition or post-relocation plans for the site. 
(Comp. 1976, §§ 5-140-5-142; Code 1989, § 38-140; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 5(A)-(C)) 
Sec. 20-168. - Criteria. 
    Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation, the commission shall use the criteria described in section 20-111 to determine whether to deny the application or issue a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-143; Code 1989, § 38-141; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 5(D)) 
Secs. 20-169-20-189. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MAINTENANCE OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES 

Sec. 20-190. - Ordinary maintenance or repair-Certificate not required. 
    Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-150; Code 1989, § 38-150; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 6(A)) 
Sec. 20-191. - Same-Failure of property owner; abatement. 
    Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: 
(1)  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and openings that allow the elements and vermin to enter, the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)  In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the property owner and set forth the steps that need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 30 days in which to do this. 
(3)  In the event that the condition is not remedied within 30 days, the owner shall be punished as provided in general penalty section 1-9 and, at the city council's direction, the commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The property owner shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
(Comp. 1976, § 5-151; Code 1989, § 38-151; Ord. of 2-3-1986, § 6(B)) 
Chapter 22 - MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; factory built structures generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-110 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Governing authority means the legally designated council, board, commission, or other governmental unit or its authorized representative of the city. 
    Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight-body feet or more in width or 40-body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. 
    Mobile home lot means a parcel of land for the placement of a single mobile home and the exclusive use of its occupants. 
    Mobile home park means a parcel of land or any portion thereof under single ownership that has been designed, planned or improved for the placement of two or more mobile homes for residential use, including land, buildings and facilities used by the occupants of mobile homes on such property. 
    Mobile home stand means that part of an individual lot that has been reserved for the placement of the mobile home, appurtenant structures or additions. 
    Permit means a written permit issued by the city council permitting the construction, alteration and extension of a mobile home park under the provisions and regulations of this chapter. 
    Service building means a structure housing toilet, lavatory and such other facilities as may be required by this chapter. 
    Sewer connection means the connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the drain outlet of the mobile home to the inlet of the corresponding sewer riser pipe of the sanitary sewer system serving the mobile home park. 
    Sewer riser pipe means that portion of the sewer lateral that extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates on each mobile home lot. 
    Water connection means the connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within the mobile home. 
    Water riser pipe means that portion of the water supply system serving the mobile home park that extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at each mobile home lot. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-1; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-2. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00, within the maximum provided in general penalty section 1-9, and otherwise punished as provided in section 1-9, and each day's failure of compliance with any such provision shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-6; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 17) 
Sec. 22-3. - Conflicts. 
    In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with any other provision of this Code or other ordinance, including the technical codes adopted by the city, or any applicable state or federal regulation, the provision that, in the city council's judgment, establishes the higher standard or provide the most stringent regulation for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-2; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 18.1) 
Sec. 22-4. - Compliance with chapter required. 
    No person shall maintain within the geographical city limits any mobile home, or other similar structure used for human habitation, except as provided in this chapter. 
Sec. 22-5. - Storage. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the storage of a mobile home or other similar structure for any reasonable length of time when the structure is not used for living or sleeping purposes and does not otherwise constitute an unsightly condition and does not prejudice the health and safety of other buildings located in the vicinity or persons residing in the vicinity. 
Sec. 22-6. - Immobilizing. 
(a)  Permit required. Removal of the wheels or other transporting device from any mobile home or other structure, so as to affix the structure permanently to the ground in any location is prohibited, unless a permit for such location is obtained from the city on the same basis as a permit required for the construction of a new building. 
(b)  Compliance with building and zoning regulations required. Any alteration, moving, relocation or conversion shall be construed as converting the mobile home or other structure into a building in such manner as to be subject to the building codes of the city and to the requirements of its zoning and building ordinances. Occupancy for sleeping or other residential purposes of any mobile home or similar structure which has been rendered immobile by the removal of wheels or the placing of the structure on a foundation or on the ground, is prohibited unless such mobile home or other structure, and the location upon which it is situated, complies with the ordinances relating to the construction, wiring, plumbing, sewerage facilities and other regulations applicable to single-family dwellings. 
Sec. 22-7. - Sale or rental. 
(a)  License required. No person shall display for sale, rental or other disposition any mobile home or other similar structure without first obtaining from the city an appropriate license to engage in such business. 
(b)  Standards for issuance of license. No business license for operation of such business shall be granted by the city until the applicant shall have identified the proposed location of such business, and unless such location is demonstrated to have sufficient space for the orderly display of such structures and conduct of such business. Maintenance of junk, debris or structures failing to meet the city's minimum housing standards will not be allowed. 
Secs. 22-8-22-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOME PARKS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 22-33-22-52. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 22-53. - Required. 
    No person shall establish, maintain or operate any mobile home park in the city without having first obtained a license therefor. 
Sec. 22-54. - Application; fee. 
    Application for a mobile home park license shall be made at the office of the city clerk on a form provided by the clerk for that purposes. The annual fee for mobile home park licenses shall be in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution and shall consist of a base fee plus a fee for each mobile home over five for which accommodations are furnished. 
Secs. 22-55-22-81. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ENVIRONMENTAL, OPEN SPACE AND ACCESS REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 22-82. - Minimum requirements. 
    Condition of soil, groundwater level, drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors or other adverse influences, and no portion subject to unpredictable or sudden flooding, subsidence or erosion shall be used for any purpose that would expose persons or property to hazards. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-60; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 7) 
Sec. 22-83. - Exposed ground surfaces to be covered. 
    Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every mobile home park shall be: 
(1)  Paved; 
(2)  Covered with stone screenings or other solid material; or 
(3)  Protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and eliminating objectionable dust. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-61; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 7.2) 
Sec. 22-84. - Grading and drainage. 
    The ground surface in all parts of every mobile home shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-62; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 7.3) 
Sec. 22-85. - Nonresidential uses of park for management and maintenance only. 
(a)  No part of any park shall be used for nonresidential purposes, except such uses that are required for the direct servicing and well-being of park residents and for the management and maintenance of the park. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed as prohibiting the sale of a mobile home located on a mobile home stand and connected to the pertinent utilities. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-63; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 7.4) 
Sec. 22-86. - Distances between mobile homes. 
(a)  Mobile homes shall be separated from each other and from other buildings and structures by at least 20 feet; provided that mobile homes placed end-to-end may have a clearance of 15 feet where rear walls are staggered. 
(b)  An accessory structure which has a horizontal area exceeding 25 square feet is attached to a mobile home or located within ten feet of its window, and has an opaque top or roof that is higher than the nearest window shall, for purposes of all separation requirements, be considered to be part of the mobile home. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-64; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 7.5) 
Sec. 22-87. - Recreation areas. 
(a)  In all parks accommodating or designed to accommodate 25 or more mobile homes, there shall be one or more recreation areas that shall be easily accessible to all park residents. 
(b)  The size of such recreation areas shall be based upon a minimum of 100 square feet for each lot. No outdoor recreation area shall contain less than 2,500 square feet. 
(c)  Recreation areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic hazards and should, where the topography permits, be centrally located. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-65; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 7.6) 
Sec. 22-88. - Setbacks, buffer strips and screening. 
(a)  All mobile homes shall be located at least 50 feet from any park property boundary line abutting upon a public street or highway and at least 20 feet from other park property boundary lines. 
(b)  There shall be a minimum distance of 20 feet between an individual mobile home and adjoining pavement of a park street, or common parking area or other common areas. 
(c)  All mobile home parks located adjacent to industrial or commercial land uses shall be provided with screening of natural growth along the property boundary line separating the park and such adjacent nonresidential uses. Such screening shall consist of mixed evergreen and deciduous trees and be at least 30 feet in width. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-66; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 7.7) 
Sec. 22-89. - Park and street access. 
(a)  General requirements. All mobile home parks shall be provided with safe and convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets or roads to each mobile home lot. Alignment and gradient shall be properly adapted to topography. 
(b)  Access. Access to mobile home parks shall be designed to minimize congestion and hazards at the entrance or exit and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets. The entrance road connecting the park streets with a public street or road shall have a minimum road pavement width of 30 feet. Where the primary entrance road is more than 100 feet long and does not provide access to abutting mobile home lots within such distance, the minimum road pavement width must be 40 feet. 
(c)  Internal streets. Surfaced roadways shall be of adequate width to accommodate anticipated traffic, and in any case, shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Surfaces. All streets shall have a 30-foot wearing surface and street surfaces shall be maintained free of cracks, holes and other hazards. 
(2)  Grades. Grades of all streets shall be sufficient to ensure adequate surface drainage, but shall be not more than five percent. Short runs with a maximum grade of five percent may be permitted; provided traffic safety is ensured by appropriate paving, adequate leveling areas and avoidance of lateral curbs. 
(3)  Intersections. Within 100 feet of an intersection, streets shall be at approximately right angles. A distance of at least 150 feet shall be maintained between centerlines of offset intersecting streets. Intersections of more than two streets at one point shall be avoided. 
(d)  Required illumination of park street systems. All parks shall be furnished with lighting units so spaced and equipped with luminaries placed at such mounting heights as will provide the following average maintained levels of illumination for the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night: 
(1)  All parts of the park street systems: a minimum of five footcandles. 
(2)  Potentially hazardous locations, such as major street intersections and steps or stepped ramps; individually illuminated with a minimum of 20 footcandles. 
(e)  Street construction and design standards. 
(1)  All streets shall be provided with a smooth hard and dense surface that shall be durable and well drained under normal use and weather conditions. Pavement edges shall be protected to prevent raveling. 
(2)  Streets, with no parking allowed, shall have a width of 24 feet (acceptable only if less than 500 feet long and serving less than 25 mobile homes or of any length if one way and providing access to abutting mobile home lots on one side only). 
(3)  Dead-end streets shall be limited in length to 600 feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least 80 feet. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-67; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 7.8) 
Sec. 22-90. - Off-street parking areas. 
(a)  Off-street parking areas shall be provided in all mobile home parks for the use of park occupants and guests. Such areas shall be furnished at the rate of at least two car spaces for each mobile home lot. 
(b)  Required car parking spaces shall be so located as to provide convenient access to the mobile home, but shall not exceed a distance of 200 feet from the mobile home that it is intended to serve. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-68; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 7.9) 
Sec. 22-91. - Walks. 
(a)  General requirements. All parks shall be provided with safe, convenient, all-season pedestrial access of adequate width for intended use, durable and convenient to maintain, between individual mobile homes, the park streets and all community facilities provided for park residents. Sudden changes in alignment and gradient shall be avoided. 
(b)  Common walk system. A common walk system shall be provided and maintained between locations where pedestrian traffic is concentrated. Such common walks shall have a minimum width of 31/2 feet. 
(c)  Individual walks. All mobile home stands shall be connected to common walks, paved streets or paved driveways, or parking spaces connecting to a paved street. Such individual walks shall have a minimum width of two feet. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-69; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 7.10) 
Sec. 22-92. - Mobile home stands. 
    The area of the mobile home stand shall be improved to provide an adequate foundation for the placement and tie-down of the mobile home, thereby securing the superstructure against uplift, sliding, rotation and overturning. 
(1)  The mobile home stand shall not heave, shift or settle unevenly under the weight of the mobile home due to frost action, inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces acting on the superstructure. 
(2)  The mobile home stand shall be provided with anchors and tie-downs such as cast-in-place concrete "dead men" eyelets imbedded in concrete foundations or runways, screw augers, arrowhead anchors or other devices securing the stability of the mobile home. 
(3)  Anchors and tie-downs shall be placed at least at each corner of the mobile home stand and each shall be able to sustain a minimum tensile strength of 3,000 pounds. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-70; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 7.11) 
Secs. 22-93-22-112. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PARK REGULATIONS 

Sec. 22-113. - Responsibilities-Management. 
(a)  The person to whom a permit for a mobile home park is issued shall live on the premises and operate the park in compliance with the regulations issued in this chapter and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)  The park management shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of this chapter and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under the regulations issued in this chapter. 
(c)  The park management shall supervise the placement of each mobile home on its mobile home stand that includes securing its stability and installing all utility connections. 
(d)  The park management shall maintain a register containing the names of all park occupants. Such register shall be available to any authorized person inspecting the park. 
(e)  The park management shall notify the city health authority immediately of any suspected communicable or contagious disease within the park. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-3; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 16.1) 
Sec. 22-114. - Same-Occupants. 
(a)  The park occupant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the regulations issued in this chapter and shall maintain such occupant's mobile home lot, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)  The park occupant shall be responsible for proper placement of such occupant's mobile home on its mobile home stand and proper installation of all utility connections in accordance with the instructions of the park management. 
(c)  No owner or person in charge of a dog, cat or other pet animal shall permit it to run at large or to commit any nuisance within the limits of any mobile home lot. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-4; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 16.2) 
Sec. 22-115. - Conditions precedent to occupancy. 
    A mobile home shall not be occupied for dwelling purposes unless it is properly placed on a mobile home stand and connected to water, sewerage and electrical utilities. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-5; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 16.3) 
Sec. 22-116. - Densities-Maximum units; minimum area of lots. 
    No mobile home park shall be permitted that has a gross density greater than six units per acre, or mobile home lots of less than 3,000 square feet. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-7; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 3.1) 
Sec. 22-117. - Same-Minimum and maximum acres of park. 
    No mobile home park of less than four contiguous acres or greater than 50 acres shall be permitted. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-8; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 3.2) 
Sec. 22-118. - Same-Proximity of mobile home parks to each other. 
    No two mobile home parks shall be permitted closer than 500 feet to one another. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-9; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 3.3) 
Sec. 22-119. - Occupant to permit access by owner or agent to make repairs. 
    It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile home park to give the owner thereof or his agent or employee access to any part of such mobile home park or its premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the regulations issued in this chapter, or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-14; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 4.5) 
Secs. 22-120-22-136. - Reserved. 
DIVISON 5. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 22-137. - Authority. 
    The enforcement officers are hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with the regulations issued in this chapter. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-10; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 4.1) 
Sec. 22-138. - Right of entry. 
    The enforcement officers shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of the regulations issued in this chapter. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-11; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 4.2) 
Sec. 22-139. - Duty of owner or occupant to permit access. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner or occupants of mobile home parks, and mobile homes contained therein, or of the person in charge thereof, to give the enforcement officers free access to such premises at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-12; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 4.4) 
Sec. 22-140. - Resident register. 
    The enforcement officers shall have the power to inspect the register containing a record of all residents of the mobile home park. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-13; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 4.3) 
Secs. 22-141-22-163. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PERMIT 

Sec. 22-164. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any mobile home park within the city unless such person holds a valid permit issued by the city council in the name of such person for the specific construction, alteration or extension proposed. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-50; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 2.1) 
Sec. 22-165. - Application; contents. 
    All applications for permits shall be made to the city council and shall contain the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  Interest of the applicant in the mobile home park. 
(3)  Location and legal description of the mobile home park. 
(4)  Complete engineering plans and specifications of the proposed park showings: 
a.  The area and dimensions of the tract of land; 
b.  The number, location and size of all mobile home lots; 
c.  The location and width of roadways and walkways; 
d.  The location of service buildings and any other proposed structures; 
e.  The location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes; 
f.  Plans and specifications of the water supply and refuse and sewage disposal facilities; 
g.  Plans and specifications of all buildings constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home park; and 
h.  The location and details of lighting and electrical systems. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-51; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 2.2) 
Sec. 22-166. - Fee. 
    All applications shall be accompanied by the deposit of a fee in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-52; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 2.3) 
Sec. 22-167. - Issuance. 
    When, upon review of the application, the city council is satisfied that the proposed plan meets the requirements and regulations issued under this chapter, a permit shall be issued. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-53; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 2.4) 
Sec. 22-168. - Hearing. 
    Any person whose application for a permit under this chapter has been denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the city council under the procedure provided by sections 22-165 through 22-169. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-54; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 2.5) 
Sec. 22-169. - Suspension-Procedure. 
    Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park, the city council finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provision of this chapter or regulations issued under this chapter, the city council shall give notice in writing in accordance with section 22-165 to the person to whom the permit was issued that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period of time specified in the notice by the city council, the permit shall be suspended. At the end of such period, the city council shall reinspect such mobile home park and, if such conditions or practices have not been corrected, it shall suspend the permit and give notice in writing of such suspension to the person to whom the permit is issued. Upon receipt of the notice of such suspension, such person shall cease operation of such mobile home park except as provided in section 9-16. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-55; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 2.6) 
Sec. 22-170. - Same-Hearing; revocation. 
    Any person whose permit has been suspended may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the city council, under the provisions of sections 22-165 through 22-169; provided that when no petition for such hearing shall have been filed within ten days following the day on which notice of suspension was served, such license shall be deemed to have been automatically revoked at the expiration of such ten-day period. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-56; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 2.7) 
Secs. 22-171-22-189. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-190. - Authority of city council to adopt regulations. 
    The city council is hereby authorized to make, and after public hearing, to adopt such written regulations as may be necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this article. Such regulations shall have the same force and effect as the provisions of this article and the penalty for violation of the provisions thereof shall be the same as the penalty for violation of this Code. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-20; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 6.1) 
Sec. 22-191. - Notice; contents. 
    Whenever the city council determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this article, or regulations issued under this article, the city council shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person to whom the permit was issued. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance; 
(3)  Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires; 
(4)  Be served upon the owner or his agent as the case may require; provided that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has been served by certified or registered mail to such owner's or agent's last known address, or when such owner or agent has been served with such notice by any method authorized or required by state law; and 
(5)  Contain an outline of remedial action that if taken will effect compliance with the regulations issued under this article. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-15; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 5.1) 
Sec. 22-192. - Hearing-Generally. 
(a)  Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this article or regulation issued under this article, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the city council; provided that such person shall file in the office of the city council a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within ten days after the day the notice was served. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice and of the suspension except in the case of an order issued for emergency action, as provided in this division. 
(b)  Upon receipt of such petition, the city council shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later than ten days after the day on which the petition was filed; provided that upon application of the petitioner the city council may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period when in its judgment the petitioner has submitted good and sufficient reason for such postponement. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-16; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 5.2) 
Sec. 22-193. - Same-Order. 
    After such hearing the city council shall make findings as to compliance with the provisions of this article and regulations issued under this article and shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the notice that shall be served as provided in herein. Upon the failure to comply with any order sustaining or modifying a notice, the permit of the mobile park affected by the order shall be revoked. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-17; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 5.3) 
Sec. 22-194. - Same-Recording; appeals. 
    The proceedings at such a hearing, including the city council's findings and decision, together with a copy of every notice and order related thereto shall be entered as a matter of public record in the city council office, but the transcript of the proceedings need not be transcribed unless judicial review of the decision is sought as provided by this section. Any person aggrieved by the city council's decision may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by state law. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-18; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 5.4) 
Sec. 22-195. - Emergency procedure. 
    Whenever the city council finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, such authority may without notice or hearing issue an order reciting the existence of such emergency and requiring that such action to be taken as it may deem necessary to meet the emergency, including the suspension of the permit. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the city council shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. The provisions of sections 22-167 and 22-168 shall be applicable to such hearing and the order issued thereafter. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-19; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 5.5) 
Secs. 22-196-22-214. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM 

Sec. 22-215. - Required. 
    An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided in each mobile home park. Where a public supply of water of satisfactory quantity, quality and pressure is available, connection shall be made thereto and its supply used exclusively. When a satisfactory public water supply is not available, a private water supply system may be developed and used as approved by the health authority. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-21; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 8.1) 
Sec. 22-216. - Minimum amount, distance and treatment specifications. 
(a)  The water supply shall be capable of supplying a minimum of 150 gallons per day per mobile home. 
(b)  Every well or suction line of the water supply system shall be located and constructed in such a manner that neither underground, nor surface contamination will reach the water supply from any source. The following minimum distances between wells and various sources of contamination shall be required: 
Contamination Source Well or Suction Line (distance in feet) Building sewer 50 Septic tank 100 Disposal field 100 Seepage pit 100 Dry well 50 Cesspool 150  
(c)  No well-casings, pumping machinery or suction pipes shall be placed in any pit, room or space extending below ground level, nor in any room or space above ground which is walled in or otherwise enclosed, unless such rooms, whether above or below ground, have free drainage by gravity to the surface of the ground. 
(d)  The treatment of a private water supply shall be in accordance with applicable state and local laws and regulations. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-22; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 8.2) 
Sec. 22-217. - Storage facilities. 
    All water storage reservoirs shall be covered, watertight and constructed of impervious material. Overflows and vents of such reservoirs shall be effectively screened. Manholes shall be constructed with overlapping covers, so as to prevent the entrance of contaminated material. Reservoir overflow pipes shall discharge through an acceptable air gap. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-23; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 8.3) 
Sec. 22-218. - Piping system. 
(a)  The water supply system of the mobile home park shall be connected by pipes to all mobile homes, buildings and other facilities requiring water. 
(b)  All water piping, fixtures and other equipment shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with state and local regulations and requirements shall be of a type and in locations approved by the state health authority. 
(c)  The water piping system shall not be connected with nonpotable or questionable water supplies and shall be protected against the hazards of backflow or back siphonage. 
(d)  The system shall be so designed and maintained as to provide a pressure of not less than 20 pounds per square inch, under normal operating conditions at service buildings and other locations requiring potable water supply. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-24; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 8.4) 
Sec. 22-219. - Individual water riser pipes and connections. 
(a)  Individual water riser pipes shall be located within the confined area of the mobile home stand at a point where the water connection will approximate a vertical position. 
(b)  Water riser pipes shall extend at least four inches above ground elevation. The pipe shall be at least three-quarters of an inch. The water outlet shall be capped when a mobile home does not occupy the lot. 
(c)  Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service lines, valves and riser pipes and to protect risers from having and thawing actions of ground during freezing weather. Surface drainage shall be diverted from the location of the riser pipe. 
(d)  A shutoff valve below the frost line shall be provided near the water riser pipe on each mobile home lot. 
(e)  Underground stop and waste valves shall not be installed on any water service. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-25; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 8.5) 
Secs. 22-220-22-228. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM 

Sec. 22-229. - Required. 
    An adequate and safe sewerage system shall be provided in all mobile home parks for conveying and disposing of all sewage. Such system shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with state and local laws. No private system shall be permitted. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-26; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 9.1) 
Sec. 22-230. - Sewer lines. 
    All sewer lines shall be located in trenches of sufficient depth to be free of breakage from traffic or other movements and shall be separated from the park water supply system at a safe distance. Sewers shall be at a grade which will ensure a velocity of two feet per second when flowing full. All sewer lines shall: 
(1)  Be constructed of materials approved by the state health authority; 
(2)  Be adequately vented; and 
(3)  Have watertight joints. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-27; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 9.2) 
Sec. 22-231. - Individual connections. 
(a)  Each mobile home stand shall be provided with at least a four-inch diameter sewer riser pipe. The sewer riser pipe shall be so located on each stand that the sewer connection to the mobile home drain outlet will approximate a vertical position. 
(b)  The sewer connection shall have a nominal inside diameter of at least three inches, and the slope of any portion thereof shall be at least one-fourth inch per foot. The sewer connection shall consist of one pipeline only without any branch fittings. All joints shall be watertight. 
(c)  All materials used for sewer connections shall be semirigid, corrosive resistant, nonabsorbent and durable. The inner surface shall be smooth. 
(d)  Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when a mobile home does not occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the riser. The rim of the riser pipe shall extend at least four inches above ground elevation. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-28; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 9.3) 
Sec. 22-232. - Treatment and/or discharge. 
    Where the sewer lines of the mobile home park are not connected to a public sewer, all proposed sewage disposal facilities shall be approved by the health authority prior to construction. Effluents from sewage treatment facilities shall not be discharged into any waters of the state except with prior approval of the health authority. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-29; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 9.4) 
Secs. 22-233-22-246. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM 

Sec. 22-247. - Required. 
    Every park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of wiring, fixture, equipment and appurtenances that shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such systems. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-30; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 10-1) 
Sec. 22-248. - Power lines. 
(a)  Main power lines shall be located underground. There shall be a minimum horizontal clearance of three feet between overhead wiring and any mobile home, service building or other structure. 
(b)  All direct burial conductors or cable shall be buried at least 18 inches below the ground surface and shall be insulated and specially designed for the purpose. Such conductors shall be located not less than one-foot radial distance from water, sewer, gas or communication lines. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-31; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 10.2) 
Sec. 22-249. - Individual connections. 
(a)  Each mobile home lot shall be provided with an approved disconnecting device and overcurrent protective equipment. The minimum service per outlet shall be 120/240 volts AC, 50 amperes. 
(b)  Outlet receptacles at each mobile home stand shall be located not more than 25 feet from the overcurrent protective devices in the mobile home and a three-pole, four-wire grounding type shall be used. Receptacles shall be of weatherproof construction and configurations shall be in accordance with American Standard Outlet Receptacle C-73.1. 
(c)  The mobile home shall be connected to the outlet receptacle by an approved type of flexible cable with connectors and a male attachment plug. 
(d)  Where the calculated load of the mobile home is more than 50 amperes either a second outlet receptacle shall be installed or electrical service shall be provided by means of permanently installed conductors. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-32; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 10.3) 
Sec. 22-250. - Required grounding. 
    All exposed noncurrent carrying metal parts of mobile homes and all other equipment shall be grounded by means of an approved grounding conductor with branch circuit conductors or other approved method of grounded metallic wiring. The neutral conductor shall not be used as an equipment ground for mobile homes or other equipment. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-33; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 10.4) 
Secs. 22-251-22-278. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SERVICE BUILDING AND OTHER COMMUNITY SERVICE FACILITIES 

Sec. 22-279. - Required. 
    The requirements of this subdivision shall apply to service buildings, recreation buildings and other community service facilities such as: 
(1)  Management offices, repair shops, appropriate only to mobile home parks and storage areas; 
(2)  Sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Laundry facilities; 
(4)  Indoor recreation areas; and 
(5)  Commercial uses supplying only essential goods or services for the exclusive use of park occupants. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-34; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 11.1) 
Sec. 22-280. - Emergency sanitary facilities. 
    Every park shall be provided with the following emergency sanitary facilities: 
(1)  For each 50 mobile home lots, or fractional part thereof, there shall be one flush toilet and one lavatory for each sex. 
(2)  The building containing such emergency sanitary facilities shall be accessible to all mobile homes. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-35; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 11.2) 
Sec. 22-281. - Structural requirements for buildings. 
(a)  All portions of the structure shall be properly protected from damage by ordinary uses and by decay, corrosion, termites, and other destructive elements. Exterior portions shall be of such materials and be so constructed and protected as to prevent entrance or penetration of moisture and weather. 
(b)  All rooms containing sanitary or laundry facilities shall: 
(1)  Have sound resistant walls extending to the ceiling between male and female sanitary facilities. Walls and partitions around showers, bathtubs, lavatories and other plumbing fixtures shall be constructed of dense, nonabsorbent, waterproof material or covered with moisture resistant material. 
(2)  Have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum aggregate gross area of windows for each required room shall be not less than ten percent of the floor area served by them. 
(3)  Have at least one window that can be easily opened or a mechanical device that will adequately ventilate the room. 
(c)  Toilets shall be located in separate compartments equipped with self-closing doors. Shower stalls shall be of the individual type. The rooms shall be screened to prevent direct view of the interior when the exterior doors are open. 
(d)  Illumination levels shall be maintained as follows: 
Area Required Illumination (in footcandles) General seeing tasks 5 Laundry room work area 40 Toilet room, in front of mirrors 40  
(e)  Hot and cold water shall be furnished to every lavatory, sink, bathtub, shower and laundry fixture, and cold water shall be furnished to every water closet and urinal. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-36; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 11.3) 
Sec. 22-282. - Barbecue pits, fireplaces, stoves and incinerators. 
    Cooking shelter, barbecue pits, fireplaces, woodburning stoves and incinerators shall be so located, constructed, maintained and used as to minimize fire hazards and smoke nuisance both on the property on which used and on neighboring property. No open fire shall be permitted except in facilities provided. No open fire shall be left unattended. No fuel shall be used and no material burned which emits dense smoke or objectionable odors. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-37; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 11.4) 
Secs. 22-283-22-312. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - FUEL SUPPLY AND STORAGE 

Sec. 22-313. - Natural gas system. 
(a)  Natural gas piping systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such systems. 
(b)  Each mobile home lot provided with piped gas shall have an approved manual shutoff valve installed upstream of the gas outlet. The outlet shall be equipped with an approved cap to prevent accidental discharge of gas when the outlet is not in use. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-40; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 14.1) 
Sec. 22-314. - Liquefied petroleum gas systems. 
(a)  Liquefied petroleum gas systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such systems. 
(b)  Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve excessive pressures and shall be arranged so that the discharge terminates at a safe location. 
(c)  Systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting off gas. Such means shall be located outside the mobile home and shall be maintained in effective operating condition. 
(d)  All liquefied petroleum gas piping outside of the mobile homes shall be well supported and protected against mechanical injury. Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be conveyed through piping equipment and systems in mobile homes. 
(e)  Liquefied petroleum gas containers installed on a mobile home lot shall be securely but not permanently fastened to prevent accidental overturning. Such containers shall not be less than 12 or more than 60 U.S. gallons gross capacity. 
(f)  No liquefied petroleum gas vessel shall be stored or located inside or beneath any storage cabinet, carport, mobile home, or any other structure, unless the county commission approved such installations. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-41; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 14.2) 
Sec. 22-315. - Fuel oil supply systems. 
(a)  All fuel oil supply systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such systems. 
(b)  All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to mobile homes shall be permanently installed and securely fastened in place. 
(c)  All fuel oil storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely fastened in place and shall not be located inside or beneath any mobile home or less than five feet from any mobile home exit. 
(d)  Storage tanks located in areas subject to traffic shall be protected against physical damage. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-42; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 14.3) 
Secs. 22-316-22-333. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - FIRE PROTECTION 

Sec. 22-334. - Compliance with city rules and regulations required. 
    The mobile home area shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the city fire prevention authority. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-43; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 15.1) 
Sec. 22-335. - Littering prohibited. 
    Mobile home parks shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other inflammable materials. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-44; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 15.2) 
Sec. 22-336. - Fire extinguishers. 
    Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the fire prevention authority shall be kept in service buildings and at all other locations designated by such fire prevention authority and shall be maintained in good operating condition. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-45; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 15.3) 
Sec. 22-337. - Fires. 
    Fires shall be made only in stoves, incinerators and other equipment intended for such purposes. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-46; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 15.4) 
Sec. 22-338. - Hydrants. 
(a)  Fire hydrants shall be installed if the park water supply system is capable of serving them in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  The water supply system shall permit the operation of a minimum of 21/2-inch hose streams. 
(2)  Each of two nozzles, held four feet above the ground, shall deliver at least 75 gallons of water per minute at a flowing pressure of at least 30 pounds per square inch at the highest elevation point of the park. 
(b)  Fire hydrants shall be located within 500 feet of any mobile home, service building or other structure in the park. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-47; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), § 15.5) 
Secs. 22-339-22-364. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 22-365. - Refuse handling. 
(a)  All refuse shall be stored in a flytight, watertight, rodentproof container, which shall be located not more than 150 feet from any mobile home lot. Containers shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to properly store all refuse. 
(b)  Refuse collection stands shall be provided for all refuse containers. Such container stands shall be so designed as to prevent containers from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration and to facilitate cleaning around them. Sunken containers are recommended. 
(c)  All refuse containing garbage shall be collected at least twice weekly. Where suitable collection service is not available from municipal or private agencies, the mobile home park operator shall provide this service. All refuse shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles or covered containers. 
(d)  Where municipal or private disposal service is not available, the mobile home park operator shall dispose of the refuse by transporting it to a disposal site approved by the state health authority. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-38; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), §§ 12.1-12.4) 
Sec. 22-366. - Insect and rodent control. 
(a)  Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control insects and rodents shall conform to the requirements of the health authority. 
(b)  Parks shall be maintained free of accumulations of debris that may provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other pests. 
(c)  Storage areas shall be maintained as to prevent rodent harborage; lumber, pipe and other building material shall be stored at least one foot above the ground. 
(d)  Where the potential for insect and rodent infestation exists, all exterior openings in or beneath any structure shall be appropriately screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials. 
(e)  The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to prevent harborage of ticks, chiggers and other noxious insects. Parks shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth of ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac and other noxious weeds considered detrimental to health. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any description. 
(Comp. 1976, § 21-105; Code 1989, § 9-39; Ord. of 8-24-1973(1), §§ 13.1-13.5) 
Chapter 24 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - False alarms. 
    No person shall intentionally make, turn in or give a false alarm of a fire or of need for police or ambulance assistance, or aid or abet in the commission of such an act. 
(Comp. 1976, § 6-105A; Ord. of 8-7-1978(2), § 12) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-26 et seq. 
Sec. 24-2. - Marijuana. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess one ounce or less of marijuana. 
(Comp. 1976, § 17-121; Code 1989, § 12-2; Ord. of 8-12-1976) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-13-30(j). 
Sec. 24-3. - Discharging firearms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged a firearm of any nature, for any purpose, within the city, except in lawful self-defense or defense of another, or by law enforcement officers in the performance of duties. 
(Comp. 1976, § 17-119; Code 1989, § 12-3) 
State Law reference- Discharge of firearm near highway, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103; or on property of another, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-104. 
Sec. 24-4. - Disorderly conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate city limits: 
(1)  To cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another, or to disturb the peace and tranquility of any citizen or the public generally and shall include the use of profane, indecent or obscene language in the presence of another. 
(2)  To congregate for the purpose of destroying property by any means including, but not limited to, trampling, stomping, kicking, striking another, or for the purpose of directing any type of missile or other such similarly used device with the intent to injure or harm any person or property. 
(3)  To be and to appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud or unbecoming language. 
(Comp. 1976, § 17-117; Code 1989, § 12-4; Ord. of 6-5-1989) 
State Law reference- Reckless conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-5-60; riot, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-30; fighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-32; loitering, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36; profanity, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 24-5. - Gambling. 
(a)  Any person who shall knowingly permit gambling, games of chance or wagers for money or other things of value on any slot machine, device, game, drawing board, pool table, or in other manner, which shall be engaged in the place of business occupied by such person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct. 
(b)  Any employee of any person who shall knowingly permit any of the acts described in subsection (a) of this section shall also be guilty of disorderly conduct. 
(c)  Any person who observes any of the acts described in subsection (a) of this section being conducted in the place of business of such person or his employer, and does not immediately report the same to the chief of police or the police officer on duty shall be deemed to have committed the acts described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Comp. 1976, § 17-116; Code 1989, § 12-5) 
Sec. 24-6. - Shoplifting. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of theft by shoplifting when he alone or in concert with another person, with the intent of appropriating merchandise to his own use without paying for the same or to deprive the owner of possession thereof or of the value thereof, in whole or in part, does any of the following: 
(1)  Conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; 
(2)  Alters the price tag or other price marking on goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; 
(3)  Transfers the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment from one container to another; 
(4)  Interchanges the label or price tag from one item of merchandise with a label or price tag for another item of merchandise; or 
(5)  Wrongfully causes the amount paid to be less than the merchant's stated price for the merchandise. 
(b)  Any person who commits the offense of theft by shoplifting shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1989, § 12-6; Ord. of 8-7-1989) 
State Law reference- Theft by shoplifting, O.C.G.A. § 16-8-14. 
Sec. 24-7. - Operating vehicle without insurance or proof of insurance. 
(a)  An owner or any other person who knowingly operates or knowingly authorizes another to operate a motor vehicle without effective insurance on such vehicle or without an approved plan of self insurance as required by the Georgia Motor Vehicle Accident Reparations Act (O.C.G.A. § 33-34-1 et seq.) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  The owner or the operator of a motor vehicle shall keep proof or evidence of the minimum insurance coverage required by the Georgia Motor Vehicle Accident Reparations Act (O.C.G.A. § 33-34-1 et seq.). A duly executed vehicle rental agreement shall be considered satisfactory proof or evidence of minimum insurance coverage required by law. 
(Code 1989, § 12-7; Ord. of 8-7-1989) 
State Law reference- Insurance requirement, O.C.G.A. § 33-34-3. 
Sec. 24-8. - Disturbing the peace. 
(a)  No person shall use, operate or play any radio receiving set, television set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for producing or reproducing sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(b)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated any device, electronic or otherwise, which amplifies the sound of voices, music or other sound on the public streets of the city, without first obtaining a permit so to do. 
(Code 1989, § 12-8; Ord. of 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 24-9. - Use of loudspeaker or amplification device for advertising. 
    It shall be unlawful to install, or cause to be installed in a permanent manner, or to operate the same after installation, any type of outdoor loudspeaker or amplification device through which business advertising, including civic organizations, music or speech may be reproduced, without first obtaining a permit to do so from the chief of police. 
(Comp. 1976, § 9-106) 
Sec. 24-10. - Attending accident by wrecker without being called. 
    In the event of a vehicle accident, wreck or collision in the city, the police department shall call a wrecker to service the vehicles involved, and any driver of a wrecker attending without having first been called by the police department shall be charged with the offense of a misdemeanor. 
(Comp. 1976, § 7-125; Code 1989, § 16-2; Ord. of 7-7-1980(2)) 
Sec. 24-11. - Littering. 
    Any person charged with the offense of throwing trash, beverage cans or other litter on the streets or sidewalks of the city shall be charged with the offense of disorderly conduct and upon conviction thereof fined not less than $5.00 and otherwise punished as provided in general penalty section 1-9. 
(Comp. 1976, § 19-107; Ord. of 6-28-1965) 
State Law reference- Littering, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-40 et seq., 40-6-249; Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. 
Secs. 24-12-24-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MINORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 24-41-24-68. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW 

Sec. 24-69. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency errand means a mission that results from an unforeseen combination of circumstances that call for immediate action. The term "emergency errand" includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  A fire; 
(2)  A natural disaster; 
(3)  Automobile accident; or 
(4)  Any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
    Minor means any unemancipated person under 16 years of age. 
    Public place. 
(1)  The term "public place" means any place to which the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, alleys or rights-of-way. 
(2)  The term "public place" includes: 
a.  Sidewalks, parks, playgrounds, malls or other places or buildings open to the public; 
b.  Any cemetery, schoolyard, body of water or watercourse; 
c.  Any privately or publicly owned place of amusement, entertainment or public accommodation, including parking lots; and 
d.  Any vacant lot or land. 
(Ord. No. 99-014, § 1(12-32), 12-6-1999) 
Sec. 24-70. - Purpose. 
    The city council has determined that: 
(1)  Persons under 16 years of age are particularly susceptible by their lack of maturity and experience to participate in unlawful activity and to be victims of older perpetrators of crime. 
(2)  There has been a significant breakdown in the supervision and guidance normally provided by parents for minors resulting in an increase in the crimes, substance abuse, and school dropout rates, juvenile pregnancy and other illicit behavior. 
(3)  The city has an obligation to provide for: 
a.  The protection of minors from each other and from other persons; 
b.  The enforcement of parental control over and responsibility for children; 
c.  The protection of the general public; and 
d.  The reduction of the incidence of juvenile criminal activities that are not easily controlled by existing laws and ordinances. 
(4)  A curfew for those under 16 years of age will be in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare and will help attain the foregoing objectives and diminish the undesirable impact of such conduct on the citizens of the city and will promote the public good, safety and welfare. 
(5)  Parental responsibility for the whereabouts of children is the accepted norm and legal sanctions to enforce such responsibility have had demonstrated effectiveness in many cities. 
(6)  A curfew will increase parental responsibility for minors within their control and decrease minor delinquency. 
(Ord. No. 99-014, § 1(12-31), 12-6-1999) 
Sec. 24-71. - Established. 
    It shall be unlawful for any minor under 16 years of age to loiter, wander, stroll, or play in any public place unsupervised by his parent, legal guardian, or other adult 21 years of age or older, having lawful care and custody of the minor and having the lawful authority to be at such places between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 5:00 a.m. of the following day; provided, however, that on Fridays and Saturdays the evening curfew shall begin at 12:00 midnight rather than 11:00 p.m.; and provided further that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  Emergency errand. When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his parent, guardian or other adult person 21 years of age or older having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(2)  School activity. When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity; 
(3)  Employment. When the minor is traveling to, or returning directly home from, lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in above-referenced places during the proscribed period of time; 
(4)  Constitutional rights. When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion; 
(5)  Travel. When the minor is engaged in interstate and intrastate vehicular travel through the city with parental consent; 
(6)  Residence. When the minor is on the sidewalk adjoining the property where the minor resides or on the property where the minor resides or on either side of or across the street from the property where the minor resides and the adult or the owner or resident of that property has given permission for the minor to be there; and 
(7)  Marriage. When the minor is married or has been married pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. No. 99-014, § 1(12-33), 12-6-1999) 
Sec. 24-72. - Parental responsibility. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other person having custody or control of any child under 16 years of age, to permit, or by insufficient control, to allow such minor to violate this division. 
(b)  Citation; general penalty section. A person charged with violation of this section for the first time shall be given a warning citation. Upon subsequent violation, the person shall be charged with such violation and, if found guilty, subject to punishment as provided in general penalty section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 99-014, § 1(12-34), 12-6-1999) 
Sec. 24-73. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  Minor subject to county juvenile court. Any minor under 16 years of age who violates this division shall be subject to the county juvenile court's jurisdiction. 
(b)  Parent or guardian subject to city municipal court. Any parent, guardian or other person having custody or control over any child under 16 years of age who violates this division shall be subject to the city municipal court's jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 99-014, § 1(12-35), 12-6-1999) 
Secs. 24-74-24-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOLICITATION 

Sec. 24-100. - Purpose; findings. 
(a)  The City Council of the City of Hartwell, Georgia, hereby finds that: 
(1)  Persons who solicit charitable contributions from public roadways are put at risk by entering the roadway. 
(2)  This activity also puts drivers and other pedestrians at risk. 
(3)  The citizens of Hartwell are subject to unregulated solicitation by sometimes questionable organizations, or solicitations in a hazardous manner or location. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to regulate solicitation and other charitable events on streets and highways and other public areas of the city where contributions are sought in order to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 5-1-2017) 
Sec. 24-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words as used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
    Applicant means the charitable organization seeking a permit. 
    Charitable organization means organizations which are qualified under Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended; Georgia registered nonprofit corporations; churches; and public and private schools. Charitable organizations must also either be registered with the Secretary of State under O.C.G.A. § 43-17-5 or be exempt from such registration under O.C.G.A. § 43-17-9. 
    Chief means chief of police of the city or his or her designee. 
    Event means any charitable solicitation within the city. 
    Event permit means a permit issued pursuant to this article to conduct an event. 
    Permit means an event permit. 
    Solicitation or charitable solicitation means the act of asking for employment, business or contributions on a public road, street, highway, right-of-way, sidewalk or other public property from the occupant of any vehicle or any pedestrian; provided, however, that "solicitation" or "charitable solicitation" shall not mean or refer to the act of asking for contributions under the following circumstances: (a) the person asking for contributions is doing so on behalf of, and with the express authorization of, a charitable organization, civic group or public entity that has obtained from the city a permit or other express approval or authorization to close and utilize a public road, street, highway, right-of-way, sidewalk or other public property for a special event, or on behalf of, and with the express authorization of, a charitable organization, civic group or public entity that has obtained permission and approval of another charitable organization, civic group or public entity that holds such a permit or other express approval or authorization, and (b) the person asking for contributions is doing so from the portion of the public road, street, highway, right-of-way, sidewalk or other public property that has been closed and is being utilized for such event; and further provided that "solicitation" or "charitable solicitation" shall not mean or refer to the act of asking for business under the following circumstances: (a) the person asking for business is doing so on behalf of, and with the express authorization of, a business that holds a valid and effective business license from the City of Hartwell. (b) the person asking for business is doing so from the sidewalk or other public property that is located adjacent to and in front of the location of such business, and (c) the person asking for business is not doing so from a public street, road, or right-of-way. 
    Solicitor means any person who engages in solicitation. 
    Travel lanes means the marked lanes on a road or highway, or the lanes of travel for vehicles, including turn lanes, access lanes, and acceleration or deceleration lanes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 5-1-2017) 
Sec. 24-102. - Restrictions. 
(a)  Solicitation restricted. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-97.1, the City of Hartwell prohibits any person from standing or entering on a highway or public street of the city for the purposes of soliciting employment, business solicitations, and/or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle or any pedestrian without a permit. Solicitation shall be allowed only by charitable organizations with a permit, under the terms of this article. It shall be a violation of this article to engage in solicitation without a permit, or otherwise not in accordance with the terms of this article and the permit. 
(b)  Permit required. No charitable organization is allowed to engage in solicitation on any public street or highway in the city without first obtaining an event permit. An event permit shall be obtained from the chief. 
(c)  Ineligible applicants. Persons, businesses and organizations that are not charitable organizations as defined in this article are not eligible to receive a permit for solicitation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 5-1-2017) 
Sec. 24-103. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  Permit application. All requests for a permit must be provided to the chief at least five business days but no more than 60 calendar days prior to the date of the requested activity. The chief shall issue a decision within three business days of the application being filed. The chief, for good cause shown. shall have the authority to consider any application under this section which is filed less than five business days before the date such event is proposed to be conducted, provided the chief shall have adequate time to conduct the investigation. An application and permit shall be required for each event, provided, however, only one application and permit shall be required for each proposed event. 
(b)  Required information. All applications for permits must include at a minimum the following information, and shall be signed by the organizer(s): 
(1)  Name and address of charitable organization, including headquarters address and address of the Hartwell office, or the address of the closest branch office if there is no Hartwell office; 
(2)  Type of organization on whose behalf the event is proposed to be held and certification, if listed below. The organization must be one of the following types to apply for a permit: 
a.  Organization qualified under Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, including certification from IRS; 
b.  Nonprofit corporation registered in Georgia, including certification from Secretary of State; 
c.  Church; or 
d.  Public or private school; 
(3)  Name of organizer(s). and address, height, weight, age, sex, race, and Social Security number of each organizer for background check purposes; 
(4)  Photocopy of driver's license or other official photo identification of each organizer; 
(5)  Proposed solicitation activity, and purpose for activity (i.e., use of funds): 
(6)  Specific location(s) for solicitation activity, including specific intersections, and number of solicitors at each such location; 
(7)  Dates and times of solicitation activity; 
(8)  Names of all participants proposed to be solicitors, and their ages; 
(9)  If any solicitors are under 18 years of age, the names and addresses of adult supervisors; one adult supervisor per four solicitors under age 18 is required; 
(10)  If the event is to be held on behalf of any person or organization other than the applicant, a communication in written form from that person or organization authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit; and 
(11)  Any additional information the chief may find reasonably necessary for a fair determination as to whether the proposed event will endanger public health, safety or welfare. 
    The application shall be signed by all organizers, and they shall include and submit with the application a consent form for each organizer, signed by each organizer and notarized, authorizing a criminal background check on each organizer. 
(c)  Organizer. A minimum of one organizer is required for an event. No more than five persons shall be designated organizers for any event. The organizer(s) are required to be at the event in person at all times. There shall be one organizer for each location where solicitation is occurring. All events shall be conducted under the supervision of a person or persons making application for same (the organizer) and shall be conducted in a peaceable and orderly manner in compliance with the laws and ordinances applicable thereto. 
(d)  Permit on site. The signed permit is to be kept on site in the possession of an organizer at all times that solicitation is underway. If multiple locations are involved, a permit copy shall be kept at each location by each organizer Permits shall be displayed at the request of any citizen or law enforcement personnel. 
(e)  Fees. An application shall be accompanied by an application fee of $50.00 to cover the cost of investigation and an additional $50.00 permit fee ($100.00 total). If the permit application is denied, the $50.00 permit fee shall be refunded. These fees may be raised from time to time by the mayor and council of the city by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 5-1-2017) 
Sec. 24-104. - Investigation and issuance. 
(a)  Investigation. The chief of police shall review the application for completeness and compliance with the terms of this article. The chief of police shall check if the charitable organization is registered with the Secretary of State, or is exempt under O.C.G.A. § 43-17-9. The chief shall determine whether there are any records of complaints against the applicant or organizers in the records of the police department or the GCIC/NCIC crime database system. The chief of police may, at his discretion, conduct a background check of the organizers or corporate officers, or any other person named on the application. The chief of police may, at his discretion, make any other inquiries he deems necessary for the investigation of the applicant or the organizers. 
(b)  Decision. The chief of police may grant, deny, or grant a restricted permit. The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided in this article from a consideration of the application and from such information as may otherwise be obtained, unless he finds that any or all of the following apply: 
(1)  The conduct of the event will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic; 
(2)  The conduct of the event will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of fire-fighting equipment en route to a fire, or other emergency services; 
(3)  The applicant or any organizers or participants have any criminal complaints pending against them, or have a criminal record involving crimes of theft, fraud, or other moral turpitude; 
(4)  The applicant is not a qualifying charitable organization or is otherwise not a legitimate organization; 
(5)  The chief has reasons to believe the event is a fraud or sham; 
(6)  If a charitable organization required to be registered with the Secretary of State under O.C.G.A. § 43-17-5, it is not so registered; 
(7)  The conduct of the event is contrary to the public's health, safety or general welfare; or 
(8)  The application was not complete, or the application or permit requested are not fully in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
    The chief shall indicate on the application review form all reasons for rejection of the application and shall return a copy of the form to the applicant. 
(c)  Restrictions. The chief of police shall indicate on the permit the permitted activities, locations, and times of the event. The chief may approve a smaller or shorter event than requested, may reduce the number of solicitors, may approve a different location, or may generally make any other adjustments he believes necessary to the application to serve the public health, safety and welfare. 
(d)  Non-content-based review. The content of the message of any applicant, their beliefs, the identification of the participants, or any other matter which does not directly impact on the public health, safety, and welfare, shall not be relevant to the determination of whether to grant or deny a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 5-1-2017) 
Sec. 24-105. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the denial or restriction of a permit shall have the right to appeal the denial or restriction to the municipal judge of the City of Hartwell. A written appeal shall be filed with the Hartwell Municipal Judge. 
(b)  Procedure. The chief of police shall appear and present his case and evidence as to why the application was denied. The applicant shall have the opportunity to present its case and evidence in support of the application. The hearing shall be conducted as a municipal court proceeding. 
(c)  Standard of review. The municipal court judge, keeping in mind the purpose of this article, the substantive provisions, and giving deference to the judgment of the chief, shall make a determination as to whether the denial or restriction was lawful and in the interests of the public health, safety and welfare, or whether the permit should be issued or modified. If the latter, the court shall enter an order providing guidance as to the location, time, persons, and other criteria of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 5-1-2017) 
Sec. 24-106. - Solicitation regulations; locations and times. 
(a)  Prohibited times. No solicitation shall be allowed during the following times: 
(1)  Before 9:30 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday; 
(2)  Between the hours of 11:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. Monday through Friday; 
(3)  Before 7:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. on Saturday or Sunday; and 
(4)  At any time after sunset or before sunrise. 
(b)  Locations. Solicitation shall only be allowed at intersections consisting of four-way stops. Solicitors are required to stay on median strips, sidewalks or otherwise out of the street. Solicitation from travel lanes is not permitted. When all vehicles are stopped at an intersection, solicitors may approach cars to receive donations if the occupants have indicated they seek to make a donation. Walking along a line of cars shall only be permitted if the solicitor stays out of the travel lanes. No more than one organization may solicit at the same intersection at the same time. 
(c)  Prohibited areas. State Route 8, State Route 51, State Route 77, and State Route 172 are all deemed to be areas of heavy traffic congestion, and no solicitation shall be permitted in the public right-of-way of State Route 8, State Route 51, State Route 77, and State Route 172 nor at the intersection of any such state highway with any street which crosses State Route 8, State Route 51, State Route 77, and State Route 172. 
(d)  Duration. An event shall last no longer than two days. A separate permit shall be required for each additional event (e.g., six days would require three permits). 
(e)  Solicitors under 18. All charitable organizations which are permitted to solicit funds must have one adult supervisor over the age of 21 for every four persons under the age of 18. 
(f)  Peddling. Peddling shall not be allowed under a solicitor's license. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 5-1-2017) 
Sec. 24-107. - Violations, enforcement. 
(a)  Persons soliciting without a permit or in violation of the permit shall be cited with a citation for prosecution in Hartwell Municipal Court, in accordance with the requirements of law for such citations. Any police officer shall be authorized to issue such citations. 
(b)  Any person, organization, business or entity violation the provisions of this article is subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00 per day per violation per individual participant. The minimum fine shall be $100.00 per day per violation per individual participant. 
(c)  Any violation of this article shall immediately revoke the permit. The chief shall also have the discretion to revoke the permit upon charge of violation being made, or upon awareness of illegal or unauthorized activity, if revocation is required in the best interests of public health, safety and welfare. 
(d)  Any person, organization, business or entity found guilty of violating this article may not be issued a permit for a two-year period from the date of the violation. Upon second offense, the person, organization, business or entity found guilty of violating this article shall be banned from further solicitation within the city. 
(e)  The city attorney shall be authorized to seek injunctive relief and other relief in superior court if necessary to effectuate the intent of this article. The city shall be entitled to seek civil fines in the amounts specified above, and shall be entitled to its attorney's fees for any successful action. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 5-1-2017) 
CHAPTER 26 - SIGN ORDINANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-02, adopted Aug.7, 2017, repealed Ch. 26 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 26 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 26, §§ 26-1-26-3, 26-25-26-28, 26-60-26-67, 26-93-26-96, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code 1989, §§ 14.5-1-14.5-11, 14.5-22, 14.5-31-14.5-34, 14.5-41-14.5-44; Ord. adopted Oct. 2, 1989, §§ I-X; Ord. adopted May 1, 1990; Ord. adopted Jan. 3, 1995; Ord. adopted March 13, 1995. 

Sec. 26-1. - Purpose. 
    Regulation of the location, size, placement, maintenance and certain other features of signs is necessary to enable the public to locate goods, services and facilities in the city without difficulty and confusion, to improve the general attractiveness of the community, to take advantage of the beauty of the community's natural and historic environment, and to protect property values therein. Accordingly, it is the intention of the city to establish regulations governing the display of signs which will: 
Protect property values, the local economy, and the quality of life by preserving and enhancing the appearance of the streetscape, which affects the image of the city. 
Promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the public. 
Promote the use of signs which are aesthetically pleasing and of appropriate scale in order to protect the character of Hartwell's historic residential and commercial districts. 
Restrict the clutter from excessive signs and lights which in turn promotes the free flow of traffic, and protects pedestrians and motorist from injury and property damage caused by, or which may be partially attributable to cluttered, distracting, and or illegal signage. 
Promote signs which are compatible with their surroundings. 
    As these or any regulations can only establish the mechanical limits of signs and not enforce a level of visual quality in sign design, anyone planning a sign is strongly encouraged to consider: 
The character of the proposed sign, the audience for which the sign is to be designed, and the area where the sign will be located. The applicant is urged to think not only of the sign in and of itself, but also in terms of the effects such a sign will have upon the character of the surrounding area. 
The character of the sign structure, that is, the physical means of supporting the sign, and whether that structure could be made an integral part of a sign rather than a separate and frequently distracting element. 
    To avoid illegal signage, anyone contemplating a sign is encouraged to contact the Building Official of the City of Hartwell, the Hartwell Downtown Development Authority, or a private firm or individual engaged in sign/graphic design for advice or assistance in the planning of such signage. For those contemplating signage within the historic district, the City of Hartwell Historic Preservation Commission may also provide guidance on the signage design requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 26-2. - Boundaries. 
    For the purpose of these regulations, the city is divided into two sign districts: sign district I and sign district II. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 26-3. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
General terms: 
    Area of display means the display surface area or copy area of a sign used to display the actual sign content or message, encompassed within any regular geometric figure which would enclose all parts of the sign. The structural supports for a sign, whether it be columns, pylons, a building or a part thereof, shall not be included in the area of display. 
    Erect means to build, construct, attach, hand place, suspend, or affix and shall also include the painting of wall signs. 
    ;p0; 
    Glazing means the part of a window containing glass or other approved clear or transparent rigid material. 
    Location means any lot, premises, building, structure, wall, or any place whatsoever upon which a sign is located. 
    Multifamily development means an approved development of residential units not classified as single-family dwellings where there is more than one living unit within a single building, such as duplexes, apartments or condominiums. Multifamily developments must be zoned R2. 
    Permanently anchored means a support post, pylon or other sign structure that is secured to a foundation, or that the post, pylon or other sign structure is set in concrete, or that the sign is mounted to a secure structure in a manner that the sign cannot be easily removed. 
    Premises means building(s), together with its land, per locale, occupied as a unit under one ownership, business or organization, irrespective of boundaries, streets or other separations. 
    Primary building walls (PBW) means those exterior walls of a structure which are oriented with most street frontage (visibility from the public right-of-way). PBWs may also include the exterior wall of a structure which does not necessarily have street frontage but which contains a public entrance and faces a parking area on site. 
    Public way means any road, street, thoroughfare, intersection or access thereto, or any sidewalk, bike path, pedestrian passageway, means of egress, or the access thereto. 
    Residential subdivision means an approved development of six or more lots zoned R1, R1A or R1B, for use or development of single-family dwellings complying with the City of Hartwell Subdivision and Land Development Regulations. 
    Secondary building walls (SBW) include the remaining walls of a building not considered to be a PBW. This includes walls with no street frontage, or walls typically not visible from public rights-of-way. 
    Shopping center means a group of commercial establishments having a building composition of six or more tenant spaces, attached or detached, that is an architectural unit and is not a miscellaneous assemblance of stores; planned developed, analyzed as a unit, related in location, size and type of shops to the trade area that the unit serves and providing on-site parking in definite relationship to the types and sizes of stores. 
    Sign means any device, including, but not limited to, message or content of letters, words, numerals, figures, emblems, pictures, or any part of combinations, used for visual communication intended to attract the attention of the public or to publicize the subject thereof. The device displaying such visual information may be, but not limited to, a sign structure, window, banner, flag, balloon, awning, umbrella, or other such device. A sign encompasses both the area of display and the structure. 
Signs: 
    Abandoned sign means a non-temporary sign structure that does not have a permanent sign face or pending sign permit application; or a non-temporary sign advertising a business activity or firm that is no longer in operation at the location of the sign. An abandoned sign includes all elements of the sign, including its structure, the sign face and sign copy. 
    Animated sign means a sign with action, motion, sound, or changing colors. This includes signs that blink, flash, or fluctuating lights or other illumination devices which have a changing light intensity, brightness or color. 
    Announcement sign means a sign used to announce entrance or exit information, business hours, menus offered, or additional off-street parking; not to include advertisements. 
    Automated changeable copy sign means a sign, usually freestanding, containing copy that changes at intervals. 
    Awning sign means a sign which is printed, painted, or affixed to an awning or canopy. 
    Bandit sign means a temporary sign posted on a utility pole, street sign, or any other sign staked, placed or erected within a public right of way or public property, or on private property such that it is visible from a public right of way or public property. A bandit sign generally has less than six square feet of advertising area and are most often made of vinyl, paper, cloth or fabric, polyboard, corrugated plastic, poster board, plastic core, cardboard, wood or plywood, including signs with wood or wire framing, posts, or stakes, used to display commercial and noncommercial copy. 
    Banner means a sign of paper, cloth, plastic or vinyl with no other substantial backing, not permanently affixed to any building or structure. 
    Bench sign means a permanent sign located on any part of the structure of a bench or seat located on or adjacent to a public right-of-way. 
    Billboards or poster panels means any sign or advertisement used as an outdoor display by the painting, posting, or affixing on any surface, of a picture, emblem, words, figures, numbers, or lettering for the purposes of making anything known; the matter advertised or displayed being remote from its origin or point of sale. 
    City banners means city-sanctioned banners mounted on permanent display poles (such as Historic Hartwell banners, annual city event banners). 
    Commemorative sign means a sign which identifies a site of memorable public interest. 
    Commercial flag means a flag displaying text or graphics advertising a product, business or service. 
    Commercial temporary banner means a temporary banner used to advertise commercial events, shows, exhibits or promotions in addition to grand openings and final closings. 
    Construction sign means a sign giving the names of all or most of the project's principal contractors, engineers, architects, and lending institutions responsible for construction on the site where the sign is placed, together with other information included thereon. 
    Contractor sign means a sign displaying the information of an individual contractor or company directly associated with the construction, renovation or repair at the premises at which it is displayed. Contractor signs do not include signs that display only for information on suppliers or materials of a project. 
    Dilapidated sign means a sign in a state of disrepair or ruin as a result of age or neglect. 
    Directory sign means a sign of which the names and locations of occupants or the use of a building is given. This shall include office building and church directories. 
    Flashing sign means an illuminated sign on which the artificial or reflected light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in use, with the exception of signs which, exclusively indicate time, date, temperature or other public service information. 
    Hanging canopy sign means a sign with a single- or double-face copy hung from a canopy or marquee. 
    Identification sign means a sign bearing only the names or addresses of the occupants of the premises and bearing no commercial message other than that of the use identified. 
    Illuminated sign means a sign illuminated in any manner by an artificial light source. 
    Individual element sign means a type of wall sign with individual lettering and elements. 
    Inflatable sign means temporary signs inflated with helium or other gases. 
    Instructional sign means a sign exclusive of any commercial messages that conveys instructions to the public such as entrance, exit, no trespassing, etc. 
    Integral sign means memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible material mounted on the face of a building. 
    Kiosk means a freestanding multiple sided structure that displays directional information to residential and commercial developments. 
    Menu board means a board attached flush to a wall adjacent to a business entrance that contains the current menu or similar information for that particular business. 
    Misleading sign means a sign that imitates an official traffic sign or signal, or contain words or symbols displayed in a manner that could mislead or confuse drivers of vehicles, or which display intermittent lights. 
    Monument sign means a freestanding sign having a support structure that has either a solid-appearing base constructed of permanent material, or is supported by columns or posts of substantial size at both ends of the sign structure or sign face. The width of the sign structure or face can be no more than 120 percent of the width of the base. 
    Noncommercial temporary banner means a temporary banner that displays information for events, promotions, fundraisers, or things of interest in Hartwell or Hart County, for civic, charitable, community, veteran, educational, fraternal, benevolent or similar organization. 
    Nonconforming sign means any sign which does not conform to the regulations of this chapter. 
    Official sign means any sign, symbol or device erected and maintained by a government agency for the purpose of informing or guiding the public. 
    Off-site sign or off-premises sign means a sign advertising goods, products, services or facilities that are located on premises other than those where the sign is located. 
    Outdoor menu ordering board means fast food drive through menu ordering board. 
    Over-the-street sign means any sign or banner crossing over a city street. 
    Pennant string means a string of small flags, triangular or other shapes, typically used to promote special sales events. 
    Personal interest sign means a temporary sign that displays support for a personal cause or issue. 
    Political sign means a temporary sign identifying and urging voter support for a particular election issue, political party or candidate for public office. 
    Portable sign means any sign that is designed to be transported periodically from place to place, or by design, even when permanently secured, was constructed and intended to be a portable sign. 
    Prohibited sign means a sign not allowed by this chapter. 
    Project sign means a sign providing information of a proposed development or project, located on the proposed project site, or a sign providing the project details, architects, contractors, lending institutions involved in the project, and other associated information. 
    Projecting sign means any sign other than a wall sign affixed to any building or wall whose leading edge extends beyond such building or wall. 
    Pylon sign means a freestanding sign that rests upon a pylon or pole(s), not meeting the specifications of a monument sign. 
    Real estate sign means a temporary sign pertaining only to the sale, rent or lease of the property on which it is located. 
    Revolving or moving sign means a sign that uses motion; including signs in which any part of a display area revolves or moves in any manner as a means to attract visibility. 
    Roof sign means a sign projecting above the coping of a flat roof, above the ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel, or otherwise located above the front building wall and supported by or attached to said roof. 
    Sandwich board means a type of sidewalk sign, typically A-frame in design. 
    Sidewalk sign means a movable sign not secured or attached to the ground or surface, located near the entrance of a business, used to advertise that businesses special services or items for sale. 
    Sign cabinet means the area of an individual sign face enclosed in a frame or cabinet. A pylon sign may contain multi-cabinets. 
    Sign face means the area within a regular geometric shape enclosing all copy and blank masking. 
    Sign structure means, for freestanding signs, the pole, pylon or base that supports the sign display cabinet or area. 
    Storefront means the front side of a store or store building facing a street. 
    Subdivision signage means signage identifying a residential subdivision or a R2-zoned multifamily development, located at the subdivision or development entrance(s) only, affixed to an approved wall or monument. Unlike monument signs, the maximum square footage allowed is determined by measuring the area of display only. 
    Tag sign means informational signs advertising special events hanging from a city banner. 
    Temporary banner means a sign of paper, cloth, plastic, vinyl or other flexible rollstock materials with no other substantial backing that is not permanently affixed to any building or structure. The banner may be temporarily attached to a building, structure, poles, posts or other acceptable objects. Temporary banners include commercial temporary banners and noncommercial temporary banners. 
    Temporary commercial banner means a temporary banner used to advertise commercial events, shows, exhibits or promotions in addition to grand openings and final closings. 
    Temporary display includes temporary commercial flags, vertical flags, feather flags, inflatable signs or devices, and other such temporary promotional sign displays. 
    Temporary noncommercial banner means a temporary banner that displays information for events, promotions, fundraisers, or things of interest in Hartwell or Hart County, for civic, charitable, community, veteran, educational, fraternal, benevolent or similar organization. 
    Temporary sign means a sign not intended for permanent placement. 
    Theatre means a building, having an occupant load of 100 or more, used exclusively for theatrical presentations or motion picture presentations. 
    Theatre marquee means a roof-like projection above a theater entrance used to display currently featured plays or movies. 
    Vehicle sign or trailer sign means a sign placed on or painted on a vehicle, or mounted on a vehicle or trailer and, as determined by the BO is parked or positioned for the sole purpose of providing advertising or displaying other messages. 
    Vertical banner flag/feather flag/commercial flag means flags of any different size or shape, hung, suspended, or attached to post or poles anchored in the ground, used for commercial promotion. 
    Wall sign means a sign applied to or mounted to the wall or surface of a building or structure, the display surface of which does not project more than 12 inches from the outside wall of such building or structure. The total lettering on one side of a building shall constitute one wall sign. This includes individual element signs. 
    Window sign means signage permanently attached to the exterior of window glazing. 
    Yard Sale Sign means a temporary sign erected to announce a yard sale. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 26-4. - Prohibited signs. 
    Unless specifically permitted elsewhere in this ordinance, the following signs are prohibited in the City of Hartwell. 
(1)  Alcoholic beverage signs displaying specific alcohol brands or prices on outside signs or signs in windows are prohibited. The sale of products in general (beer, wine, distilled beverages, etc.) may be advertised. Sandwich boards are exempt and may display products, brands and prices. 
(2)  Abandoned signs, as specified in section 26-11(6). 
(3)  Animated signs, excluding "OPEN" and "CLOSED" signs as allowed in section 26-5(a) and tables 1 through 5. 
(4)  Bandit signs, with the exception of contractor signs, political campaign signs, real estate signs, yard sale signs and personal interest signs as specifically allowed in section 26-7. 
(5)  Bench signs. 
(6)  Billboards or poster panels. 
(7)  Dilapidated signs, as specified in section 26-11. 
(8)  Misleading signs. 
(9)  Off-site signs or off-premises signs, with the exception of off-site or off-premises signs specifically allowed in section 26-6. 
(10)  Over-the-street signs. 
(11)  Permanent inflatable signs. 
(12)  Pennant strings. 
(13)  Portable signs. 
(14)  Revolving or moving signs. 
(15)  Roof signs. 
(16)  Sidewalk signs, with the exception of sandwich boards, as allowed in compliance with section 26-7(4). 
(17)  Signs employing motion in such a manner as to obstruct or interfere with a driver's view of approaching, merging, or intersecting traffic, or of a traffic signal, device or sign, or which would otherwise interfere with a driver's operation of a motor vehicle. 
(18)  Signs painted on or attached to trees, rocks, or other natural features. 
(19)  Signs painted on or attached to utility poles or other structures or devices not intended for such use. 
(20)  Vehicle signs or trailer signs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 26-5. - Lighting. 
(a)  With the exception of "OPEN" and "CLOSED" signs as allowed in tables 1 through 5, or signs specifically addressed in section 26-5(f) of this chapter, signs which utilize lights in a manner that flash, strobe, pulsate, blink, twinkle, and/or that create a sense of movement by scrolling, rolling, expanding and contracting written messages or visual images, and/or that recreate or simulate moving video images shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Lighted, neon, or luminous signs giving off light resulting in glare, blinding, or any other such adverse effect on traffic shall be prohibited. 
(c)  Automated changeable copy signs subject to the following exceptions: 
(1)  Where the copy changes at a frequency of no more than once every ten seconds, and 
(2)  Devices that display the date, time, temperature and brief public service announcements only. 
(d)  The light from illuminated signs shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties. 
(e)  No illuminated sign shall be constructed or maintained within 50 feet of any residential district or dwelling. 
(f)  Signs with flashing, intermittent, or animated illumination shall not be allowed; provided that time and weather information signs, official warning, traffic, or regulator signs shall be exempt from this requirement. 
(g)  In general, internally lighted signs are discouraged in areas where they would tend to overpower their setting. If internal lighting is used, illuminated individual letters are preferable to illuminated panels. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 26-6. - Signs exempt from these regulations. 
    The following types of signs or displays shall be exempt from these regulations: 
(1)  Official signs, including traffic signs, directional signs, warning and informational signs, owned or displayed by the GADOT or the City of Hartwell and located in public right-of-ways or other adjacent property. 
(2)  Official notices issued, or required to be posted, by federal, state, county or municipal government. 
(3)  Signs not exceeding one square foot in area and bearing only the property address, names of owners or occupants of the premises, or other identification of premises, located on the property identified, and not having a commercial message. 
(4)  Government flags, except when displayed in connection with commercial promotion. 
(5)  Indoor signs not observable from outside the building. 
(6)  Nonpermanent window signs and window paintings. 
(7)  Signs located and affixed on gasoline and other motor fuel dispensers so as to provide information to the public such as price, octane and type of fuel. As the trade name of the business is oftentimes incorporated into the name of the different types of fuel, the trade name and any associated symbols shall be permitted on the dispensers as flat signs not to exceed three square feet in area per sign face. Also exempt is the required signage regulating dispenser operations and dispensing safety laws. 
(8)  Outdoor menu ordering boards. 
(9)  Tag signs hanging from city banners advertising special events. Only one tag sign per banner shall be allowed. Tags shall be allowed to advertise an event for no more than a 30-day period. 
(10)  Historic or memorial plaques and signs 
(Ord.  No. 2017-02, 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 26-7. - Signs that require no permit. 
    The following signs do not require a permit for the erection or placement; however the use, number, location, size and/or placement of these signs must comply with the requirements herein. 
(1)  Political campaign signs. 
a.  Political campaign signs shall be limited to one per candidate or issue with opposition on any one premises. Signs for candidates or issues with no opposition are prohibited. 
b.  Political campaign signs shall not be placed on public property or in public rights-of-way. 
c.  Political campaign signs shall not be placed on private property without the consent of the property owner or authorized agent. 
d.  Political campaign signs shall not be placed on vacant or unoccupied properties or premises without the written consent of the property owner or authorized agent. 
e.  Political campaign signs shall not be erected more than 60 days prior to the election or referendum for which they apply. 
f.  Political campaign signs shall be removed within five days after the election or referendum for which they apply. Signs for candidates in run-offs may be maintained until five days following the final election for which they apply. 
g.  Political campaign signs shall comply with tables 1 through 5. 
(2)  Real estate signs. 
a.  Real estate signs shall be limited to one free-standing sign per street front of property. For parcels that exceed 500 feet in street frontage an additional free standing sign shall be allowed per frontage for each additional 500 foot increments. 
b.  Real estate signs shall further comply with Tables 1 through 5. 
c.  Real estate signs shall be removed following rental, lease, or sale of property. 
d.  Real estate signs shall be displayed on the property for sale, rent, lease or development only. 
e.  Real estate signs shall not be placed so as to obstruct the vision of traffic or in any way jeopardize the safety of the public. 
f.  Real estate signs shall not be illuminated. 
(3)  Construction signs. 
a.  Construction signs shall be limited to the size and location as specified in tables 1 through 5. 
b.  No more than one construction sign shall be allowed on the project premises at any one time. 
c.  Construction signs shall be allowed on construction sites of new construction for one- and two-family residential, and for new construction, major additions or renovations for all non-one- and two-family residential construction. 
d.  Construction signs shall be placed on the property of the construction site only. Off-site construction signs are prohibited. 
e.  Construction signs shall not be placed so as to obstruct the vision of traffic or in any way jeopardize the safety of the public. 
f.  Construction signs shall not be displayed on the site prior to issuance of the applicable building permit. 
g.  Construction signs shall be removed from the premises prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or final inspection approval. 
(4)  Contractor signs. 
a.  Contractor signs shall be limited to one sign per contractor per construction or job site. 
b.  Contractor signs shall be placed on the property or premises for which the work is being performed only. 
c.  Contractor signs shall be limited to the size and location as specified in tables 1 through 5. 
d.  Contractor signs shall be self-supported. Contractor signs shall not be attached to utility poles, street signs, trees, or other public or private structures for which a sign attachment is not intended. 
e.  Contractor signs shall not be allowed for contractors included on a construction sign for that project. 
f.  Contractor signs shall not be placed on the site prior to actual work commencing by the applicable contractor. 
g.  Contractor signs shall be removed immediately upon completion of the applicable work. 
(5)  Project signs. 
a.  Project signs shall be limited to the size and location as specified in tables 1 through 5. 
b.  No more than one project sign shall be allowed on the project premises at any one time. 
c.  Project signs shall be placed on the property of the proposed project only. Off-site project signs are prohibited. 
d.  Project signs shall not be placed so as to obstruct the vision of traffic or in any way jeopardize the safety of the public. 
e.  Project signs shall not be erected more than 180 days prior to the proposed start of construction and shall be allowed for no more than 180 days. 
f.  Project signs may be converted to construction signs after issuance of the applicable building permits, conforming to construction sign regulations. Total square footage of the project sign and construction sign shall not exceed the square footage allowed for either the project sign or the construction sign. 
(6)  Sandwich boards. 
a.  No more than one sandwich board shall be allowed per occupancy. 
b.  Sandwich boards displayed on sidewalks shall be placed in front of the building for which the advertising is intended only. As an imaginary line extends through the sidewalk from the buildings property lines, sandwich boards shall not be placed on sidewalks or other locations outside those imaginary boundaries. 
c.  Sandwich boards shall not obstruct pedestrian traffic, nor shall sandwich boards obstruct building means of egress, exit passageways or building entrances. 
d.  It shall be the building occupant's responsibility to properly maintain the placement of a sandwich board. 
e.  Sandwich boards shall be displayed outside only when the business for which the advertising is intended is open for business. 
f.  Sandwich boards shall display menu items, store specials or special events only, and such information shall be for the building location for which the sign is placed. 
g.  Sandwich boards shall not be displayed outdoors when weather conditions, such as windy or stormy conditions, prevents the safe placement of such signs. 
(7)  Yard sale signs. 
a.  No more than one yard sale sign shall be erected on the property for which the yard sale is permitted. 
b.  Yard sale signs shall be placed on the property or premises for which the yard sale is permitted only. 
c.  Yard sale shall not be attached to utility poles, street sign post, fire hydrants, or other public use structures, nor shall they be attached to any tree or other natural object located in a public right-of-way. 
d.  Yard sale signs may be erected no more than 24 hours prior to the permitted date of the yard sale. Yard sale signs shall be removed immediately upon the close of the sale. 
(8)  Directory signs and menu boards. 
a.  Directory signs and menu boards shall be limited to one each, per business main entrance as allowed in tables 1 through 5. 
b.  Directory signs shall provide only the names and locations of building or premises occupants and their locations. 
c.  Menu boards shall contain the current menu or similar information only for that particular business. 
d.  Directory signs and menu boards shall be attached flush to a wall adjacent to the business entrance. 
(9)  Personal interest signs. 
a.  Personal interest signs shall display information of support for a personal cause or interest only. Personal interest signs shall not display information political, commercial, or controversial in nature. 
b.  Personal interest signs shall be allowed in residential zones, on properties used for residential only. 
c.  Personal interest signs shall be limited to one sign per residential property. 
d.  Personal interest signs shall be limited to the size and locations as specified in table 1. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 26-8. - Temporary banners and displays. 
(a)  Temporary banners and displays. Both commercial and noncommercial temporary banners and displays shall be permitted only as allowed in tables 1 through 5, with the following provisions: 
(1)  A permit shall be obtained prior to the placement or display of a temporary banner or display. 
(2)  Prior to issuance of a temporary banner or display permit, in addition to paying the applicable permit fee, the applicant shall file with the building official a deposit in the amount of $50.00, payable to the City of Hartwell. Said deposit shall be remitted, or the check shall be returned at the end of the application period upon full compliance of the requirements and regulations stated herein. Failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter, or failure to remove the banner or display within the time and date specified on the permit, or upon suspension of the permit shall constitute complete forfeiture of the submitted deposit. 
(3)  Temporary banners or displays shall be properly supported or attached during the entire permitted period. Temporary banners or displays found to have inadequate support or improperly attached, or are otherwise found to be unsafe or unsightly shall require immediate removal and suspension of the permit. 
(4)  Temporary banners or displays approved and permitted for placement on or attached to buildings or structures shall be attached to such structures in a manner that does not damage the structure or building finish. Furthermore, temporary banners or displays shall not obstruct a public way or jeopardize public safety, nor shall the placement of temporary banners or displays be otherwise impractical or unsightly as determined by the building official. 
(b)  Noncommercial temporary banners or displays. 
(1)  Noncommercial temporary banners or displays shall promote and/or display information about events, promotions, fundraisers, or things of interest in Hartwell or Hart County, for civic, charitable, community, veteran, educational, fraternal, benevolent or the like. 
(2)  Events, promotions, fundraisers or things of interest displayed on noncommercial temporary banners and displays shall be open to the public. 
(3)  Noncommercial temporary banners and displays, for each application period, shall be permitted for no more than 30 days total, to include no more than three (3) days following an event, function, or thing of interest. 
(4)  Noncommercial temporary banners and displays shall be limited to one banner or display per street frontage for any premises at any one time. 
(5)  Noncommercial temporary banners and displays shall be limited to four per premises in any one year, beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of each year. 
(6)  Noncommercial temporary banners or displays may be placed higher than the allowable heights specified in tables 1 through 5, provided the banner or display is attached securely to a wall or structure, the height of the banner or display placement does not exceed eight feet, the means of attachment and location of placement is approved by the building official, and the means of attachment does not damage the structure or building finish. 
(c)  Commercial temporary banners or displays. 
(1)  Two commercial temporary banners, one advertising the initial opening and one advertising the final closing of an establishment, shall be allowed. The opening and closing banners shall be allowed only once for any given owner or occupant. 
(2)  In addition to the commercial temporary banners allowed for the initial openings and final closings, each business shall be allowed no more than two commercial temporary banner or display permits per year that promote special events, exhibits, shows or promotions. 
(3)  Commercial temporary banners or displays shall be displayed no more than 14 days per application period. 
(4)  Commercial temporary banners or displays shall be displayed on the property or premises for which they advertise only. Off-site commercial temporary banners or displays are prohibited. 
(5)  Commercial temporary banners or displays may be placed higher than the allowable heights specified in tables 1 through 5, provided the banner or display is attached securely to a wall or structure, the height of the banner or display placement does not exceed eight feet, the means of attachment and location of placement is approved by the Building Official, and the means of attachment does not damage the structure or building finish. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 26-9. - Permits and administration. 
(a)  Permits required. Unless specifically exempted in section 26-6 and section 26-7 of this chapter, a sign permit shall be obtained prior to the erection, installation, display, alteration, or change of any sign. 
(1)  Sign alteration or change includes any alteration or change in the appearance or design of sign faces, supports, surrounds or structures, or changes made to the style, type or quantity and illumination of external lighting. Replacing sign faces or other sign components with identical material, the same appearance and design shall be considered maintenance and repair and shall not require a permit. 
(b)  Issuance of permits. Unless specifically excluded from the provisions of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to post, display, erect, place, substantially change or structurally alter a sign in the city without first obtaining a sign permit. The building official shall only issue a permit for the erection or alteration of a sign which meets the requirements of these regulations and applicable sections of the building code and electrical code. 
(c)  Certificate of appropriateness. Prior to the issuance of a sign permit for locations in district I, applicants shall first obtain approval from the City of Hartwell Historic Preservation Commission (HHPC) by submitting an application for certificate of appropriateness (COA). The building official shall therefore not issue a permit for the erection or alteration of a sign in sign district I until the submitted COA application is granted. 
(d)  Filing procedure. Applicants wishing to obtain a permit to erect, display, construct, place, hang, alter or change a sign not exempt in section 26-6 or section 26-7 shall first make application with the building official. Upon application, the applicant shall provide necessary information as required by the building official, including but not limited to: 
(1)  The type of sign(s) as defined in this chapter. 
(2)  The names, addresses and contact information for the owners and occupants. 
(3)  A site plan showing the specific location of the existing sign and/or the proposed sign(s) on the applicable site, relative to the property line(s), right(s)-of-way, and building(s). 
(4)  A photograph or detailed sketch depicting the existing and/or proposed sign(s), showing all text and graphics. 
(5)  The number of proposed sign faces. 
(6)  The dimensions of the existing and/or proposed sign(s), including the height and square footage per sign face. 
(7)  Structural details including, but not limited to, foundations or other means of securing signs or sign structures to the ground or details on the means of attachment to buildings of other structures. 
(8)  The sign material to be used. 
(9)  Desired lighting if any, including internal or external lighting, the number and wattage of lighting, and type of illumination, i.e., incandescent, fluorescent, neon, etc. 
(10)  Other information as may be required for proper issuance by the building official. 
(e)  Expiration. Every sign permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the sign authorized by such sign permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such sign permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. 
(f)  Suspension or revocation. The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a sign permit issued under the provisions of the sign ordinance wherever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of the sign ordinance. 
(g)  Permit fees. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by this chapter have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. 
(h)  Schedule of permit fees. On signs requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the fee schedule established in section 26-16. 
(i)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who erects, installs, constructs, displays, alters or changes any sign requiring a permit by this chapter before obtaining the necessary permit shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the total sign permit fee in addition to the usual permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 26-10. - Sign measurements and placements. 
(a)  Sign height. The height of a sign shall be measured from the average natural grade at the base of the sign to the highest point of the sign face or structure, whichever is highest. The height shall not be measured from the top of an earth berm, support beam, or planting box. The ground level shall be the lower of the ground level existing at the time of construction or the ground level existing prior to construction or any earth disturbance at the site. No person shall artificially increase the maximum height of a sign by altering the grade at the base of the sign. 
(b)  Sign clearances. The sign clearance shall be measured from the bottom of the sign at any point, being the sign or the sign structure, whichever is lowest, vertically to the ground below. 
(c)  Sign face area. The sign face area shall be measured as described for each sign below: 
(1)  Monument signs. Monument signs shall be measured to the outside edge of the monument structure, from top to ground on signs with solid bases. Monument signs supported with columns shall be measured horizontally to the outer edges of the columns, and vertically from the upper edge of the sign face to the lower edge of the sign face. 
(2)  Sign cabinets. The area of sign faces enclosed in frames or cabinets is determined based on the outer dimensions of the frame or cabinet surrounding the sign face. 
(3)  Multiple cabinets. For freestanding and projecting signs that contain multiple cabinets on one structure and are oriented in the same viewing direction, the modules together are counted as one sign face. 
(4)  Individual element signs. When signs are constructed of individual elements or use individual painted or attached text, characters or symbols, as opposed to the sign text being on a sign cabinet or having a defined border, the sign area is determined by calculating the area of an imaginary rectangle drawn around the sign elements. 
(5)  Round signs (ball shaped). The maximum surface area visible at any one time of a round, three-dimensional, or three-sided or more sign is counted to determine sign area. 
(6)  Signs on a base material. When a sign is on a base material and attached without a frame, such as a wood board or Plexiglas panel, the dimensions of the base materials are to be used. 
(7)  Awnings and marquees. When signs are incorporated into awnings, the sign area is determined by computing the area of an imaginary rectangle drawn around the sign face. 
(8)  Asymmetrical, elliptical or irregular-shaped signs. The area shall be measured by drawing an imaginary rectangle around the total sign or sign elements as illustrated in figure 10.3.8. 

Figure 10.3.8
(9)  Circular. The allowed area of a sign shaped as a perfect circle shall be determined by using the formula: A = p × r 2 (p = 3.14) A = area r-radius: figure 10.3.9. 

Figure 10.3.9
(10)  Projecting signs. Projecting signs can project over a public right-of-way but no closer than two feet from a curbline and shall have a minimum clearance of nine feet of the finish grade of a sidewalk and 15 feet above any road, driveway or alley. No projecting sign or supporting structure shall extend above the top of a parapet wall. 
(11)  Backed (two-sided) signs. When the faces of a backed (two-sided) sign are parallel, or within ten degrees of parallel, only one side of the sign shall be counted for allowable signage. If the sign faces are not parallel, each is considered to be a separate sign face, and both faces are counted. See figure 10.3.11. 

Figure 10.3.11
(d)  Allowable sign placement. Certain signage shall be allowed for primary building walls (PBW) and secondary building walls (SBW) as specified in figure 10.4. The PBWs and SBWs are determined as follows: 
(1)  Primary building walls (PBW). The PBWs are those exterior walls of a structure which are oriented with most street frontage (visibility from the public right-of-way). PBWs can also include the exterior wall of a structure which does not necessarily have street frontage but which contains a public entrance and faces a parking area on site. Structures located on corner lots may have PBWs designated for each street front. 
(2)  Secondary building walls (SBW). The SBWs are those walls of a building that are not PBWs. 

Figure 10.4
(Ord. No. 2017-02, 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 26-11. - Sign maintenance. 
    All signs shall be maintained in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Signs shall be properly maintained at all times. No part of any sign shall be left in disrepair. 
(2)  All sign structures, including, but not limited to, sign framework, poles, pylons, and sign surrounds shall be maintained structurally sound at all times. Exterior surfaces of sign structures shall be maintained in good condition. Wood surfaces shall be properly protected and shall not be allowed to decay. Metal surfaces shall not be allowed to rust. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. Sign structures determined to be so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, or in such disrepair shall be ordered removed and replaced with a conforming sign. 
(3)  Sign faces, or sign face covers found to be in disrepair shall be properly repaired or replaced. Painted sign faces shall be maintained free from peeling, flaking and chipped paint. Letters, text and graphics located on sign face areas shall be properly maintained in place and clearly legible at all times. All sign copy shall be maintained securely on the sign and all missing copy shall be replaced. 
(4)  All nonfunctioning bulbs or damaged panels shall be replaced or repaired. 
(5)  The area around the base of every sign shall be properly maintained at all times. Grasses and other vegetation shall be properly maintained. Masonry, rock or any other base materials or structures shall be maintained, free from missing, loose or damaged material. 
(6)  Abandoned signs, including the sign structure, shall be removed within 30 days after said business activity or firm vacates the premises. 
(7)  Temporary signs shall be properly maintained during the entire permit period. Temporary signs found to be poorly maintained or found to be otherwise noncompliant with this chapter shall be removed immediately, the permit shall be suspended, and any deposit shall be forfeited. 
(8)  Signs found to be a danger to the safety and welfare of the public, and/or to a building's or premises' occupants because of lack of maintenance shall be removed or corrected immediately. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 26-12. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Any sign, banner or other display included in the provisions of this chapter, existing at the time of enactment of or subsequent amendment of this chapter, that is not in conformity with its provisions and regulations shall be considered a nonconforming sign. 
(b)  Nonconforming temporary signs made of paper, cloth, or other nondurable material, other than those permitted herein, and any sign that is not permanently anchored to the ground or affixed to a building or are located within a public right-of-way shall be removed within 14 days of the effective date of this chapter. 
(c)  Existing non-temporary, nonconforming signs shall not be: 
(1)  Changed to or replaced with another nonconforming sign. This provision shall allow a change in copy or graphics on the sign face only if the occupant or tenant is unchanged. Changes to copy or graphics on nonconforming signs for different occupants or tenants shall be prohibited. Furthermore, the copy or graphics may be changed on the sign face of a group development sign, provided the change maintains or establishes consistent color and design of the overall sign. 
(2)  Torn down and rebuilt as a nonconforming sign; 
(3)  Extended or enlarged except in conformity with these regulations. 
(4)  Structurally altered so as to extend useful life. 
(5)  Relocated. 
(d)  Repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs shall be permitted. However, no structural repairs or maintenance shall be permitted which would change the size, shape, area, or location, except in compliance with the provisions and requirements of this chapter. Furthermore, no repairs in excess of 50 percent of the replacement value of the sign structure shall be permitted. If the repairs are in excess of 50 percent of the replacement value the sign shall be removed as required by section 26-4 of this chapter. 
(e)  Nonconforming signs shall not be continued upon the change of ownership of the business located on the property or upon change of the tenant or occupancy of the property. A nonconforming sign will not be affected by a change of ownership of the building when the tenant or business does not change. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 26-13. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Authorization to enforce. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the sign ordinance, otherwise referred to herein as this chapter. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this chapter and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this chapter. 
(b)  Applications and permits. The building official shall receive applications, review submitted plans, and issue permits for the erection, placement or alteration of new or existing signs requiring a permit under this chapter, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Notices and orders. The building official shall issue all necessary notices and orders to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(d)  Inspections. The building official shall make all necessary inspections, or shall cause such inspections to be made as determined to be necessary for full-compliance with this chapter. 
(e)  Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the building official or his representative is authorized to enter any structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this chapter, provided that if such structure or premises is occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure of premises is unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
(f)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, place or alter any sign regulated by this chapter, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(g)  Permit required. Any owner, occupant or authorized agent who intends to construct, erect, place, display or alter any sign requiring a permit by this chapter, or cause any such work to be done shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit. 
(h)  Notice of violation. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, placement or alteration of any sign in violation of the provisions of this chapter. The notice and order shall specify a reasonable time for the correction of violation. Except as otherwise specified in section 26-13, the building official will require the correction, removal, abatement, or remedy of the violation within 30 days of receipt of the notice and order. Such notice and order shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is delivered personally, sent by certified or first-class mail to the last known address, or a copy of the notice and order is affixed at a conspicuous location at the front entrance of a business or location, or attached to the sign itself. 
(i)  Immediate removal or correction required. In addition to other remedies, the building official is authorized to require the immediate removal or the immediate correction of violations, or shall have the authority to remove or correct any violations, or cause such work to be done for: 
(1)  Any sign that is determined to jeopardize the safety, health or welfare of the public. 
(2)  Commercial or noncommercial temporary banners found to exist in noncompliance with section 26-8 of this chapter. 
(3)  Temporary signs prohibited by this chapter. 
(j)  Confiscation of illegal signs. Signs removed by the building official in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be confiscated and held by the building official for a period of 30 days. During that 30 days, the confiscated signs may be returned to the sign owners or responsible persons only after a fee as prescribed in section 26-16 is paid in full and authorized by the building official. After the 30-day holding period, the signs shall be disposed of in an approved manner. 
(k)  Stop work order. Whenever the building official finds any work regulated by this chapter being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or is determined to be dangerous or unsafe, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order. 
    The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume. 
    Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
(l)  Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice and order issued by the building official for noncompliance of these regulations shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor as determined by the City of Hartwell Municipal Courts, and shall be subject to penalties as provided by law. If the notice and order is not complied with, the building official shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal of such signage. Any action taken by the building official on any premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the sign is located and a lien shall be placed upon such real estate. 
(m)  Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or any of the requirements thereof, shall be subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00 per violation, or by imprisonment for a period of up to 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. In addition, each day that the violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 26-14. - Means of appeals. 
    Any person directly affected by a decision of the building official or a notice or order issued under this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the board of appeals, as created in Section 113 of the International Building Code, provided that a written application for appeal is filed with the city manager within 20 days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this chapter or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this chapter do not fully apply, or the requirements of this chapter are adequately satisfied by other means. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 26-15. - Repealer. 
    All laws, resolutions, or ordinances or parts thereof that conflict with the provisions of this chapter are repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 26-16. - Sign permit fee schedule. 
SIGN PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE 
Permanent signs: 
For each permit - Permit issuing fee ..... $20.00 
Plus ..... $2.00 s.f. 
Temporary banners or displays: 
For each location ..... $20.00 
Plus deposit ..... Refundable upon compliance 
With section 26-8 ..... $50.00 
In accordance with section 26-8(a)(2) of this chapter 
Signs, banners or displays requiring a permit: 
Erecting, installing, placing or commencing work on signs, banners or displays before obtaining the proper permit ..... The normal total 
permit fee shall be doubled 
In accordance with section 26-9(i) of this chapter 
Fee to reclaim confiscated signs ..... $5.00 per sign 
In accordance with section 26-13(j) of this chapter 
TABLE 1 SIGN DISTRICTS I AND II R1, R1A, R1B, R2 AND MHP ZONES Districts Max Square Footage Max Height (ft) Lighting Max Number Other External Illumination Internal Illumination ANNOUNCEMENT SIGNS District I Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited section 26-3 District II Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited section 26-3 AWNING SIGNS District I Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited sections 26-3 & 26-10(c) District II Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited sections 26-3 & 26-10(c) CONSTRUCTION SIGNS District I 64 sf 10' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per construction site sections 26-3 & 26-7(3) District II 64 sf 10' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per construction site sections 26-3 & 26-7(3) CONTRACTOR SIGNS District I 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per construction site sections 26-3 & 26-7(3) District II 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per construction site sections 26-3 & 26-7(3) DIRECTORY SIGNS AND MENU BOARDS District I Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited sections 26-3 & 26-7(8) District II Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited sections 26-3 & 26-7(8) HANGING CANOPY SIGNS District I Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited section 26-3 District II Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited section 26-3 MONUMENT SIGNS District I Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited/Except as allowed for subdivision and multifamily development signage sections 26-3 & 26-10(c) District II Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited/Except as allowed for subdivision and multifamily development signage sections 26-3 & 26-10(c) PERSONAL INTEREST SIGNS District I 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per residence sections 26-3 & 26-7(9) District II 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per residence sections 26-3 & 26-7(9) POLITICAL SIGNS District I 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per candidate or issue sections 26-3 & 26-7(1) District II 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per candidate or issue sections 26-3 & 26-7(1) PROJECT SIGNS District I 64 sf 10' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per project property sections 26-3 & 26-7(5) District II 64 sf 10' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per project property sections 26-3 & 26-7(5) PROJECTING SIGNS District I Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited sections 26-3 & 26-10(c) District II Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited sections 26-3 & 26-10(c) PYLON SIGNS District I Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited section 26-3 District II Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited section 26-3 REAL ESTATE SIGNS District I 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(2) District II 4 sf 4 Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(2) SIDEWALK SIGNS/SANDWICH BOARDS District I Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited sections 26-3, 26-4(16) & 26-7(6) District II Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited sections 26-3, 26-4(16) & 26-7(6) SUBDIVISION, MULTIFAMILY DEVELOPMENT AND MOBILE HOME PARK ENTRANCES District I 48 sf 6' Permitted Prohibited 1 Monument sign or 2 entry wall signs per approved entrance Entry walls may not exceed max hgt within 8' of display area 
Max sq. ft. allowed is determined by measuring display area only District II 48 sf 6' Permitted Prohibited 1 Monument sign or 2 entry wall signs per approved entrance Entry walls may not exceed max hgt within 8' of display area. 
Max sq. ft. allowed is determined by measuring display area only TEMPORARY BANNERS AND SIGNS District I Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited sections 26-3 & 26-8 District II Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited sections 26-3 & 26-8 THEATER MARQUEES District I Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited N/A section 26-3 District II Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited N/A section 26-3 WALL SIGNS/INDIVIDUAL ELEMENT SIGNS District I 1 1/2 sq. ft. N/A Prohibited Prohibited (1) per residence w/approved occupation section 26-3 District II 1 1/2 sq. ft. N/A Prohibited Prohibited (1) per residence w/approved occupation section 26-3 WINDOW SIGNS District I Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited sections 26-3 & 26-6(6) District II Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited sections 26-3 & 26-6(6) YARD SALE SIGNS District I 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per residence sections 26-3 & 26-7(7) District II 20 sf 5' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per residence sections 26-3 & 26-7(7)  
TABLE 2 SIGN DISTRICTS I AND II NONRESIDENTIAL USES ALLOWED IN R-ZONE (I.E., CHURCHES, SCHOOLS, ETC.) Districts Max Square Footage Max Height (ft) Lighting Max Number Other External Illumination Internal Illumination ANNOUNCEMENT SIGNS District I 3 sf 2' for traffic guidance signs Prohibited Prohibited (1) per bldg entrance; (1) traffic guidance per parking entrance section 26-3 District II 3 sf 2' for traffic guidance signs Prohibited Prohibited (1) per bldg entrance; (1) traffic guidance per parking entrance section 26-3 AWNING SIGNS District I 25% of Awning surface Shall not extend above bldg height Prohibited Prohibited (1) per awning sections 26-3 & 26-10(c) District II 25% of awning surface Shall not extend above bldg height Prohibited Prohibited (1) per awning sections 26-3 & 26-10(c) CONSTRUCTION SIGNS District I 128 sf 12' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per job site sections 26-3 & 26-7(3) District II 128 sf 12' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per job site sections 26-3 & 26-7(3) CONTRACTOR SIGNS District I 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per contractor sections 26-3 & 26-7(4) District II 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per contractor sections 26-3 & 26-7(4) DIRECTORY SIGNS AND MENU BOARDS District I 4 sf N/A Allowed Allowed (1) each per entrance sections 26-3 & 26-7(8) District II 4 sf N/A Allowed Allowed (1) each per entrance sections 26-3 & 26-7(8) HANGING CANOPY SIGNS District I 2 sf N/A Allowed Prohibited (1) per PBW (1) per SBW sign attached to underside shall not be less than 1' from outer edge and no less than 9' above the ground District II 6 sf N/A Allowed Prohibited (1) per PBW (1) per SBW sign attached to underside shall not be less than 1' from outer edge and no less than 9' above the ground MONUMENT SIGNS District I 48 sf 6' Allowed Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-10 District II 48 sf 6' Allowed Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-10 POLITICAL SIGNS District I 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per candidate or issue per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(1) District II 20 sf 5' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per candidate or issue per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(1) PROJECT SIGNS District I 128 sf 12' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per job site sections 26-3 & 26-7(5) District II 128 sf 12' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per job site sections 26-3 & 26-7(5) PROJECTING SIGNS District I 12 sf Shall not extend above top of wall where attached Permitted Prohibited (1) per PBW (1) per SBW sections 26-3 & 26-10(c) No closer than 2' to a curb line and a min. of 9' above walks and 15' above drives or alleys District II 12 sf Shall not extend above top of wall where attached Permitted Prohibited (1) per PBW (1) per SBW sections 26-3 & 26-10(c) No closer than 2' to a curb line and a min. of 9' above walks and 15' above drives or alleys PYLON SIGNS District I Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited section 26-3 District II Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited section 26-3 REAL ESTATE SIGNS District I 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(2) District II 20 sf 5' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(2) SIDEWALK SIGNS/SANDWICH BOARDS District I 6 sf 3' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per occupancy sections 26-3, 26-4(16) & 26-7(6) District II 6 sf 3' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per occupancy sections 26-3, 26-4(16) & 26-7(6) TEMPORARY BANNERS AND DISPLAYS District I 32 sf 4' (See exceptions 26-8(b)(6) & 26-8(c)(5)) Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-8 District II 32 sf 4' (See exceptions 26-8(b)(6) & 26-8(c)(5)) Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-8 THEATER MARQUEES District I Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited N/A section 26-3 District II Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited N/A section 26-3 WALL SIGNS District I 1/2 sf per LF of bldg width or 16 sf whichever is greater shall not extend above bldg hght Allowed Prohibited (1) per PBW (1) per SBW section 26-3 District II 1/2 sf per LF of bldg width or 16 sf whichever is greater shall not extend above bldg hght Allowed Prohibited (1) per PBW (1) per SBW section 26-3 WINDOW SIGNS District I Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited sections 26-3 & 26-6(6) District II Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited sections 26-3 & 26-6(6) YARD SALE SIGNS District I 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(7) District II 20 sf 5' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(7)  
TABLE 3 SIGN DISTRICTS I AND II B1, B2, M1 AND M2 ZONES
EXCLUDING SHOPPING CENTERS Districts Max Square Footage Max Height (ft) Lighting Max Number Other External Illumination Internal Illumination ANNOUNCEMENT SIGNS District I 3 sf 2' for traffic guidance signs Prohibited Prohibited (1) per bldg entrance; (1) traffic guidance per parking entrance sections 26-3 & 26-10 District II 3 sf 2' for traffic guidance signs Prohibited Prohibited (1) per bldg entrance; (1) traffic guidance per parking entrance sections 26-3 & 26-10 AWNING SIGNS District I 25% 25% of awning surface Prohibited Prohibited (1) per awning sections 26-3 & 26-9(c) District II 25% 25% of awning surface Prohibited Prohibited (1) per awning sections 26-3 & 26-9(c) CONSTRUCTION SIGNS District I 128 sf 12' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per job site sections 26-3 & 26-7(3) District II 128 sf 12' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per job site sections 26-3 & 26-7(3) CONTRACTOR SIGNS District I 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per contractor sections 26-3 & 26-7(4) District II 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per contractor sections 26-3 & 26-7(4) DIRECTORY SIGNS AND MENU BOARDS District I 4 sf N/A Allowed Allowed (1) each per entrance sections 26-3 & 26-7(8) District II 4 sf N/A Allowed Allowed (1) each per entrance sections 26-3 & 26-7(8) HANGING CANOPY SIGNS District I 2 sf N/A Allowed Prohibited (1) per PBW (1) per SBW sections 26-3 & 26-10 
Sign attached to underside shall not be less than 1' from outer edge and no less than 9' above the ground District II 6 sf N/A Allowed Allowed (1) per PBW (1) per SBW sections 26-3 & 26-10 
Sign attached to underside shall not be less than 1' from outer edge and no less than 9' above the ground MONUMENT SIGNS District I 48 sf 6' Allowed Allowed (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-10 District II 48 sf 6' Allowed Allowed (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-10 POLITICAL SIGNS District I 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited 1 per candidate or issue per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(1) District II 20 sf 5' Prohibited Prohibited 1 per candidate or issue per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(1) PROJECT SIGNS District I 128 sf 12' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per job site sections 26-3 & 26-7(5) District II 128 sf 12' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per job site sections 26-3 & 26-7(5) PROJECTING SIGNS District I 12 sf shall not extend above bldg hght Permitted Prohibited (1) per PBW (1) per SBW sections 26-3, 26-9(c) & 26-10 
No closer than 2' to a curb line and a min. of 9' above walks and 15' above drives or alleys District II 12 sf shall not extend above bldg hght Permitted Permitted (1) per PBW (1) per SBW sections 26-3, 26-9(c) & 26-10 
No closer than 2' to a curb line and a min. of 9' above walks and 15' above drives or alleys PYLON SIGNS District I Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited sections 26-3 & 26-10 District II 100 sf 18' Allowed Allowed (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-10 REAL ESTATE SIGNS District I 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(2) District II 20 sf 5' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(2) SIDEWALK SIGNS/SANDWICH BOARDS District I 6 sf 3' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(6) District II 6 sf 3' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(6) TEMPORARY BANNERS AND DISPLAYS District I 32 sf 4' (See exceptions 26-8(b)(6) & 26-8(c)(5)) Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-8 District II 32 sf 4' (See exceptions 26-8(b)(6) & 26-8(c)(5)) Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-8 THEATER MARQUEES District I As Approved As Approved Allowed Allowed (1) per bldg front sections 26-3 & 26-10 District II As Approved As Approved Allowed Allowed (1) per bldg front sections 26-3 & 26-10 WALL SIGNS District I 1/2 sf per LF of bldg width or 16 sf whichever is greater shall not extend above bldg hght Allowed Prohibited (1) per PBW (1) per SBW sections 26-3 & 26-10 District II 1 sf per LF of bldg width or 16 sf whichever is greater shall not extend above bldg hght Allowed Allowed (1) per PBW (1) per SBW sections 26-3 & 26-10 WINDOW SIGNS District I Signage on exterior of glazing shall be limited to 1/2 sf per LF of glass; shall be permanently attached to the glazing, individual element signs only. N/A Prohibited Prohibited (1) per PBW (1) per SBW Applies to signage on the exterior of glazing only. Window signage may be applied to clear or transparent glazing only. 
sections 26-3, 26-5(a) & 26-6 District II Signage on exterior of glazing shall be limited to 1 sf per LF of glass; shall be permanently attached to the glazing, individual element signs only. N/A Prohibited Allowed (1) per PBW (1) per SBW Applies to signage on the exterior of glazing only. Window signage may be applied to clear or transparent glazing only. 
sections 26-3, 26-5(a) & 26-6 YARD SALE SIGNS District I 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(7) District II 20 sf 5' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(7)  
TABLE 4 SIGN DISTRICTS I AND II O-I ZONE Districts Max Square Footage Max Height (ft) Lighting Max Number Other External Illumination Internal Illumination ANNOUNCEMENT SIGNS District I 3 sf 2' for traffic guidance signs Prohibited Prohibited (1) per bldg entrance; (1) traffic guidance per parking entrance sections 26-3 & 26-10 District II 3 sf 2' for Traffic Guidance Signs Prohibited Prohibited (1) per bldg entrance; (1) traffic guidance per parking entrance sections 26-3 & 26-10 AWNING SIGNS District I 25% of awning surface Shall not extend above building wall Prohibited Prohibited (1) per awning sections 26-3 & 26-9(c) District II 25% of awning surface Shall not extend above building wall Prohibited Prohibited (1) per awning sections 26-3 & 26-9(c) CONSTRUCTION SIGNS District I 128 sf 12' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per construction site sections 26-3 & 26-7(3) District II 128 sf 12' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per construction site sections 26-3 & 26-7(3) CONTRACTOR SIGNS District I 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per contractor sections 26-3 & 26-7(4) District II 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per contractor sections 26-3 & 26-7(4) DIRECTORY SIGNS AND MENU BOARDS District I 4 sf N/A Allowed Allowed (1) each per entrance sections 26-3 & 26-7(8) District II 4 sf N/A Allowed Allowed (1) each per entrance sections 26-3 & 26-7(8) HANGING CANOPY SIGNS District I 2 sf N/A Allowed Prohibited (1) per PBW (1) per SBW Sections 26-3 & 26-10 
Sign attached to underside shall not be less than 1' from outer edge and no less than 9' above the ground District II 6 sf N/A Allowed Allowed (1) per PBW (1) per SBW Sections 26-3 & 26-10 
Sign attached to underside shall not be less than 1' from outer edge and no less than 9' above the ground MONUMENT SIGNS District I 48 sf 6' Allowed Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-10 District II 48 sf 6' Allowed Allowed (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-10 POLITICAL SIGNS District I 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per candidate or issue per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(1) District II 20 sf 5' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per candidate or issue per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(1) PROJECT SIGNS District I 128 sf 12' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per job site sections 26-3 & 26-7(5) District II 128 sf 12' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per job site sections 26-3 & 26-7(5) PROJECTING SIGNS District I 12 sf shall not extend above bldg hght Permitted Prohibited (1) per PBW (1) per SBW sections 26-3, 26-9(c) & 26-10 
No closer than 2' to a curb line and a min. of 9' above walks and 15' above drives and alleys District II 12 sf shall not extend above bldg hght Permitted Allowed (1) per PBW (1) per SBW sections 26-3, 26-9(c) & 26-10 
No closer than 2' to a curb line and a min. of 9' above walks and 15' above drives and alleys PYLON SIGNS District I Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited sections 26-3 & 26-10 District II 100 sf 18' Allowed Allowed (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-10 REAL ESTATE SIGNS District I 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(2) District II 20 sf 5' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(2) SIDEWALK SIGNS/SANDWICH BOARDS District I 6 sf 3' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3, 26-4(16) & 26-7(6) District II 6 sf 3' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3, 26-4(16) & 26-7(6) TEMPORARY BANNERS AND DISPLAYS District I 32 sf 4' (See exceptions 26-8(b)(6) & 26-8(c)(5)) Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-8 District II 32 sf 4' (See exceptions 26-8(b)(6) & 26-8(c)(5)) Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-8 THEATER MARQUEES District I As approved As Approved Allowed Allowed (1) per bldg front sections 26-3 & 26-10 District II As approved As Approved Allowed Allowed (1) per bldg front sections 26-3 & 26-10 WALL SIGNS District I 1/2 sf per LF of bldg width or 16 sf whichever is greater Shall not extend above bldg hght Allowed Prohibited (1) per PBW (1) per SBW sections 26-3 & 26-10 District II 1 sf per LF of bldg width or 16 sf whichever is greater Shall not extend above bldg hght Allowed Prohibited (1) per PBW (1) per SBW sections 26-3 & 26-10 WINDOW SIGNS District I Signage on exterior of glazing shall be limited to 1/2 sf per LF of glass; shall be permanently attached to the glazing, individual element signs only. N/A Prohibited Prohibited (1) per PBW (1) per SBW Applies to signage on the exterior of glazing only. Window signage may be applied to clear or transparent glazing only. 
sections 26-3, 26-5(a) & 26-6 District II Signage on exterior of glazing shall be limited to 1 sf per LF of glass; shall be permanently attached to the glazing, individual element signs only. N/A Prohibited Prohibited (1) per PBW (1) per SBW Applies to signage on the exterior of glazing only. Window signage may be applied to clear or transparent glazing only. sections 26-3, 26-5(a) & 26-6 YARD SALE SIGNS District I 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(7) District II 20 sf 5' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(7)  
TABLE 5 SIGN DISTRICTS I AND II SHOPPING CENTERS Districts Max Square Footage Max Height (ft) Lighting Max Number Other External Illumination Internal Illumination ANNOUNCEMENT SIGNS District I 3 sf 2' for traffic guidance signs Prohibited Prohibited (1) per bldg entrance; (1) traffic guidance per parking entrance sections 26-3 & 26-10 District II 3 sf 2' for traffic guidance signs Prohibited Prohibited (1) per bldg entrance; (1) traffic guidance per parking entrance sections 26-3 & 26-10 AWNING SIGNS District I 25% of awning surface Shall not extend above building wall Prohibited Prohibited (1) per awning sections 26-3 & 26-9(c) District II 25% of awning surface Shall not extend above building wall Prohibited Prohibited (1) per awning sections 26-3 & 26-9(c) CONSTRUCTION SIGNS District I 128 sf 12' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per construction site sections 26-3 & 26-7(3) District II 128 sf 12' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per construction site sections 26-3 & 26-7(3) CONTRACTOR SIGNS District I 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per contractor sections 26-3 & 26-7(4) District II 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per contractor sections 26-3 & 26-7(4) DIRECTORY SIGNS AND MENU BOARDS District I 4 sf N/A Allowed Allowed (1) each per entrance sections 26-3 & 26-7(8) District II 4 sf N/A Allowed Allowed (1) each per entrance sections 26-3 & 26-7(8) HANGING CANOPY SIGNS District I 2 sf N/A Allowed Allowed (1) per PBW (1) per SBW sections 26-3 & 26-10 
Sign attached to underside shall not be less than 1' from outer edge and no less than 9' above the ground District II 6 sf N/A Allowed Allowed (1) per PBW (1) per SBW sections 26-3 & 26-10 
Sign attached to underside shall not be less than 1' from outer edge and no less than 9' above the ground MONUMENT SIGNS District I listing of businesses or tenants 300 sf 18' Allowed Allowed (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-10 District I name of facility only 100 sf 18' Allowed Allowed (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-10 District II listing of businesses or tenants 300 sf 18' Allowed Allowed (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-10 District II name of facility only 100 sf 18' Allowed Allowed (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-10 POLITICAL SIGNS District I 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per candidate or issue per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(1) District II 20 sf 5' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per candidate or issue per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(1) PROJECT SIGNS District I 128 sf 12' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per job site sections 26-3 & 26-7(5) District II 128 sf 12' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per job site sections 26-3 & 26-7(5) PROJECTING SIGNS District I 12 sf Shall not extend above top of wall where attached Permitted Prohibited (1) per PBW (1) per SBW sections 26-3, 26-9(c) & 26-10 
No closer than 2' to a curb line and a min. of 9' above walks and 15' above drives and alleys District II 12 sf Shall not extend above top of wall where attached Permitted Prohibited (1) per PBW (1) per SBW sections 26-3, 26-9(c) & 26-10 
No closer than 2' to a curb line and a min. of 9' above walks and 15' above drives and alleys PYLON SIGNS District I listing of businesses or tenants Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited N/A sections 26-3 & 26-10 District I name of facility only Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited N/A sections 26-3 & 26-10 District II listing of businesses or tenants Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited N/A sections 26-3 & 26-10 District II name of facility only Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited N/A sections 26-3 & 26-10 REAL ESTATE SIGNS District I 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(2) District II 20 sf 5' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(2) SIDEWALK SIGNS/SANDWICH BOARDS District I 6 sf 3' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3, 26-4(16) & 26-7(6) District II 6 sf 3' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3, 26-4(16) & 26-7(6) TEMPORARY BANNERS AND DISPLAYS District I 32 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-8 District II 32 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-8 THEATER MARQUEES District I As Approved As Approved Allowed Allowed (1) per bldg front sections 26-3 & 26-10 District II As Approved As Approved Allowed Allowed (1) per bldg front sections 26-3 & 26-10 WALL SIGNS District I 1/2 sf per LF of bldg width or 16 sf whichever is greater shall not extend above bldg hght Allowed Allowed (1) per PBW (1) per SBW sections 26-3 & 26-10 District II 1 sf per LF of bldg width or 16 sf whichever is greater shall not extend above bldg hght Allowed Allowed (1) per PBW (1) per SBW sections 26-3 & 26-10 WINDOW SIGNS District I Signage on exterior of glazing shall be limited to 1/2 sf per LF of glass; shall be permanently attached to the glazing, individual element signs only. N/A Prohibited Prohibited (1) per PBW (1) per SBW Applies to signage on the exterior of glazing only. Window signage may be applied to clear or transparent glazing only. 
sections 26-3, 26-5(a) & 26-6 District II Signage on exterior of glazing shall be limited to 1 sf per LF of glass; shall be permanently attached to the glazing, individual element signs only. N/A Prohibited Prohibited (1) per PBW (1) per SBW Applies to signage on the exterior of glazing only. Window signage may be applied to clear or transparent glazing only. 
sections 26-3, 26-5(a) & 26-6 YARD SALE SIGNS District I 4 sf 4' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(7) District II 20 sf 5' Prohibited Prohibited (1) per street frontage sections 26-3 & 26-7(7)  
(Ord. No. 2017-02, 8-7-2017) 
Chapter 28 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1; hazardous waste management, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-79. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Garbage service and payment of fees required. 
    All occupied residences will receive garbage service and pay garbage fees as charged on the utility bill. 
(Comp. 1976, § 8-102; Code 1989, § 10-140; Ord. of 3-14-1985, § 1) 
Sec. 28-2. - Service terminated for nonpayment. 
    Failure to pay the charge on the utility bill will result in termination of all utility services. 
(Comp. 1976, § 8-102; Code 1989, § 10-141; Ord. of 3-15-1985, § 2) 
Sec. 28-3. - Receptacle use and restrictions. 
(a)  The Poly Kart is to be used only for normal household garbage. 
(b)  The load limit is 200 pounds. 
(c)  Wastes not acceptable for the Poly Kart are: 
(1)  Poisons, acids, caustics, explosives and volatile liquids, such as gasoline, oil and paint; 
(2)  Hot coals and ashes; 
(3)  Building rubbish or materials and furniture; 
(4)  Soil, rocks and automobile and vehicle tires. 
(d)  The Poly Kart shall be placed near the street on the scheduled collection day by 8:00 a.m. 
(e)  Exemption from placing the Poly Kart near the street will be made by the city only when an attending physician certifies that all persons occupying the site are unable to perform this act. 
(f)  The Poly Kart may not be emptied for the following reasons: 
(1)  The kart is too heavy; 
(2)  Unlawful materials were found in kart; and 
(3)  The kart was not at the curb when truck arrived. 
(Comp. 1976, § 8-102; Code 1989, § 10-145; Ord. of 3-15-1985, § 6) 
Sec. 28-4. - Nuisance created. 
    It shall be unlawful and constitute a nuisance for any person to create or cause an unhealthy accumulation of garbage by willfully failing to place garbage for collection as set out in section 28-3. 
(Comp. 1976, § 8-102; Code 1989, § 10-146; Ord. of 3-15-1985, § 7) 
Sec. 28-5. - Collection of commercial and industrial waste. 
(a)  All occupied commercial and industrial businesses located within the city limits will receive solid waste disposal services and pay fees as charged on the utility bill except those commercial and industrial businesses which are not now being serviced because of the inability of the city to serve said commercial or industrial businesses due to equipment limitations. For purposes of this section, the term "commercial businesses" includes public housing and mobile home parks. 
(b)  The city will set fees based on the following: 
(1)  A base fee. 
(2)  A pickup fee. 
(3)  A landfill fee. 
(c)  Failure to pay the charges for solid waste disposal on the utility bill will result in the termination of all utility services. 
(d)  Unacceptable waste: 
(1)  Dangerous materials or substances such as poisons, acids, caustics, explosives and volatile liquids such as gasoline, oil and paint. 
(2)  Hot coals and ashes. 
(3)  Building rubbish or materials. 
(4)  Furniture and appliances. 
(e)  If unacceptable waste is found in the solid waste collected at any site the city will not pick up waste at such site until it is assured that future collection at said site will not contain unacceptable waste. 
(Code 1989, § 10-147; Ord. of 12-7-1992) 
Secs. 28-6-28-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GARBAGE COLLECTION CONTAINERS 

Sec. 28-29. - Maintenance; damage; replacement costs. 
(a)  The Poly Kart will be furnished to all residents at no charge, and will be maintained by the city unless damaged by improper use or negligence. When the Poly Kart no longer functions properly due to normal wear and use, the city will replace it at no charge. 
(b)  Any cost of Poly Kart repair or replacement not caused by normal and proper usage, including being lost or stolen, will be charged to the responsible resident on such resident's utility bill. The cost may be prorated over a period of time upon request of the resident if it exceeds $10.00, but in no circumstance will such period exceed 12 months. 
(Comp. 1976, § 8-102; Code 1989, §§ 10-142, 10-143; Ord. of 3-15-1985, §§ 3, 4) 
Sec. 28-30. - Resident to notify utility office when changing addresses. 
    The resident shall not move the Poly Kart when changing his address. The resident must notify the city utility office of the move and the sanitation department will pick up the kart. 
(Comp. 1976, § 8-102; Code 1989, § 10-144; Ord. of 3-15-1985, § 5) 
Chapter 30 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; authority for local regulations of streets, sidewalks and other public places, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET USE AND OBSTRUCTIONS 

Sec. 30-19. - Obstructing street prohibited; nuisance; abatement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or maintain an obstruction in a street or public way in the city by a fence or otherwise in violation of state law, the city Charter or city ordinances. Such action is adjudged a nuisance and its abatement may be made by the city at the owner's or other person's expense upon failure of such owner or other person to abate the same within ten days after written notice from the city to do so. 
(Comp. 1976, § 19-105; Code 1989, § 15-10; Ord. of 11-1-1982) 
State Law reference- Obstructing streets, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43. 
Sec. 30-20. - Goods, wares and merchandise on sidewalks prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in business in the city, or otherwise, to store any type of goods, wares or merchandise on the city's sidewalks that would extend more than 24 inches from the building on such sidewalk. 
(Comp. 1976, § 7-107; Code 1989, § 15-11) 
Sec. 30-21. - Unlawful to tack, attach, etc., posters to poles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to tack, attach, paste or place a poster on any pole located on the public streets and sidewalks of the city. 
(Comp. 1976, § 7-107; Code 1989, § 15-12) 
State Law reference- Damaging utility property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Sec. 30-22. - Private driveway damaged during repair of street or utility line. 
    Private driveways located on public rights-of-way shall be permitted and shall be constructed and maintained solely at the property owners' expense. If it becomes necessary for the city to repair any street or utility line that damages any private driveway, the city will, at its expense replace only that part of the driveway that is damaged by the city. 
(Code 1989, § 15-13; Ord. of 12-7-1992) 
Secs. 30-23-30-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREET DEDICATION 

Sec. 30-48. - Rules and regulations promulgated by planning commission. 
    The planning commission shall be authorized to set up rules and regulations with regard to the procedure to be practiced in submitting any proposed streets, roads or alleys to the planning commission, subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Comp. 1976, § 11-106; Code 1989, § 15-6; Ord. of 7-2-1956, § 2) 
Sec. 30-49. - Plan to be submitted. 
    Before any street or road is opened or extended by private authority, or before any new street, road or alley is laid out in any subdivision for residential, business or industrial uses, and before the city council shall consider acceptance of any new street, road or alley, the person proposing to open or extend the street, road or alley shall submit a detailed plan of the same with such pertinent information or data as may be required by the planning commission to the commission. The commission shall carefully examine the plan with regard to its nature and the purpose, width, character and location of the street, road or alley. 
(Comp. 1976, § 11-106; Code 1989, § 15-5; Ord. of 7-2-1956, § 1) 
Sec. 30-50. - Report. 
    The planning commission shall make a report on each application for a proposed street, road or alley to the city council with its recommendation of approval or disapproval in writing, and the city council shall either approve or disapprove such plan. 
(Comp. 1976, § 11-106; Code 1989, § 15-7; Ord. of 7-2-1956, § 3) 
Sec. 30-51. - City council approval required. 
    No street, road or alley shall be accepted by the city or joined onto any existing public street or road without the city council's approval. 
(Comp. 1976, § 11-106; Code 1989, § 15-8; Ord. of 7-2-1956, § 4) 
Secs. 30-52-30-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 30-76. - Permit required. 
    Whenever it shall be necessary for any property owner or other person to cut into any street, sidewalk, curb or gutter for any reason, it shall be necessary to first obtain a permit from the city council. It shall be the duty of the permittee to replace the surface in as good condition as it was before the excavation was made. 
(Comp. 1976, § 11-104; Code 1989, § 15-9; Ord. of 5-23-1927) 
Sec. 30-77. - Duty to repair surface. 
    It shall be the duty of the permittee to replace the surface in as good condition as it was before the excavation was made. 
(Comp. 1976, § 11-104; Code 1989, § 15-9; Ord. of 5-23-1927) 
Secs. 30-78-30-97. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARADES 

Sec. 30-98. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the term "parade," "procession" or "other public demonstration" does not include a funeral, wedding or city-sponsored procession provided with a police escort. 
(Comp. 1976, § 18-105-A; Code 1989, § 12-20; Ord. of 6-24-1986, § 1(a)) 
Sec. 30-99. - Permit-Required. 
    It shall be unlawful to organize or hold, or to assist in organizing or holding, or to take part or participate in, any parade, procession or other public demonstration on the streets, sidewalks or other public ways of the city, unless otherwise allowed by state or federal law without first obtaining a written permit for the allowance of the same from the city. 
(Comp. 1976, § 18-105-A; Code 1989, § 12-21; Ord. of 6-24-1986, § 1(a)) 
Sec. 30-100. - Same-Application. 
    A written application for such permit shall be made to the city manager at least 45 days prior to the date of the parade, procession or other public demonstration, indicating: 
(1)  The hour, date, proposed route over which it is desired to have the parade, procession or other public demonstration pass; 
(2)  The probable number of persons and/or vehicles engaged in such parade, procession or other public demonstration; and 
(3)  Specify each street, sidewalk or other public way over, along or in which it is desired to have or hold such parade, procession or other public demonstration. 
(Comp. 1976, § 18-105-A; Code 1989, § 12-22; Ord. of 6-24-1986, § 1(b)) 
Sec. 30-101. - Same-Issuance, contents. 
(a)  The city council shall act upon the application no later than 45 days after the application is submitted to the city manager. In acting on the permit, the city council shall either deny the permit or issue a permit allowing such parade, procession or other public demonstration during daylight hours only (unless the application specifically requested other than daylight hours, and the permit specifically grants the request of other than daylight hours). 
(b)  Such permit shall prescribe the route of such parade, procession or other public demonstration by listing the streets, sidewalks or other public ways over which the parade, procession or other public demonstration shall pass. 
(c)  The written permit shall set forth the basis for any modification of the requested route. Any modification of a requested route shall be based on a consideration of the public welfare, peace, safety, health, good order and convenience of the general public necessitating regulations of pedestrian and vehicular traffic along the proposed route. 
(Comp. 1976, § 18-105-A; Code 1989, § 12-23; Ord. of 6-24-1986, § 1(b)) 
Sec. 30-102. - Unlawful to deviate from prescribed route. 
    It shall be unlawful to use for such purposes any street, sidewalk or public way other than those set out in such permit. 
(Comp. 1976, § 18-105-A; Code 1989, § 12-24; Ord. of 6-24-1986, § 1(b)) 
Sec. 30-103. - Appeal from route modification order. 
(a)  Where the written permit issued modifies the proposed route of the parade, procession or other public demonstration as originally set forth in the application, the applicant may appeal such modification to the city council by filing, within ten days of the issuance of the permit modifying the proposed route, a written notice with the city clerk setting forth objections to the modification. The city council shall review such notice and issue a decision within ten days. 
(b)  The city council shall have the power to amend or modify the written permit in any particular. 
(Comp. 1976, § 18-105-A; Code 1989, § 12-25; Ord. of 6-24-1986, § 1(b)) 
Chapter 32 - SUBDIVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means a private or public thoroughfare that affords only a secondary access to a building or abutting property and is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Arterial streets, unless otherwise specified by the comprehensive plan, a transportation element of the comprehensive plan or major thoroughfare plan, means those streets and highway facilities, including full and partial access controlled highways and major urban area entrance highways, which are designed to carry the highest traffic volumes and the longest trips through and within an urban area. 
    Auction means a public sale of property to the highest bidder. 
    Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public streets, public lands, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses or any other barrier to the continuity of development. 
    Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, above or below ground, having a roof or other covering, and designed, built, or used as a shelter or enclosure for persons, animals or property of any kind, including tents, awnings or vehicles used for purposes of a building. 
    Building setback line means a line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the building, including any covered porches, and the street right-of-way or property line when measured perpendicularly thereto. In the case of corner lots or double frontage lots, front yard requirements shall be observed for those areas adjacent to street rights-of-way. 
    Centerline of street means that line surveyed and monumented by the city council and designated as the center of a public street. If a centerline has not been surveyed, it shall be the line running midway between the outside curbs, ditches or paved or improved sides of the street. 
    City engineer means the person appointed by the city council to review engineering aspects of plans. 
    Clear site triangle means an area of unobstructed vision at street intersections designed by the centerlines of the streets and by a line of sight between points on their centerlines at a given distance from the intersection of the centerlines. 
    Collector streets, unless otherwise specified by the comprehensive plan, a transportation element of the comprehensive plan or major thoroughfare plan, are those streets that collect traffic from minor streets or other collector streets and channel it to the arterial system. Collector streets provide land access and traffic circulation within commercial and industrial areas. 
    Comprehensive plan means those coordinated plans or portions thereof which have been prepared by or for the city council for the physical development of the jurisdiction, or any plans that designate plans or programs to encourage the most appropriate use of the land in the interest of public health, safety and welfare. 
    Corner lot means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
    Cul-de-sac means a street having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated at the other end by a vehicular turnaround. 
    Culvert means a drain or conduit that carries water under a driveway, roadway, railroad, pedestrian walk or public way. 
    Curb means a concrete boundary marking the edge of a paved area. 
    Curb cut means a provision for vehicular ingress or egress between property and an abutting street. 
    Deceleration lane means an added roadway lane that permits vehicles to slow down and leave the main vehicle stream. 
    Dedication plat means a plat that indicates property to be dedicated for public right-of-way or land for public use. 
    Development means any manmade change of improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings, structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
    Double frontage lot means a lot other than a corner lot that has frontage upon two or more streets that do not intersect at a point abutting the property. 
    Drainage means the removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading or other means. 
    Easement means: 
(1)  A nonpossessory interest in land; and 
(2)  A grant by a property owner for the use by the public, a corporation or persons of a portion of land for a specified purpose. 
    Escrow account means a type of subdivision improvement guarantee where the subdivider deposits either cash, a note, a bond or some other instrument readily convertible to cash for a specific face value specified by the city to cover the costs of required improvements. 
    Final plat means a finished drawing of a subdivision showing completely and accurately all legal and engineering information and certification necessary for recording. 
    Flag lot means a tract or lot of land of uneven dimensions in which the portion fronting on a public street is less than the required minimum width for construction of a building or structure on that lot. 
    Grade means the slope of a street, or other public way, specified in percentage terms. 
    Gridiron pattern means a street and block system resulting in formal, regular, rectangular blocks and resulting in four-way intersections. 
    Letter of credit means a type of subdivision improvement guarantee whereby a subdivider secures a letter of credit from a bank or other institution or from a person with resources sufficient to cover the cost of improvements required by the city. The letter pledges the creditor to pay the cost of improvements in case of default by the subdivider. 
    Lot means a portion or parcel of land intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development or both, intended to be devoted to a common use or occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, and having principal frontage on a public street. In determining the area and dimension of a lot, no part of the right-of-way may be included. 
    Lot area means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of public street rights-of-way. 
    Lot depth means the average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot frontage means the width in linear feet of a lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. This width shall not be less than 30 feet. 
    Lot width means the distance between side lot lines measured at the regulatory/required building line. 
    Major subdivision means the division of a buildable lot of record into six or more lots complying with all zoning requirements. 
    Minor subdivisions are those that, because of their small size, can be administratively approved in expedited fashion by the planning and zoning commission. A minor subdivision is a buildable lot of record divided into five or fewer lots and, where the following conditions exist, the proposed lot complies with all zoning requirements: 
(1)  Each proposed lot fronts on an existing public street and complies with the county health department requirements; 
(2)  All slope and utility easements as determined necessary by the city zoning administrator are provided to the city; and 
(3)  Each lot created is not resubdivided pursuant to the provisions for minor subdivisions, and the entire contiguous property owned by the subdivider is included. 
    Mortgage lot means a lot created out of a tract to enable the contract purchaser of the tract to finance construction of a single-family residence or other building thereon. 
    Performance bond means a type of subdivision improvement guarantee in the form of a bond, secured by the subdivider from a bonding company, in an amount specified by the city to cover the costs of required improvements, and payable to the city. The performance bond may be cashed in by the city in the event the subdivider defaults on required improvements. 
    Preliminary plat means a drawing that shows the proposed layout of a subdivision in sufficient detail to indicate its general design. 
    Public street means a dedicated and accepted public right-of-way which affords the principal means of paved access to abutting properties. 
    Reservation means a method of holding land for future public use by designating public areas on a subdivision plat. 
    Resubdivision means the further division of a lot within a subdivision previously approved and recorded. 
    Right-of-way, distinguished from an easement, means that area specified for the present or future use of roads, streets and highways, together with its drainage facilities and other supporting uses and structures. 
    Shade tree means a tree in a public place, street, special easement or right-of-way adjoining a street. 
    Sidewalk means a hard surfaced area provided for pedestrian use, usually located alongside a road within the right-of-way. 
    Street means a public or private thoroughfare which is open to the general public and which affords the principal means of paved access to abutting property. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground, or which is attached to something having more or less a permanent location on the ground, not including utility poles. 
    Subdivision means the division, proposed division, redivision or proposed redivision of any land into two or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots or interests for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of offer, sale, lease, gift, charitable donation or development. 
(1)  The term "subdivision" includes the division or development of residential and nonresidential land, whether by deed, metes and bounds description, intestacy, lease, map, plat or other recorded instrument. 
(2)  The term "subdivision" also means the land to be so divided, as the context may indicate. 
(3)  Certain types of subdivisions are exempted from the procedural requirements of this chapter, but otherwise require compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
    Subdivision improvement guarantee means a legal device used by local governments to ensure that the required capital improvements are, in fact, completed in a satisfactory manner by subdivision developers. 
    Temporary cul-de-sac means a nonpermanent vehicular turnaround located at the termination of a street. 
    Variance means a minimal relaxation or modification of the strict terms of this chapter as applied to specific property when, because of particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical condition of the property, compliance would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or a desire to make a profit. 
    Zoning administrator means the city manager or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-2. - Purpose; intent. 
    These regulations are adopted for the following purposes: 
(1)  To protect and provide for the public health, safety and general welfare; 
(2)  To guide the future growth and development of the city in accordance with the comprehensive plan; 
(3)  To provide for adequate light, air and privacy; 
(4)  To secure safety from fire, flood and other dangers; 
(5)  To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue congestion of population; 
(6)  To protect the character and social and economic stability of all parts of the city and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of all parts of the city; 
(7)  To protect and conserve the value of land and the value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the conflicts among the uses of land and buildings; 
(8)  To guide public and private policy and action in order to: 
a.  Provide adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation and other public requirements and facilities; and 
b.  Ensure that public facilities are available and will have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision; 
(9)  To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the city, with particular regard to: 
a.  Avoiding congestion in the streets and highways; 
b.  The pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of land and buildings; 
c.  Providing for the proper location and width of streets and building lines; 
(10)  To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions, resubdivisions and land development in order to further the orderly layout and use of land; 
(11)  To ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land; 
(12)  To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the city to: 
a.  Ensure appropriate development with regard to natural features; 
b.  Prevent the pollution of air, streams and ponds; 
c.  Ensure the adequacy of drainage facilities; and 
d.  Encourage the wise use and management of natural resources to preserve the integrity and stability of the community and the value of land; 
(13)  To ensure that all building lots have adequate access and circulation, especially for firefighting equipment and other emergency and service vehicles; 
(14)  To ensure the provision of needed open spaces and building sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational and other public purposes; 
(15)  To ensure the equitable handling of all subdivision plans by providing uniform submittal requirements, approval procedures and improvement standards for the subdivider; 
(16)  To help eliminate the costly maintenance problems which develop when streets and lots are laid out without proper consideration given to various public purposes; 
(17)  To protect lot purchasers who generally lack the specialized knowledge to evaluate subdivision improvements and design. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-3. - Authority of planning commission. 
    The city planning commission shall administratively review, approve and disapprove certain plats for the subdivision of land and all land development plans within the corporate city limits, as more specifically provided in this chapter, provided the plats do not involve dedication of land for any purpose to the city (minor subdivisions), nor involve variance to the development standards provided in this chapter. The chairperson of the planning commission is authorized to sign and record plats approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-4. - Applicability. 
    These regulations shall apply to the development of all lands located within the corporate city limits, whether the development involves the subdivision of land or pertains only to the construction of buildings or other improvements on a single lot or parcel. No person shall subdivide or develop land within the city except in accordance with these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-5. - Plat approval and recording required. 
(a)  It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or subdivider, by deed, map or other instrument, to sell, transfer, agree to sell, offer at public auction, negotiate to sell or subdivide any land until a final plat is approved by the planning commission and recorded in the county superior court clerk's office in accordance with this chapter. No subdivision plat or part thereof shall be recorded unless it has been approved for recording by the planning commission. 
(b)  Each approved plat must contain the signature of the chairperson of the planning and zoning commission and the date signed along with an "Approved" stamp of the city. 
(c)  No street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or other improvement in connection therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public use or travel or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon, except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from this chapter or from the penalties established in this chapter. The city, through its attorney or other designated official, may enjoin any transfer of, sale, or agreement by appropriate action. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-6. - Development approval required. 
    No person shall commence construction of any improvements on any land within the corporate city limits, and no development permits, land disturbing activity permits, building permits, certificates of occupancy or other instrument of approval shall be issued by the building official prior to the approval of a preliminary plat, or prior to the approval and recording of a final subdivision plat, as the case may be, as provided in this chapter, nor prior to the approval of land development plans which demonstrate compliance with this chapter and other applicable land development regulations in effect in the city. This provision shall not be construed as requiring a new plat for existing lots of record, as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-7. - Recording of unapproved plats prohibited. 
    From and after the date of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the planning commission shall be the official platting authority, and no plat of a land subdivision shall be entitled to be recorded in the county superior court clerk's office unless it shall have the planning commission's approval inscribed thereon. The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision without the approval required in this section is declared to be a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-8. - Dedication of public streets. 
    No land dedicated as a public street or for other public purpose shall be opened, extended or accepted as a public street or for other purpose unless such improvements are constructed in accordance with the specifications fixed by this chapter and formally approved and accepted as public improvements by the city council at a public meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-9. - Compliance with city zoning regulations required. 
    No person shall subdivide or develop land, and the planning and zoning commission shall not approve any subdivision or development of land, unless the lots created pursuant to a subdivision meet or exceed all applicable requirements of the city zoning regulations, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-10. - Conflicts. 
    Whenever the provisions of this chapter, other provisions of this Code or those of some other ordinance or statute apply to the same subject matter, that regulation requiring the highest, or more strict, standard shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-11. - Compliance with state and federal laws required. 
(a)  The subdivision of land within the city shall comply with the Interstate Land Sales Full Disclosure Act (15 USC 1701 et seq.) and the Georgia Land Sales Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-3-1 et seq.). 
(b)  All subdivision plats shall also comply with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67 regarding the accuracy and content of all recorded subdivision plats. 
(c)  In an effort to control erosion and sedimentation caused by stormwater runoff from construction sites, developers and landowners with plats of one acre or more must comply with the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.) and the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.). Developers and landowners must also comply with the federal Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.). 
(d)  The city may provide assistance as to how to abide by these laws by implementing a schedule or a checklist for developers to follow while submitting various plans and various plats for their developments. Unless otherwise exempt, developers and landowners shall submit plans to the issuing authority in compliance with the Georgia Water Quality Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20) and the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1). 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-12. - Exemptions-Plat approval. 
    The exemptions provided in this section shall not apply to the land development requirements of this chapter, shall not require the city to issue permits should the resulting lots or parcels not meet applicable zoning or subdivision regulations, and do not exclude the land transfers specified in this chapter from recording requirements in cases where a plat is the method of land conveyance. Otherwise, the following types of land transfer are specifically exempted from plat approval requirements of this chapter: 
(1)  The sale of cemetery plots; 
(2)  The sale of lots consistent with a previously approved and recorded plat or deed; 
(3)  The creation of a leasehold for a space within a multiple-occupant building or the division of property into leaseholds for commercial, industrial or institutional uses (e.g., shopping center); 
(4)  The creation of a leasehold for agricultural use of a property where the use does not involve the construction of a building to be used as a residence or for any purpose not directly related to agricultural use of the land, or crops or livestock raised thereon; and 
(5)  Mortgage lots and other parcel transfers by lawsuits for partition, inheritance, the probate of an estate, merger of title or by a court of law. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-13. - Same-City council approval. 
    The following are exempt from city council approval: 
(1)  The division of a tract or parcel for purposes of creating a dedication plat; 
(2)  The combination, recombination or aggregation of properties for land assembly purposes; and 
(3)  Minor subdivisions as defined in this chapter. 
However, these exemptions shall require approval by the planning and zoning commission to ensure minimum lot sizes and dimensions as may be required by the city zoning ordinance are met and to ensure the subdivision is properly recorded. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Secs. 32-14-32-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING APPROVAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 32-45. - Preapplication conference. 
(a)  Whenever the subdivision of a tract of land is proposed to be made, or when land is proposed to be developed, the subdivider or land developer is encouraged, but not required, to consult early and informally with the zoning administrator. 
(b)  The subdivider or land developer may submit sketch plans and data showing existing conditions within the site and its vicinity and the proposed layout and development of the subdivision or parcel of land. Plans shall be clearly marked "Sketch Plans." 
(c)  This preapplication conference is intended to permit an early evaluation of the subdivider's or land developer's intentions and coordination with the city's comprehensive plan, and to inform and provide the subdivider or land developer with the necessary regulations in order to properly accomplish the proposed project. 
(d)  No fee shall be charged for the preapplication review and no formal application shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Secs. 32-46-32-63. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRELIMINARY PLAT 

Sec. 32-64. - Application. 
    This section shall apply only to applicants for subdivision plat approval not exempted as a minor subdivision. Following the preapplication review of a subdivision involving the grading of land or the installation of roads, streets, utilities or other improvements, the subdivider shall submit to the zoning administrator the following: 
(1)  An application on a form furnished by the city zoning administrator; 
(2)  Five copies of the preliminary plat, with appropriate information required by this chapter; provided, however, that the zoning administrator may require more or less copies depending upon the nature and extent of review; 
(3)  An application fee, in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution; 
(4)  A review of the owner's plans and the development's impact on soil erosion control. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-65. - Specifications. 
(a)  The preliminary plat shall be drawn at a suitable scale (one inch equals 100 feet, unless another scale is approved) on a sheet size not exceeding 24 inches by 36 inches. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet at this size and scale, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map on a separate sheet of the same size. 
(b)  The preliminary plat shall include the following information; provided, however, that the zoning administrator may waive individual information requirements established in this section when, in his opinion, the information is not essential to the review process: 
(1)  Ground elevations at contour intervals of not less than five feet, based on sea level datum and a tie to one or more benchmarks (if available within 1,000 feet); 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of the owner of record and subdivider; 
(3)  Proposed name of subdivision, its acreage, density and location by land lot and district; 
(4)  North arrow, graphic scale and date; 
(5)  Vicinity map showing location of subdivision; 
(6)  Exact boundary lines of the tract by bearings and distances, as certified by a state-registered land surveyor on the plat or by reference to a certified boundary survey, including all adjacent land owned by the subdivider; 
(7)  Names of the owners of record of adjoining land; 
(8)  Existing streets, utilities and easements on or adjacent to the tract, including the length and width of all new streets; 
(9)  Other physical features of the land such as streams and direction of flow, lakes, floodplains, and bodies of water identified by the United States Geological Survey data, and existing buildings; 
(10)  Proposed layout including streets, alleys, street names, right-of-way widths, lot lines with dimensions and acreage, easements, land to be reserved or dedicated for public uses and any land to be used for purposes other than single-family dwellings; 
(11)  All lots, numbered sequentially, regardless of number of phases or sections, indicating lot size; 
(12)  Provisions for water supply, sewage disposal, storm drainage and other utilities such as gas, electricity, telephone and cable television; 
(13)  Location and results of percolation tests or soils information for lots which will not be served by a public sanitary sewage system, as required by the county health department; 
(14)  Existing and proposed covenants and restrictions; 
(15)  Name, address and telephone number of the person to contact; 
(16)  Location of all utilities; 
(17)  Zoning classification or any variance or special exception granted; 
(18)  Signature block for planning and zoning commission approval; 
(19)  Driveway access points on corner lots; 
(20)  Proposed minimum building setback lines for each street; 
(21)  Playgrounds or public areas and parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public use; 
(22)  Stormwater retention facilities, with calculations for runoff; and 
(23)  Setbacks for existing buildings. 
Sec. 32-66. - Transmittal to review agencies. 
    At his discretion, the zoning administrator may transmit for review and comment a copy of the plat to applicable internal and external review agencies including, but not limited to: 
(1)  City engineer; 
(2)  City attorney; 
(3)  City police chief; 
(4)  City fire chief; 
(5)  City building official; 
(6)  County health department; 
(7)  U.S. Postal Service (local postmaster); and 
(8)  State department of natural resources. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-67. - Procedure for city action. 
(a)  Within 30 working days of receipt of the completed application for preliminary plat, the plat shall be submitted for action by the planning and zoning commission at its next regularly scheduled public meeting or specially called public meeting. Approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat; rather it shall be approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat to be used as a guide for the preparation of the final plat. 
(b)  One copy of the plat shall be given to the erosion and sedimentation control office of the state soil and water conservation commission. One copy of the plat shall be given to the erosion and sedimentation control permitting office of the state EPD, along with fees that may be associated with obtaining a NPDES general permit to discharge stormwater from the work site. 
(c)  Preliminary plat approval shall continue in effect for a period of one year. Each application shall be given written notification of planning and zoning commission action when the preliminary plat is not approved as filed. The decision shall specify the defects found in the plan and describe the requirements which have not been met and cite the provisions of the regulations relied upon. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-68. - Soil erosion and sedimentation control permit. 
(a)  A soil erosion and sedimentation control permit (NPDES general permit) may be issued by the erosion and sedimentation office of the state EPD following approval of the preliminary plat and planning and zoning commission action. 
(b)  Upon issue of the soil erosion and sedimentation control permit, erosion control measures must be installed by the landowners and approved by the erosion and sediment control permitting office of the state EPD prior to any grubbing and grading. Sediment retention facilities must be installed and operational prior to major grading operations, as specified in the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission's Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-69. - Waiver of approval. 
    Where a proposed subdivision does not involve the grading of land prior to the sale or installation of streets or utilities, or which does not require storm drainage facilities or other such improvements, the planning and zoning commission may waive the requirement of a preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-70. - Development plans-Required; contents. 
    This section applies to all applicants for preliminary subdivision plat and land development approval. Prior to the issuance of a development permit as required by the city zoning regulations, three copies of plans and specifications for the improvements shall be submitted to the zoning administrator. Plans shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Utility plans providing information regarding the location, size, length and type of all water, sanitary sewer, fire hydrants, electricity, telephone, gas, cable television, and storm drainage improvements showing their minor structures, appendages and connections with existing systems, and the approximate location of service lines from the lots to the proposed utility lines. The city layout shall be used for all utility locations. Plans must show existing utility services at the connection point. 
(2)  Street plans providing street profiles and cross sections as required by this chapter, type of sub-base, type of paving base, type of curb and gutter, type of street paving, and type of improvements within the street right-of-way outside of the paved area. 
(3)  A grading plan and soil sedimentation and erosion control plan. 
(4)  In addition to utility, street, grading and erosion control plans, if required by the city, a hydrological study or other engineering studies as may be necessary, depending upon the scope and extent of the development project. 
(5)  Tree species acceptable to the city's tree committee. 
(6)  Concrete curbs and sidewalks. 
(7)  Signage including, but not limited to, stop signs, speed limit signs, warning signs and development name signage. 
(8)  Traffic devices, which must meet state department of transportation (DOT) approval. 
(9)  Traffic stop bars, centerline and crosswalks. 
(10)  Type and location of all streetlights, which shall meet IES standards. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-71. - Same-Review; approval. 
(a)  This section shall apply to all applicants with approved preliminary plats and all applicants for land development approval, unless specifically exempted as provided in this chapter or the city zoning regulations. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the completed development plans by the zoning administrator, he shall initiate review and forward a copy of the plans to the city engineer, fire department, building official or other personnel as appropriate for review and comment. 
(c)  Approval of the final plan by the planning and zoning commission constitutes final approval of land development as to the character and intensity of development, the layout and the dimensions, lots and other planned features. Approval binds the developer to the scheme shown on the final plan. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-72. - Issuance of development permit. 
(a)  Upon receipt and approval of development plans, the building official shall issue a building permit in accordance with established procedures. Issuance of a building permit shall constitute authorization to begin land disturbing activities and the construction of improvements. 
(b)  A prerequisite to the issuance of a development permit shall be the completion and signature of an indemnification agreement. 
(c)  Soil erosion control permits must be issued prior to development permits. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Secs. 32-73-32-102. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FINAL PLAT 

Sec. 32-103. - Application. 
(a)  This section shall not apply to land developers not requiring final subdivision plat approval. 
(b)  Upon completion of the required improvements, the subdivider may submit an application for final plat approval, which shall consist of the following: 
(1)  An application form furnished by the zoning administrator; 
(2)  Five copies of the final plat, with appropriate information required by this chapter, and one time-stable reproducible film (Mylar or linen) copy or the original of the plat; 
(3)  An application fee in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution; 
(4)  A letter from the applicant's engineer that all required improvements have been constructed and meet the city's specifications; 
(5)  A letter from the applicable electricity service company may be required indicating that service points for individual lots and streetlights have been installed; 
(6)  A performance bond for required improvements not yet completed (e.g., pavement topping), if a delay in the completion of required improvements is permitted by the zoning administrator, such bond to be: 
a.  Conditioned on the faithful performance by the subdivider or developer of all work required within a specified time; 
b.  Payable to or for the indemnification of the city in an amount equal to the cost of construction of the required improvements not yet completed plus an additional ten percent of such costs, as approved by the city manager; 
c.  With surety by a company entered and licensed to do business in the state; and 
d.  Approved as to form and content by the city attorney; 
(7)  A maintenance bond, cash deposit, escrow account or other guarantee or instrument of financial security as approved by the city attorney to ensure maintenance of the required improvements in the subdivision for a period of one year after acceptance by the city, payable to the city and in the amount of ten percent more than the city's estimate of actual construction cost. If, upon being notified of the failure of the required improvements, and the subdivider does not correct the deficiency or commence work within ten days of notice, it shall be deemed to be a failure on the bond, and the city shall have the right to make the necessary repairs, either by public work or by private contract, and the bond or instrument of financial security shall be liable for the full amount of the cost and repairs, as determined by the city; 
(8)  "As-built" drawings acceptable to the city engineer of all streets showing the planned and actual location of all utility lines, centerline profile of all streets with final grades, and horizontal and vertical alignment including profiles and invert elevations of all storm and sanitary sewer lines; provided, however, the planning and zoning commission may waive this final plat submittal requirement for a set period of time if improvements or "as-built" drawings are not complete, subject to subsequent denial of building permits should such drawings not be submitted. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-104. - Specifications. 
    The final plat shall be drawn in permanent ink at a suitable scale (one inch equals 100 feet, unless another scale is approved) on a sheet size of 17 inches by 22 inches or otherwise approved by the planning and zoning commission. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet at this size and scale, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map on a separate sheet of the same size. Ten copies of the final plat shall be filed with the city planning and zoning commission or five copies and an electronic format on computer disc. The final plat shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name of the subdivision and street names. 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of the owner of record. 
(3)  Name, address and phone number of the subdivider. If the subdivider is different from the owner, the owner's signature must appear on the final plat cover sheet. 
(4)  Date of plat drawing, graphic scale, north point, notation as to the reference of bearings to magnetic, true north, or grid north, and indication whether bearings shown are calculated from angles turned or taken from compass readings. 
(5)  Location of tract (land district and land lot), location sketch and acreage. 
(6)  Courses and distances to the nearest existing street intersections or benchmarks or other recognized permanent monuments. 
(7)  Exact boundary lines of the tract, to be indicated by a heavy line, giving distances to the nearest one-hundredth foot and bearings to the nearest second, determined by an accurate field survey. 
(8)  Street centerlines showing angles of deflection and standard curve data of intersection, radii, length of tangents and arcs, and degree of curvature with basis of curve data. 
(9)  Municipal, county and land lot lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse or immediately adjoin the subdivision. 
(10)  Exact locations, rights-of-way and pavement widths, and names of all streets and alleys within such immediately adjoining the subdivision. 
(11)  Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth foot, necessary internal angles, arcs and chords and tangent or radii of rounded corners. 
(12)  The acreage or square footage of the area of each lot and the total number of lots in the subdivision. 
(13)  Front yard/building setback lines with dimensions. 
(14)  Lots numbered in numerical order, regardless of the number of phases or sections. 
(15)  Accurate location, material and description of monuments, markers, signs and lights. 
(16)  Locations, dimensions and purposes of easements and areas to be reserved or dedicated for public use. 
(17)  A statement, either directly on the plat or in an identified attached document, of private covenants, if any. 
(18)  Areas within the intermediate regional flood (IRF), such as a 100-flood, shall be determined by a professional engineer and shall be shown on the plat, including the location and elevation of the intermediate regional flood. 
(19)  Names of the owners of record of adjoining unplatted land, and the names of subdivisions and blocks and lot numbers for adjoining platted land. 
(20)  The following certifications: 
a.  Final surveyor's certificate. 
b.  Owner's certificate of ownership and dedication to public use streets, alleys, easements and other public areas, signed by the owner. 
c.  Certification by the county health department that the plat and proposed water and sewage facilities are acceptable. 
d.  The planning and zoning commission's signature indicating approval of the final plat. 
e.  Certificate of recording. The owner/subdivider must file the plan in the county court clerk's office within ten days of final approval. 
(21)  A statement that final plat approval does not constitute acceptance of public streets, easements and areas; however, recording of a final plat shall constitute a dedication of rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-105. - Procedure for city action. 
    Upon receipt of the completed final plat application materials, the planning commission may transmit for review and comment a copy of the plat to applicable review agencies. The plat shall be submitted for action by the planning and zoning commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting or specially called meeting. If approved by the planning and zoning commission, the signature of the chairperson of the planning and zoning commission shall be placed on the reproducible film copy or original of the plat and his signature shall constitute the city's final approval. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-106. - Combinations and replats. 
    Where separate lots of land are proposed to be combined or replatted, but where the resulting number of lots is not increased, they shall be submitted to the zoning administrator as a final plat for review, approval and recording. The plat shall contain all information and certificates as specified in section 32-104; provided, however, the planning and zoning commission may waive certain of these specific information requirements if determined not to be essential. Any combinations or replats shall indicate in writing on the plat in a conspicuous place, numbered and dated consecutively, of all revisions to the plat. Any plat shall require a fee in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution as a final plat. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-107. - Recording. 
    Upon approval and within ten days, the owner/developer shall have the final plat recorded in the records of the superior court clerk's office, and a time-stable reproducible film copy or original filed in the zoning administrator's office. A copy of the original shall require an engineer's or surveyor's stamp to protect the liability of the professional involved. The superior court clerk shall indicate on the filed copy, as well as the time-stable reproducible film copy or original, the book and page number in the county records where the final plat is recorded. Recordation of a final plat constitutes approval to begin the sale or transfer of subdivision lots. Proof of such recording shall be furnished to the city within ten days. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-108. - Street addresses assigned. 
    Upon recording of a final plat, the county 911 director shall assign each lot a street address and shall note each address in permanent ink on the time-stable, reproducible film copy or original. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-109. - Recorded final plat distributed. 
    The final plat is a source of essential information to tax officials, public safety officials, and utility officials, among others. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for ensuring that each agency listed in this section receives a copy of the final recorded plat with assigned addresses: 
(1)  The county tax commissioner. 
(2)  The county tax assessor. 
(3)  The county health department. 
(4)  The city police chief. 
(5)  The city fire chief. 
(6)  The city engineer. 
(7)  The U. S. Postal Service (local postmaster). 
At the discretion of the zoning administrator, additional agencies or persons may be added to the above list. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-110. - Acceptance of public streets and improvements. 
    At any date after one year has passed since the date of final plat approval, the subdivider or land developer may petition the city council in writing to accept public streets and other improvements, in whole or in part, within the subdivision. Any improvement shall not be accepted for maintenance until approved by the city council. Any instrument of financial guarantee shall be returned to the subdivider upon acceptance of public streets and improvements by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Secs. 32-111-32-133. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL DESIGN AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 32-134. - Suitability of land. 
    Land subject to flooding, improper drainage or erosion, or that is for topographical or other reasons unsuitable for residential use shall not be platted for residential use nor any other use that will continue or increase the danger to health, safety or proper construction, unless hazards can be and are corrected. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-135. - Name of subdivision. 
    The name of the subdivision must have the city council's approval. The name shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision in the city or county. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-136. - Access from public street. 
    Access to every subdivision shall be provided over a public street. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-137. - Conformance to adopted major thoroughfare and other plans. 
(a)  All streets and other features of the Major Thoroughfare Plan of the City of Hartwell, Georgia, if adopted by the city council, shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and to the dimension indicated on the major thoroughfare plan. The state department of transportation's approval shall be required by the planning and zoning commission in subdivisions related to or affecting any state or federally numbered highway. 
(b)  When features of other plans adopted by the city (and as schools or other public building sites, parks or other land for public uses) are located in whole or in part in a land subdivision, such features shall either be dedicated or reserved by the subdivider for acquisition within a six-month period from the date of preliminary plat submittal to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-138. - Continuation of existing streets. 
    Existing streets shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-139. - Street names. 
    Street names shall be approved by the city council. Streets that are in alignment with existing named streets shall be given the names of the existing streets. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or closely approximate those of existing streets in the city or county. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-140. - Street jogs. 
    Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-141. - Development along arterial street or limited access highway. 
    Where a subdivision abuts or contains an arterial street or limited access highway, the city may require a street approximately parallel to and right-of-way at a distance suitable for an appropriate use of the intervening land with a nonaccess reservation suitably planned. Lots shall have no access to arterial streets or limited access highways but only to approved access streets. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-142. - Easements. 
(a)  Easements having a minimum width of 20 feet shall be provided where required for utility lines, storm drains and underground mains and cables. 
(b)  When a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater or drainage easement of adequate width (minimum 20 feet) approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-143. - Cul-de-sacs. 
    Except where topographic or other conditions make a greater length unavoidable, cul-de-sacs shall not be greater in length than 500 feet unless approved by the city council and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround. Dead-end streets are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-144. - Right-of-way widths. 
    The right-of-way width shall be the distance across a street from property line to property line. The minimum street right-of-way widths shall be as follows: 
Arterial streets 80 feet or as shown in the major thoroughfare plan Collector streets 40 feet Minor streets 40 feet (60 feet for nonresidential streets) Cul-de-sacs, commercial and industrial subdivisions 100-foot radius Cul-de-sacs, local residential streets 100-foot radius  
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-145. - Pavement widths. 
    Minimum street pavement widths shall be as follows measured from back of curb to back of curb. 
Arterial streets 60 feet Collector streets 26 feet Minor streets 20 feet Minor streets, commercial and industrial subdivisions 24 feet Cul-de-sacs, commercial and industrial subdivisions 80-foot radius Cul-de-sacs, local residential streets 80-foot radius  
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-146. - Street grades. 
    Maximum and minimum street grades shall be as follows: 
Arterial streets Not to exceed 6 percent Collector streets Not to exceed 7 percent Minor streets Not to exceed 10 percent No street grade Less than one-half percent Cul-de-sacs Not to exceed 6 percent  
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-147. - Horizontal curvature. 
    The minimum radii of centerline curvature shall be as follows: 
Arterial streets No less than 800 feet Collector streets 300 feet Minor streets 100 feet  
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-148. - Tangents. 
    Between reverse curves, there shall be a tangent having a length not less than the following: 
Arterial streets 200 feet Collector streets 100 feet Minor streets 50 feet  
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-149. - Vertical alignment. 
    The following requirements for the vertical alignment shall be met: 
(1)  Major streets shall have a sight distance of at least 500 feet at four feet above ground level. 
(2)  Collector streets shall have a sight distance of at least 300 feet at four feet above ground level. 
(3)  Minor streets shall have a sight distance of at least 200 feet at four feet above ground level. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-150. - Street intersections. 
    Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible. No street intersections shall be at an angle of less than 75 degrees, unless required by unusual circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-151. - Curbline radius. 
    The curbline radius at street intersections shall be at least 30 feet. Where the angle of street intersections is less than 90 degrees, a longer radius may be required. For commercial and industrial subdivision streets, a minimum 40-foot curbline radius shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-152. - Block lengths and widths. 
    Block lengths and widths shall be as follows: 
(1)  In general, residential blocks shall be not greater than 1,800 feet nor less than 600 feet in length. 
(2)  Blocks shall be wide enough to provide two tiers of lots of minimum depth, except where abutting upon major arterial streets or limited-access highways, or where other situations make this requirement impracticable. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-153. - Lot sizes. 
(a)  Lots shall meet the minimum lot width and lot area requirements of the city zoning regulations. 
(b)  Residential lots shall have a depth of not less than 100 feet and not greater than three times the width of the lot at the building line, unless unusual circumstances make these limitations not practicable. 
(c)  Where individual septic tanks are used, the county health department shall approve minimum lot sizes to conform to the health standards of the state department of public health. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-154. - Lot lines. 
    All lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to street lines unless not practicable because of topographic or other features. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-155. - Building lines. 
    A building line meeting the front yard setback requirements of the city zoning regulations, as a minimum, shall be established on all lots. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-156. - Lot frontage. 
    Each lot shall abut a minimum of 30 feet on a public street. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-157. - Double and reverse frontage lots. 
    Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or overcome specific disadvantages of topography or orientation. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-158. - Panhandle or flag lots. 
    Any panhandle or flag lot is discouraged, but if designed with the required width and area they may be allowed where terrain makes standard design or frontage impossible or impractical. Where such lots are allowed, the street frontage of each panhandle access shall not be less than 30 feet wide, and the panhandle access shall be not more than 200 feet long. Not more than two flag and panhandle lots shall abut each other. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-159. - Sight distances. 
    Proper sight lines must be maintained at all street intersections. Clear sight triangles of 150 feet measured along street centerlines from their points of junction shall be provided at all intersections and no buildings, structures, grade or planting higher then 21/2 feet above the centerline of the street shall be permitted within such triangles. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
_____
Sec. 32-160. - Distance between intersections. 
(a)  The distance between intersections shall be in accordance with the following: 
Distance/ 
Separation Type of Intersection Arterial with arterial Arterial with collector and minor Collector with collector Collector with minor Minor with minor Minimum distance between centerline of intersections 800 feet 800 feet 600 feet 500 feet 500 feet Minimum separation of centerlines for streets not in alignment Must be in alignment with planned or proposed streets entering from opposite side 200 feet 200 feet  
(b)  Multiple intersections involving a junction of more than two streets are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
_____
Sec. 32-161. - Other street provisions. 
(a)  Access. Streets shall be laid out to provide access to all lots and to adjacent undeveloped areas, and the developer shall improve these streets to the limits of the development. 
(b)  Access drives. Within ten feet of a street right-of-way line, an access drive width shall not exceed 20 feet or be less than ten feet. 
(1)  On a street frontage, the number of access drives shall not exceed two per lot or dwelling. 
(2)  An access drive shall not cross a street right-of-way line: 
a.  Within 40 feet of the right-of-way line of an intersecting street. 
b.  Within 25 feet of a fire hydrant. 
c.  Within 25 feet of another access drive on the same property. 
d.  Within three feet of a property line. 
(3)  The minimum angle between the centerline of the access drive and the street shall be not less than 65 degrees. An access drive must be located in safe relationship to sight distance and barriers to vision. The drive slope shall not exceed five percent within 25 feet of the street right-of-way and may not exceed 12 percent for the remainder of the drive. Where a drive enters the right-of-way through a cut, the banks of the cut shall not exceed 50 percent in slope within 25 feet of the street right-of-way. The height of the bank shall not exceed three feet within 20 feet of the street. 
(c)  Street names. Street names shall not duplicate existing or platted street names, or approximate and names by the use of suffixes such as "lane," "way," "drive," "court," or "avenue." In approving names of streets cognizance may be given to an existing or platted street named within the postal delivery district served by the post office. New streets shall bear the same name of the existing or platted street of which they are a continuation or with which they are in alignment. Street names must be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Secs. 32-162-32-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 32-191. - Applicability. 
    All subdivisions and land developments, as applicable, shall be required to have the improvements contained in this article installed before lots are permitted for sale or any building permits will be issued. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-192. - Right-of-way clearance. 
    All trees, brush, stumps, rocks or other debris shall be cleared from the street right-of-way as required, except in cases where shade trees are required to be preserved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-193. - Street grading to comply with plans. 
    All streets shall be graded to lines, grades and cross sections approved on the plans. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-194. - Street paving and base. 
(a)  Base and sub-base shall be installed in compliance with the city engineer's specifications. Residential streets shall consist of either: 
(1)  Type 1 paving (Mix 200 pounds/square yard crusher run into top six inches of sub-base if required; place and compact five inches crusher run base; place 11/2 inches plant mix binder; place one inch plant mix topping, Type "E"); or 
(2)  Type II paving (Mix 200 pounds/square yard crusher run into six inches of sub-base if required; place and compact five inches soil cement base; place 11/2 inches plant mix binder; place one inch plant mix topping, Type "E"). 
(b)  For commercial and industrial street paving base, use six inches crusher run base, prime and place two inches of plant mix asphaltic binder and surface with one inch of compact hot plant mix topping, Type "E." 
(c)  The final wearing surface (topping) shall be installed at the end of construction within the street easement. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-195. - Concrete curb. 
    Concrete curb shall be installed along both sides of all paving. All concrete shall conform to city specifications. Concrete curb construction shall be of 3,000 psi concrete. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-196. - Street signs. 
    Street signs shall be furnished and installed at all street intersections on the rights-of-way by the developer and shall be green "scotchlite" with white legends to meet city standards. The city street department shall approve exact location prior to installation. All signs must meet state department of transportation (DOT) criteria. Traffic signs shall be placed by the city at the developer's cost. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-197. - Right-of-way improvements. 
    All street rights-of-way outside of the paved portions shall be graded to conform to the approved cross section and shall be grassed as directed by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-198. - Street trees. 
    Street trees and other shrubbery that may be retained or planted shall be placed or retained so as not to obstruct sight distances at street intersections. Developers shall plant street tree species, as approved by the street tree committee, at 200-foot intervals on both sides of the right-of-way. Trees shall be 11/2-inch caliper and planted between the sidewalk and right-of-way line. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-199. - Sidewalks. 
    When concrete sidewalks are provided, the subdivider or land developer shall furnish and install all required paving materials without cost to the city, in accordance with city specifications. Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of four feet and consist of four-inch thick concrete (3,000 psi at 28 days). Sidewalks in residential areas shall not be less than two feet from street curbs. All driveway aprons over sidewalk areas shall be paved with concrete by the developer or builder. Driveway aprons and sidewalks shall be six feet thick. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-200. - Storm drainage system. 
    Storm drains along with catchbasins and manholes shall be installed in compliance with the plans and specifications, and as indicated in this section. 
(1)  Every subdivision shall be served by storm drainage facilities, including drains, catchbasins, culverts and other facilities as required by standards and specifications of the city and as designed by a registered engineer. Stormwater facilities shall be installed in accordance with approved plans and profiles at the developer's expense. 
(2)  All drainage facilities shall be so designed to serve the entire drainage area in which these facilities are located. The subdivider, at his own cost, shall install all street drains serving lots in the subdivision. 
(3)  All surface water drainage shall be transported to existing storm drainage facilities as approved by the city. 
(4)  Whenever surface drainage ditches are used, such ditches shall retain natural design characteristics and be so designed that they do not present a hazard to life and safety or create erosion problems. 
(5)  All drainage features shall be in accordance with the city's standards and specifications, and no extension shall be made from the street drainage through the abutting property without city approval. 
(6)  When the construction of a proposed public road makes it necessary to cross a storm drain, the developer shall provide and install the required size and length of an acceptable grade of concrete pipe. The length of the pipe required shall be measured from a point 60 feet to the rear of the established building line on the upstream side of the road to a point 60 feet beyond the building line on the downstream side of the road and in no case shall the extension be less than 30 feet from the rear of any proposed dwelling; provided, however, the drain runs through building lots proposed to be platted. 
a.  In cases where the developer or owner chooses not to develop the land through which the drain runs, the trench may be left open; however, in such cases the plat must be so marked and an easement shown thereon, indicating that no building or driveway shall be built over or within 40 feet of the open drain. 
b.  Where the developer chooses to leave the drain open and a driveway crosses the same, the size of the pipe shall be determined by the city and no building permit will be approved unless the installation meets city requirements. 
c.  Notwithstanding the controls stated in this section, the building official may refuse to issue a building permit on any lot where the land is subject to floods or where, in the city's opinion, the topographic features of the property are such that a building could not be properly maintained on the lot. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-201. - Water system and fire hydrants. 
    All water mains shall be installed along with a service connection for each lot and be in operating condition prior to final plat approval and paving installation. This system shall be connected to the city water system. All pipes, valves, hydrants, and other components shall conform to the city's standard fire protection code and NFPA 24 specifications and regulations. Fire hydrants shall be located and set in accordance with city specifications. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-202. - Sanitary sewerage system. 
(a)  When a public sanitary sewer is within 1,000 feet of the subdivision, the subdivider shall provide sanitary sewer services to each lot within the bounds of the subdivision. The developer, at his own cost, shall install all street sanitary sewers serving lots in the subdivision, including a lift station, if required. A formula may be developed by the city to provide for a sharing of the costs of other sewer facilities needed to serve the subdivision when certain of the required sewer facilities are necessary to serve other subdivisions in the same drainage basin. 
(b)  When a public sanitary sewer is not within 1,000 feet of the subdivision an alternate method of sewage disposal for each lot may be used when in compliance with the standards of the county health department. If public sewerage is not available, but is expected to be available within a reasonable time period after completion of the subdivision, an alternate method for sewage disposal for individual lots will be required on an interim basis. In this instance, and at the city's discretion, the developer will be required to construct a complete sanitary sewer system for the subdivision, including outfall lines, street sewers and service stubs to individual lots. All sewers will be plugged and otherwise protected to ensure serviceability at the time of connection to the public system and will conform to city specifications. 
(c)  When a public sanitary sewer is within 300 feet of a lot to be developed, the developer shall provide sanitary sewer services to the subject development at the developer's cost. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-203. - Utility systems. 
    All underground utility systems to be installed in a subdivision or land development shall be installed along with service connections, before any paving is laid, at the developer's cost. This applies to water, sewer, gas, cable television, telephone and electrical systems. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-204. - Monuments. 
(a)  Permanent monuments shall be accurately set and established at the following points: 
(1)  Where the plat boundary lines intersect with land lot lines. 
(2)  Monuments shall consist of one-half-inch diameter metal pin or pipe, a minimum of 18 inches in length. 
(3)  The accurate location, material and size of all existing monuments shall be shown on the final plat, as well as the future location of monuments to be placed after street improvements have been completed. 
(b)  Monuments shall be placed at all corners of each lot and driven so they are set two inches above the finished grade. Monuments must be set by a registered engineer or surveyor at the developer's expense. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-205. - Streetlights. 
    Streetlights shall be approved by the utility company, which will be responsible for the maintenance of the facilities, and the city. Streetlights shall meet IES standards for lighting conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-206. - Acceleration/deceleration lanes. 
(a)  For development accessing state routes, the state department of transportation and city require the installation of acceleration/deceleration lanes. 
(b)  The city may require the installation of an acceleration/deceleration lane for a distance of 200 feet and a 50-foot taper from all project entrances serving commercial and industrial subdivisions, any residential subdivisions serving 50 lots or more, and any individual land development on any street where such developments generate more than 300 vehicle trips per day as determined by the city. The developer shall be required to obtain the necessary driveway permits from the state department of transportation prior to commencing work. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-207. - Additional construction specifications. 
    For those improvements where construction specifications have not been set forth in this article, the city shall determine the specifications and the construction of improvements shall be as required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-208. - Local recreation sites. 
(a)  Where a proposed park, playground, open space or other local or neighborhood recreation site is shown on the comprehensive plan or where the planning commission considers that a local recreation site is necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter, the planning commission may require the dedication of all or a portion of such site in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  The land to be dedicated must be of suitable site, dimensions, topography, access and general character for the proposed use. 
(2)  The amount of land so required for this purpose must not exceed 0.02 acres of land for each lot or dwelling unit shown on the final plan. 
(b)  Where the application of these area standards would result in an open space or recreation site too small to be usable, or if the planning commission calls for a local recreation site to be located elsewhere, or if a suitable local recreation site cannot be properly located in the land development, as determined by the planning commission, a payment of a fee in lieu of dedication of such land is required. The following procedures must be followed: 
(1)  The amount of the fee must be substantially equal to the value of the land that could be set aside if the standards specified in subsection (a) of this section were applied. 
(2)  The fee must be paid to the city prior to approval of the final plat. 
(3)  All moneys paid to the city in this manner must be kept in a capital reserve fund established as provided by law. Moneys in such capital reserve fund must be used only for the acquisition of land for park and recreation or open space purposes. 
(4)  The provisions of these regulations governing the setting and collection of fees in lieu of land dedication shall not be utilized until the city has established a capital reserve fund. 
(c)  In lieu of requiring the dedication of a recreation or park site, or a fee for this purpose, the city council may permit a private site to be used if: 
(1)  In its judgment the purposes of these regulations regarding recreation and park sites will be accomplished; and 
(2)  The private site is permanently devoted to recreation and park use and adequately secured for such use by deed covenants or other private restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-209. - Regulatory approval. 
    All state and federal permits and approvals must be obtained before final plan consideration by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Secs. 32-210-32-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATIVE AND LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 32-246. - Zoning administrator to administer and interpret chapter. 
    The zoning administrator shall administer and interpret the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-247. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of the building official, zoning administrator or other and duly authorized representative of the city to hereby enforce this chapter. The enforcement officer is hereby given the power and authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter as stipulated in the provisions of this chapter and as stipulated in the city Charter. The enforcement officer shall require that the application for a building permit contain all information necessary to enable him to ascertain whether the proposed building, alteration, or use is located in an approved land development. No building permit shall be issued until the enforcement officer has certified that the site for the proposed building, alteration or use complies with all the provisions of the chapter and conforms to the site description as indicated on the approved and recorded final plan. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-248. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by fine not to exceed $200.00, or by imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both, as determined by the city municipal court. 
(b)  In any case where any land is, or is proposed to be, used in violation of this chapter, the city attorney may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute an injunction, abatement or any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin or abate and unlawful use. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 32-249. - Variances. 
    The city council may approve variances to the provisions of this chapter, after a public hearing before the city council, notice of which shall be published at least 15 days prior to any hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 3-1-2004) 
Chapter 34 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. 9, § 2, ¶ 3(a)(4); traffic generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq.; certain powers preserved to local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 34-19. - State uniform rules of road adopted; penalty. 
(a)  The Uniform Rules of the Road (O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1) and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby incorporated and adopted by reference as the city's traffic regulations as if fully set forth in this section. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in general penalty section 1-9. 
(Comp. 1976, § 7-120; Code 1989, § 16-1; Ord. of 10-4-1982; Ord. of 11-6-1989) 
Sec. 34-20. - Reckless driving. 
    Any person who drives or causes to be driven any motor vehicle upon the streets, highways, private streets, public parks, drive-ins, parking lots, schoolyards or other places of public gathering within the city carelessly and heedlessly, and in such a manner as to be in willful or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property, shall be deemed guilty of the offense of reckless driving. 
(Comp. 1976, § 7-122; Code 1989, § 16-41; Ord. of 6-6-1955(1), § 1) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-390. 
Secs. 34-21-34-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC CONTROL 

Sec. 34-44. - One-way streets during specified hours. 
    Each day that the Hart County Middle School and Hart County High School are open for student attendance, the following streets located in the city shall be open for traffic in only one direction between the hours of 7:45 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and between the hours of 3:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m., as set forth in subsections (1) through (3) of this section: 
(1)  Powell Road between Fairview Avenue and Campbell Drive shall be one-way, and traffic shall proceed in a westerly direction from Fairview Avenue to Campbell Drive. 
(2)  Campbell Drive between East Franklin Street and Fifth Street shall be one-way, and traffic shall proceed in a northerly direction from Fifth Street to East Franklin Street. 
(3)  Traffic on Fifth Street and First Street shall be two-way at all times. 
(Code 1989, § 16-42; Ord. of 8-31-1990; Ord. No. 98-006, 8-3-1998) 
Sec. 34-45. - Left turns prohibited at certain intersections. 
    Traffic, except pedestrians, facing a steady circular red signal may not make a left turn from the lefthand lane of a one-way street onto a one-way street onto which traffic moves toward the driver's left at the following intersections: 
(1)  Forest Avenue and Franklin Street. 
(2)  Franklin Street and Carolina Avenue. 
(3)  Carolina Avenue and Howell Street. 
(4)  Howell Street and Forest Avenue. 
(Code 1989, § 16-43; Ord. of 12-3-1990) 
Secs. 34-46-34-63. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPEED REGULATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Maximum speed limits, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-181; power of local authorities to alter speed limits, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 

Sec. 34-64. - School zone. 
    School zones shall be posted at the beginning and end of the zone. The school zone speeds posted shall be effective for two hours per day (one hour in the morning and one hour in the afternoon) on school days as follows: 
(1)  In the morning from 45 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time; and 
(2)  In the afternoon from 15 minutes prior to dismissal to 45 minutes after dismissal. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, 1-2-2007) 
Sec. 34-65. - On-system speed limits established. 
    The following speed zones are established for the following streets and roads and portions of streets and roads in the corporate city limits, all of which are part of the state highway system: 
(1)  Twenty-five miles per hour. 
(a)  Georgia Highway 8. From 306 feet west of Gibson Street (mile point 10.99) to 202 feet west of College Avenue (mile point 12.17), a distance of 1.81 miles. 
(b)  Georgia Highway 8 West. From Georgia Highway 8 and North Richardson Street (mile point 00.00) to Georgia Highway 77 (mile point 00.07), a distance of 00.07 miles. 
(c)  Georgia Highway 51. From Georgia Highway 8 (Chandler Street) (mile point 10.68) to 101 feet south of Maret Street (mile point 10.87), a distance of 00.20 miles. 
(d)  Georgia Highway 77 (during school days). On days that the public schools in Hart County, Georgia are in session: From 59 feet North of Holland Street (mile point 07.40) to 148 feet south of Carter Street (mile point 07.64), a distance of 00.24 miles. 
(e)  Georgia Highway 77 (during non-school days). On days that the public schools in Hart County, Georgia are not in session: From 27 feet south of Alford Road (mile point 07.54) to Georgia Highway 8 (mile point 07.83), a distance of 00.29 miles. 
(2)  Thirty-five miles per hour. 
(a)  Georgia Highway 8. From 272 feet west of Condor Street (mile point 10.78) to 306 feet west of Gibson Street (mile point 10.99), a distance of 00.21 miles; and from 202 feet west of College Avenue (mile point 12.17) to 95 feet east of Ridge Road (mile point 12.96), a distance of 00.79 miles. 
(b)  Georgia Highway 8 (during school days). On days that the public schools in Hart County, Georgia, are in session: From 210 feet west of College Avenue (mile point 12.17) to 35 feet east of Slaton Avenue (mile point 12.63), a distance of 00.46 miles. 
(c)  Georgia Highway 51. From 775 feet North of Leard Street (mile point 10.32) to Georgia Highway 8 (mile point 10.57), a distance of 00.25 miles; and from 101 feet south of Maret Street (mile point 10.88) to 543 feet south of Emory Drive (mile point 11.02), a distance of 00.14 miles. 
(d)  Georgia Highway 77. From 248 feet south of Thornton Drive (mile point 07.06) to 27 feet south of Alford Road (mile point 07.54), a distance of 00.48 miles. 
(e)  Georgia Highway 172. From 137 feet north of Race Street (mile point 09.25) to the end at Georgia Highway 77 (mile point 09.95), a distance of 00.70 miles. 
(3)  Forty-five miles per hour. 
(a)  Georgia Highway 8. From 199 feet east of Memorial Road (mile point 10.51) to 272 feet west of Condor Street (mile point 10.78), a distance of 00.27 miles; and from 95 feet east of Ridge Road (mile point 12.96) to 62 feet east of Ulyanovsk (mile point 13.44), a distance of 00.48 miles. 
(b)  Georgia Highway 51. From 147 feet north of Glendale Drive (mile point 09.92) to 775 feet North of Leard Street (mile point 10.32), a distance of 00.40 miles; and from 543 feet south of Emory Drive (mile point 11.02) to 287 feet north of Woodlake Landing (mile point 11.84), a distance of 00.82 miles. 
(c)  Georgia Highway 77. From 48 feet North of Hodges Road (South Hartwell City Limits) (mile point 06.68) to 248 feet south of Thornton Drive (mile point 07.06), a distance of 00.38 miles. 
(d)  Georgia Highway 172. From 619 feet South of Opal Street (South Hartwell City Limits) (mile point 08.92) to 137 feet north of Race Street (mile point 09.25), a distance of 00.33 miles. 
(4)  Fifty-five miles per hour. 
(a)  Georgia Highway 8. From 522 feet west of Tabernacle Church Road (West Hartwell City Limits) (mile point 10.21) to 199 feet east of Memorial Road (mile point 10.51), a distance of 00.30 miles; and from 62 feet east of Ulyanovsk (mile point 13.44) to 297 feet west of Elizabeth Road (East Hartwell City Limits) (mile point 13.92), a distance of 00.48 miles. 
(b)  Georgia Highway 51. From 42 feet North of Fisher Drive (South Hartwell City Limits) (mile point 09.76) to 147 feet north of Glendale Drive (mile point 09.92), a distance of 00.16 miles; and from 287 feet north of Woodlake Landing (mile point 11.84) to 366 feet south of Rowland Road (North Hartwell City Limits) (mile point 12.19), a distance of 00.35 miles. 
(Comp. 1976, § 7-120; Code 1989, § 16-61; Ord. of 10-4-1982; Ord. of 11-15-1990; Ord. No. 2006-09, § 2, 1-2-2007; Ord. No. 2015-06, § 3, 1-4-2016) 
Sec. 34-66. - Off-system speed limits established. 
    The following speed zones are hereby established for the following streets and roads and portions of streets and roads within the corporate city limits, all of which are not part of the state highway system: 
(1)  Twenty-five miles per hour. 
(a)  Alford Road. From Benson Street to South Forest Avenue, a distance of 00.27 miles. 
(b)  Campbell Drive (school zone). On days that public schools in Hart County, Georgia, are in session: From East Franklin Street to Second Street, a distance of 00.43 miles. 
(c)  Campbell Drive. From Second Street to Benson Street (Georgia Highway 77), a distance of 00.07 miles. 
(d)  Cleveland Avenue (school zone). On days that public schools in Hart County, Georgia, are in session: From Benson Street (Georgia Highway 77) to East Howell Street, a distance of 00.29 miles. 
(e)  Cleveland Avenue. From East Howell Street to Franklin Street (Georgia Highway 8), a distance of 00.12 miles. 
(f)  College Avenue (school zone). On days that public schools in Hart County, Georgia, are in session: From East Howell Street to Benson Street (Georgia Highway 77), a distance of 00.19 miles. 
(g)  East Johnson. From Maple Street to Chandler Street, a distance of 00.66 miles. 
(h)  Fairview Avenue (school zone). On days that public schools in Hart County, Georgia, are in session: From Franklin Street (Georgia Highway 8) to Fifth Street, a distance of 00.47 miles. 
(i)  Fairview Avenue. From Fifth Street to Benson Street (Georgia Highway 77), a distance of 00.48 miles. 
(j)  Fifth Street (school zone). On days that public schools in Hart County, Georgia, are in session: From Fairview Avenue to Campbell Drive, a distance of 00.36 miles. 
(k)  First Street (school zone). On days that public schools in Hart County, Georgia, are in session: From Campbell Drive to College Avenue, a distance of 00.28 miles. 
(l)  Highland Avenue. From Georgia Highway 8 to 1,320 feet from Georgia Highway 8, a distance of 00.25 miles. 
(m)  Opal Street. From Georgia Highway 172 to Georgia Highway 8 at the Hartwell City Limits, a distance of 00.40 miles. 
(n)  Powell Road (school zone). On days that public schools in Hart County, Georgia, are in session: From Campbell Drive to Randall Road, a distance of 00.29 miles. 
(o)  Savannah Street. From Ridge Road to College Avenue, a distance of 00.72 miles. 
(p)  Second Street (school zone). On days that public schools in Hart County, Georgia, are in session: From College Avenue to Campbell Drive, a distance of 00.27 miles. 
(q)  South Forest Avenue. From Benson Street to Georgia Highway 172, a distance of 00.93 miles. 
(2)  Thirty miles per hour. 
(a)  Powell Road. From Randall Road to East City Limits, a distance of 00.44 miles. 
(3)  Thirty-five miles per hour. 
(a)  Highland Avenue. From 1,320 feet from Georgia Highway 8 to 1,411 feet from Georgia Highway 8, a distance of 00.25 miles. 
(b)  Leard Street. From Georgia Highway 77 to Georgia Highway 51, a distance of 00.64 miles. 
(c)  North Forest Avenue. From Johnson Street to the Hartwell City Limits, a distance of 1.00 mile. 
(d)  Vickery Street. From North Forest Avenue to the Hartwell City Limits, a distance of 00.71 miles. 
(Comp. 1976, § 7-108; Code 1989, § 16-62; Ord. of 10-7-1974(1); Ord. No. 2006-03, § 2, 6-5-2005; Ord. No. 2006-09, § 3, 1-2-2007; Ord. No. 2015-06, § 4, 1-4-2016) 
_____
Sec. 34-67. - Speed detection devices to be used on certain roadways. 
    Speed detection devices may be used on the following roadways: 
(1)  On-system. 
State Route Within the City/Town Limits of and/or School Name From Mile Point To Mile Point Length (in miles) Speed Limit 8 Hartwell 370 ft. west of Condor Street (west city limits) 10.78 370 ft. west of Gibson Street 10.99 00.21 35 8 Hartwell 370 ft. west of Gibson Street 10.99 N. Richardson Street 12.17 01.97 25 8 Hartwell N. Richardson Street 12.17 52 ft. west of Fernwood Drive (east city limits) 12.96 00.79 35 8 Hartwell Elementary School Zone (school days only) N. Richardson Street 12.17 Slaton Avenue 12.63 00.46 35 8 West Hartwell SR 8 and N. Richardson Street 00.00 SR 8, 77 and 51 00.55 00.55 25 51 Hartwell 52 ft. south of Fisher Drive (south city limits) 09.76 52 ft. north of Glendale Drive 09.91 00.15 55 51 Hartwell 52 ft. north of Glendale Drive 09.91 581 ft. south of W. Franklin Street 10.31 00.40 45 51 Hartwell 581 ft. south of W. Franklin Street 10.31 SR 8 10.58 00.27 35 51 Hartwell SR 51 runs common with SR 8 for a distance of 00.12 miles from MP 10.58 to MP 10.67 51 Hartwell SR 8 10.67 211 ft. south of Marett Street 10.87 00.20 25 51 Hartwell 211 ft. south of Marett Street 10.87 422 ft. south of Bartlett Street (north city limits) 11.58 00.71 45 77 Hartwell 52 ft. South of Hodges Road (south city limits) 06.68 317 ft. south of Thorton Drive 07.06 00.38 45 77 Hartwell 317 ft. south of Thorton Drive 07.06 52 ft. south of Alford Road 07.54 00.48 35 77 Hartwell Elementary School Zone (school days only) 52 ft. south of Holland Street 07.40 158 ft. south of Carter Street 07.64 00.24 25 77 Hartwell 52 feet south of Alford Road 07.54 SR 8 07.83 00.29 25 77 Hartwell SR 77 runs common with SR 8 West for a distance of 00.48 miles from MP 7.83 to MP 8.31 77 East Hartwell SR 77 runs common with SR 8 for a distance of 00.48 miles from SR 8 West to SR 77 172 Hartwell 634 ft. north of Bow Hill Estates (south city limits) 08.92 100 ft. north of Race Street 09.25 00.33 45 172 Hartwell 100 ft. north of Race Street 09.25 End at SR 8 West 09.95 00.70 35  
(2)  Off-system. 
Road Name Within the City/Town Limits of and/or School Name From To Length (in miles) Speed Limit Alford Road Hartwell Benson Street South Forest Avenue 00.27 25 Campbell Drive Hartwell East Franklin Street Adams Street 00.50 25 Cleveland Avenue Hartwell Benson Street State Route 8 00.41 25 East Johnson Hartwell Maple Street Chandler Street 00.66 25 Fairview Avenue Hartwell State Route 77 Fifth Street 00.47 35 Fairview Avenue Hartwell Fifth Street State Route 8 00.34 25 Fifth Street Hartwell Fairview Avenue Campbell Drive 00.36 25 First Street Hartwell Campbell Drive College Avenue 00.28 25 Highland Avenue Hartwell State Route 8 1,320 ft. from State Route 8 00.25 35 Highland Avenue Hartwell 1,320 ft. from State Route 8 1,411 ft. from State Route 8 00.25 25 Leard Street Hartwell State Route 77 State Route 51 00.64 35 North Forest Hartwell Johnson Street City limits 01.00 35 Opal Street Hartwell State Route 172 State Route 8 at city limits 00.40 25 Powell Road Hartwell Campbell Drive 1,544 ft. from Campbell Drive 00.29 25 Powell Road Hartwell 1,544 ft. from Campbell Drive 2,864 ft. from Campbell Drive 00.25 30 Savannah Street Hartwell Ridge Road College Avenue 00.72 25 South Forest Avenue Hartwell Benson Street State Route 172 00.93 25 Vickery Street Hartwell North Forest Avenue City limits 00.71 35  
(Ord. No. 2006-09, 1-2-2007) 
_____
Secs. 34-68-34-92. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARKING RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 34-93. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall appear before the municipal court and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not less than $10.00 or more than $25.00, subject to the provisions of section 34-94. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, any person cited for the violation of any such provision may, in lieu of court appearance, post a cash bond of $5.00 within 48 hours of receipt of citation and summons. Such cash bond will increase to $10.00 48 hours after receipt of citation and summons. Failure to pay such cash bond prior to the appearance date of such summons will require attendance in municipal court as set out in this section. 
(Comp. 1976, § 7-124-B; Code 1989, § 16-25; Ord. of 5-4-1987; Ord. of 8-7-1989; Ord. No. 2001-006, § 3, 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 34-94. - Increased bond amount. 
(a)  When the records of the police department or records of the state crime information center or other appropriate agency disclose that any person has been cited ten or more times in a continuous 12-month period for violations of this article, the cash bond provided in section 34-93(a) shall be $25.00. 
(b)  For each subsequent violation by the same violator, the cash bond for violations of this article shall remain at $25.00 per violation until such time as the violator has had no violations of this article for a continuous period of 90 days. 
(c)  Notice of application of the increased cash bond amount shall be provided to the violator by the police department through certified mail. 
(Comp. 1976, § 7-124-B; Code 1989, § 16-25; Ord. of 5-4-1987; Ord. of 8-7-1989; Ord. No. 2001-006, § 3, 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 34-95. - Immobilization of vehicle. 
(a)  If the owner of a vehicle that has been cited as illegally parking ten times within a 12-month period fails to pay the parking citations, within five days of receiving the tenth parking citation, the person shall satisfy all delinquent parking tickets or be subject to an additional penalty or fine of $50.00. In addition, the police department shall immobilize the vehicle through the use of a wheel lock or similar device. 
(b)  The wheel lock or similar device shall be removed upon payment of all previous parking fines for that person and a fee of $50.00 for the removal of the device and posting of bond as provided in this article. 
(Comp. 1976, § 7-124-B; Code 1989, § 16-25; Ord. of 5-4-1987; Ord. of 8-7-1989; Ord. No. 2001-006, § 3, 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 34-96. - Parking so as to block alley. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in front of any alley in the city so that the parking blocks normal traffic in and out of the alley. 
(Comp. 1976, § 7-116; Code 1989, § 16-20; Ord. of 11-6-1950(2), § 1) 
Sec. 34-97. - Parking within painted lines or markings. 
    Each vehicle parking along side of or next to the curb on either side of a street shall be parked within the lines or markings so established. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section to park any vehicle in such a position that the same shall not be entirely within the area so designated by such lines and markings. 
(Comp. 1976, § 7-103(3); Code 1989, § 16-26) 
Sec. 34-98. - Fifteen minute parking zones. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in front of the United States Post Office in the city for a continuous period in excess of 15 minutes: 
(1)  In any of the parking spaces on the north side of Franklin Street, between the midpoint of the block between Forest Avenue and Carolina Street and the intersection of Carolina Street and Franklin Street; or 
(2)  In any of the parking spaces on the east side of Carolina Street between the intersection of Carolina Street and Franklin Street and the rear of the United States post office. The city manager and chief of police shall cause the spaces that shall be included in this zone to be marked. The selection of spaces that fall within the zone as described in this section, and the manner of marking of such spaces, shall be in the judgment and discretion of the city manager and police chief. 
(Ord. No. 2001-006, § 2, 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 34-99. - Two-hour parking zones. 
    The following two-hour parking zones shall be in effect between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday, on the following streets in the city: 
(1)  On the east and west sides of North and South Forest Avenue, beginning at East Johnson Street and running south to Railroad Street. 
(2)  On the north and south sides of Depot Street, beginning at South Forest Avenue and extending west to Jackson Street. 
(3)  On the north and south sides of West Howell and East Howell Street, beginning at Jackson Street and extending east to Carter Street. 
(4)  On the north and south sides of West Franklin and East Franklin Street, beginning at the midpoint of the block between Jackson Street and Carolina Street and extending to Carter Street. 
(5)  On the east and west sides of Carolina Street, beginning at Depot Street and extending to Johnson Street. 
(Comp. 1976, § 7-124-B; Code 1989, § 16-21; Ord. of 5-4-1987; Ord. No. 2001-006, § 1, 8-6-2001) 
Sec. 34-100. - Parking time limits; offenses. 
    No vehicle shall be parked for a continuous period of over two hours at or in the same parking space in any area designated as a two-hour parking zone by the city, except vehicles of the physically handicapped. The exceeding of each segment of time or fraction thereof beyond the initial lawful unit of time shall constitute a separate violation under this section. 
(Comp. 1976, § 7-124-B; Code 1989, § 16-24; Ord. of 5-4-1987) 
Sec. 34-101. - Removal of illegally parked vehicles. 
    If any such vehicle remains continuously for a period of over 48 hours at or in the same parking space in any such area designated as a two-hour parking zone by the city, police chief or members of the police department shall cause the same to be moved and placed in storage at such place as may be designated by the police chief. The owner or the operator of the vehicle shall bear all costs of moving the vehicle and the storage costs, if any, thereof. 
(Comp. 1976, § 7-124-B; Code 1989, § 16-24; Ord. of 5-4-1987) 
Sec. 34-102. - Altering tire markings prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, erase or alter any tire markings, chalk or otherwise, placed by the police department on any vehicle parked in any area designated as a two-hour parking zone with the intent to prevent the enforcement of two-hour parking within such zones. 
(Comp. 1976, § 7-124-B; Code 1989, § 16-24; Ord. of 5-4-1987) 
Chapter 36 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Access to premises; grant of easements. 
(a)  Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the water, sewer, and gas service and its facilities. 
(b)  Extensions to the system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the city a permanent easement or right-of-way across any property traversed by the water, sewer, and gas lines. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-120; Code 1989, § 10-7; Ord. of 3-7-1983, § 7) 
Sec. 36-2. - Search warrants. 
    If the city manager or any other city official designated by the city manager has been refused access to a building, structure or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, the city manager may seek issuance of a search warrant from the Hartwell Municipal Court. 
(Code 1989, § 10-85; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 7.2) 
Sec. 36-3. - Disconnection of services. 
(a)  In addition to disconnection of services for nonpayment as provided in this chapter, the city reserves the right to discontinue water, sewer or natural gas service, or any combination thereof, without notice for the following reasons: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse. 
(2)  In response to the consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules. 
(3)  Emergency repairs. 
(4)  Insufficiency of supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control. 
(5)  Legal processes. 
(6)  Direction of public authorities. 
(7)  Strike, riot, fire, flood or unavoidable accident. 
(b)  Re-establishing service following disconnection to prevent fraud or abuse or due to willful disregard of the city's rules shall require payment of the same reconnection fee applicable to disconnections for nonpayment. Re-establishing service following disconnection for any other reason may, at the city council's discretion, be subject to a reconnection fee. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-120; Code 1989, § 10-10; Ord. of 3-7-1983, § 10) 
Sec. 36-4. - Notice of service interruptions. 
    Under normal conditions the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-120; Code 1989, § 10-5; Ord. of 3-7-1983, § 5) 
Secs. 36-5-36-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UTILITY CHARGES AND COLLECTIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-19. - Payment of costs of extending utility distribution lines. 
(a)  The city council hereby finds that, as provided throughout this City Code, including, but not limited to, in sections 36-150, 36-281(d), and 36-552 of this Code, when the owner of a property that is not adjacent to an existing utility distribution line requests that the city extend its utility line to such property, the City of Hartwell, Georgia, does not pay the costs of extending a utility distribution line in such circumstances. The city finds that this policy is sound and appropriate in the vast majority of cases. 
(b)  The city further finds, however, that notwithstanding any other limitation, restriction or requirement in this Code, if in the opinion of the city council, a particular proposed development would provide a significant economic development benefit to the citizens of Hartwell generally, and the benefits of such development exceed the costs of such extension, then the city shall be authorized, but not obligated, to pay some or all of the costs of extending certain utility distribution lines to the boundary of the property, as the city council may approve in each case. 
(c)  In assessing the economic development benefit of a proposed project, the city shall consider any and all probable economic development benefits that may accrue to the city, including, but not limited to, the quality and quantity of jobs created by such development, any impacts on tourism, the possibility that such development may attract other economic development or cause other projects or businesses to locate in the City of Hartwell or its vicinity, and such other factors that involve benefits to the general public, in the opinion of the city council. 
(d)  The city shall not be obligated to consider any proffered benefit if the city council determines, in the opinion of the city council, that such benefit is not reasonably probable. 
(e)  The city shall not be obligated to consider any proffered benefit if the city council determines, in the opinion of the city council, that such benefit is likely to accrue to only the owner or developer of the proposed project, the owner of the property where the project will be located, or a small group of persons, and not to the public generally. 
(f)  The city shall be authorized to require the owner or developer of a proposed project to satisfy such conditions as the city council may require before the city agrees to pay any such costs. These conditions may vary from project to project depending on the circumstances, and may include construction completion deadlines or milestones, job creation guaranties, utility usage guaranties, provision of bonds or letters of credit to secure any such agreements or guaranties, and such other conditions as the city council may decide to impose in a particular situation, in the opinion of the city council. Any such conditions shall be confirmed and memorialized in an enforceable contract between the city, the owner of the property, the developer, or such party or parties as the city deems appropriate. 
(g)  If the city determines to pay a portion or all of the costs of extending a utility line or lines in a particular case, then the city may pay only actual, reasonable, and bona fide costs of extending such line or lines, including, but not limited to, costs of acquiring any required right-of-way or easements, costs of construction, and costs of materials. 
(h)  Nothing in this article shall obligate the city to pay the costs of extending any utility lines or lines for a particular project or projects under any circumstances. The city retains discretion to act in these matters as the city council deems in the best interest of the city and its citizens. 
(i)  This article shall not apply to the costs of improvements within a residential subdivision, such as pavement, water and sewer lines, electrical power, and similar matters. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1(6-5), 10-6-2014) 
Secs. 36-20-36-33. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTION CHARGES 

Sec. 36-34. - No free services. 
    Except for water provided for fire protection, the city shall not under any conditions furnish free water, sewer or gas services to any person. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-120; Code 1989, § 10-2; Ord. of 3-7-1983, § 4) 
Sec. 36-35. - Initial service. 
    Each consumer subscribing to use the water, sewer, or gas service of the city shall pay a connection fee in an amount as prescribed from time to time by city council resolution. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-120; Code 1989, § 10-1; Ord. of 3-7-1983, § 3) 
Sec. 36-36. - Minimum fees to be paid with application for service. 
    Each consumer, upon application for service, shall pay the minimum connection fee in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-120; Code 1989, § 10-2; Ord. of 3-7-1983, § 4) 
Secs. 36-37-36-51. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - APPLICATIONS AND DEPOSITS 

Sec. 36-52. - Application required. 
    The consumer shall make an application for water, sewer or gas service, in person, at city hall, on the form provided by the city. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-120; Code 1989, § 10-3; Ord. of 3-7-1983, § 2) 
Sec. 36-53. - Deposits. 
(a)  Base deposit amounts. Applications for utility service shall be accompanied by a cash deposit for utility services in a base amount established from time to time by city council resolution, unless the applicant has a credit score of 500 or greater. 
(b)  Subsequent additional deposits. The city may require from time to time, in its sole discretion, an additional utility deposit from any customer based on the customer's usage or utility charge payment history. 
(c)  Disposition of deposit. The utility deposit required in subsection (a) of this section shall be retained by the city, without interest, for so long as service is provided by the city to the customer. The deposit may be applied by the city to payment of the customer's past due bill and upon termination of service for any reason, the balance of the deposit, if any, after deducting unpaid bills, shall be refunded to the customer. Any customer in making a subsequent application for service may be required to make another deposit as required hereby. 
(d)  Unclaimed deposits. Any utility deposit required to be made in accordance with the terms of this section, which is unclaimed for a period of five years after service is discontinued, shall become a part of the utility fund and applied to unpaid and uncollectible bills of the utility system. 
(e)  When no new or additional deposit is required. An existing business or commercial establishment shall not be required to make a new or an additional utility deposit by virtue of moving the same business to a different location in the city, rebuilding at the same location or adding one or more additional locations within the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, §§ 19, 20, 4-6-1998) 
Secs. 36-54-36-69. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RATES, BILLING AND DELINQUENCY 

Sec. 36-70. - Rate schedules. 
(a)  Charges for water, sewer and gas shall be in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution and included in the separate rate schedules maintained by the city, based on the formula and within the parameters provided in this chapter. 
(b)  BOD and SS strengths for industrial users shall be determined by one or more 24-hour, flow-proportioned composite samples of plant effluent wastewater. These analyses shall be arranged for and paid by the industrial users. The city has the right to perform confirmation sampling and to make the final decision as to wastewater BOD and SS strengths for billing purposes. 
(c)  Rates are subject to review after the first year under this user charge system and at least every second year thereafter. 
(d)  Utility rate schedules contemplate a single user, such as a one-family dwelling, one-farm dwelling, one-farm dwelling with appurtenances or one-commercial operation. 
(e)  Services furnished for a given lot, premises or structure shall be used on that lot, premises or structure only. 
(f)  Extraordinary circumstances, such as multiple dwelling units, industrial users and fire protection shall be governed by special contract agreements made by the city council on the city engineer's recommendation. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-120; Code 1989, § 10-4; Ord. of 3-7-1983, § 1) 
Sec. 36-71. - Meter reading; billings; collecting; penalties. 
(a)  Meters shall be read at intervals of approximately one month and bills mailed as soon thereafter as is practical. The charges, which shall be for all gas service up to the latest meter reading, shall be due and payable on or before the 25th day of each month. 
(b)  On the 26th day of the month, if the bill shall remain unpaid, it shall be declared delinquent. 
(c)  On the 26th day of the month, all delinquent bills shall be assessed a penalty of ten percent of the total bill amount or $10.00, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 20, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 36-72. - Disconnection for nonpayment. 
(a)  Service shall be disconnected for nonpayment 40 days from the due date of the bill if the bill remains unpaid. Service shall not be reconnected until the customer has paid or made satisfactory arrangements to pay the delinquent bill, penalties and interest, any additional deposit required by the city, and a reconnection fee in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(b)  Any applicant for utility service who owes an unpaid utility bill to the city shall pay the unpaid bill prior to obtaining new service. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 20, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 36-73. - Discontinuation of service; change of occupancy. 
    Not less than three days' notice must be given, in person or in writing, at city hall if the consumer desires to discontinue utility service or to change occupancy of the serviced premises. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all utility consumed up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for utility service within 48 hours after occupying the premises and failure to do so will make such occupant liable for paying for the utilities consumed since the last meter reading. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-120; Code 1989, § 10-8; Ord. of 3-7-1983, § 8) 
Sec. 36-74. - Charge for water turnoff at consumer's request. 
    At any time the city shall be required to turn off the water or gas at the meter at the request of the property owner, the city may charge a fee in an amount as prescribed from time to time by city council resolution. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-115; Code 1989, § 10-11; Ord. of 3-7-1977(3)) 
Secs. 36-75-36-91. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - COMPLAINTS AND ADJUSTMENTS 

Sec. 36-92. - Claims of error in meter reading or billing. 
(a)  If the consumer believes a utility bill to be in error, he may present a claim, in person, at city hall before the bill becomes delinquent. A claim made after the bill has become delinquent shall not be effective in preventing the discontinuance of service for nonpayment as is provided in this chapter. 
(b)  The consumer may pay such bill under protest, and the payment shall not prejudice the claim. 
(c)  The city will make a special meter reading at the request of a consumer for a fee in an amount as prescribed from time to time by city council resolution; provided, however, that if such special reading discloses that the meter was not read properly no charge will be assessed for the reading. 
(d)  If the seal of a meter is broken by someone other than the city's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of the consumer's previous bills or from other property data. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-120; Code 1989, § 10-12; Ord. of 3-7-1983, § 11; Ord. No. 98-001, § 20, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 36-93. - Malfunctioning meter-Claim of error. 
    Claims of meter malfunction shall be made as provided in section 36-92. Upon receipt of the claim, meters will be tested upon payment to the city of the actual costs of making the test; provided, however, that if the meter is found to over-register beyond three percent of the correct volume no charge will be made. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 20, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 36-94. - Same-Estimated billing. 
    In the event that a meter installed by the city fails to register properly during any period the bill will be estimated by the city from readings for a similar previous billing period. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 16, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 36-95. - Leaks-Relief for charges. 
(a)  It is the obligation and duty of each customer of the city's utility services to: 
(1)  Maintain the customer's pipes and service apparatuses in a good and sound manner; 
(2)  Inspect for leaks and other defects periodically; and 
(3)  Arrange for the prompt repair of leaks in a good and workmanlike manner. 
(b)  The customer's duty applies to all pipes, even if the pipe is underground or otherwise not readily visible unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code. 
(c)  It is the city's policy to charge customers for utility services distributed to the customer, even when a customer uses utility services inadvertently, such as when services are consumed due to leaks in the customer's pipes or service apparatus, even if the leak was underground or otherwise not readily visible to the customer. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the city's general policy requiring that a customer pay for utility services distributed to the customer, regardless of the cause, the city may, in its discretion, provide monetary relief to the consumer for services consumed due to an undetected leak, but only by giving the customer a credit on the customer's utility bill, and only in limited circumstances, as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-002, § 1, 8-2-2004; Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1, 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 36-96. - Same-Conditions for credit. 
    The city may give a city water or sewer consumer credit under this division, in the following circumstances: 
(1)  The consumer must be a residential or commercial customer. No credit shall be provided for industrial accounts or other accounts except residential accounts and commercial accounts. For the purposes of this section, an account shall be classified as "residential" or "commercial" (and thus eligible for consideration of a credit) if the account was classified as a residential or commercial account when the account was opened. 
(2)  The customer must prove to the city's satisfaction that there is or was a leak in the customer's system and that the leak was underground or was otherwise not readily detectable by reasonable means. 
(3)  The customer must produce proof, satisfactory to the city, that a licensed professional was hired to repair the leak and did repair the leak. Proof may be in the form of a written statement from the licensed professional on a form satisfactory to the city. 
(4)  The customer must continue to pay the amount of his average monthly bill, as determined by the city, while adjustments are in process. 
(5)  The customer may utilize the credit only once in a period of 12 months. 
(Ord. No. 2004-002, § 1, 8-2-2004; Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1, 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 36-97. - Same-Calculation of credit. 
    The credit under section 36-96 shall be applied to the two highest corresponding utility service bills from the period when the leak was present. The credit shall be calculated separately for each bill as follows: 
(1)  The amount of the customer's average utility bill for the corresponding service shall be calculated using the bills from the last 12 months before the date on which the credit is being calculated, and dividing the total of all the bills by 12. 
(2)  The customer shall receive a credit on the highest bill equal to one-half of the difference between the amount of the bill and the average monthly bill (a credit equal to one-half of the excess). 
(3)  The customer shall receive a credit on the second highest water bill equal to one-half of the difference between the amount of the bill and the average monthly bill (a credit equal to one-half of the excess). 
(4)  The customer shall: 
a.  Not receive any other credits; 
b.  Pay the balance of the two highest bills; and 
c.  Pay the full amount of all other bills. 
(Ord. No. 2004-002, § 1, 8-2-2004; Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1, 8-7-2006) 
Secs. 36-98-36-122. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-123. - Permit required for use of fire hydrant. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain water from any fire hydrant that is serviced by the city water department without first obtaining a permit from the water department. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-116A; Code 1989, § 10-14; Ord. of 8-7-1978(2)) 
Sec. 36-124. - Private well connections prohibited. 
    To be considered as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system and all applicants, by becoming consumers of the city covenant, agree that so long as they continue to be consumers of the city they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-120; Code 1989, § 10-6; Ord. of 3-7-1983, § 6) 
Sec. 36-125. - Restrictions on sale and use. 
    The consumer, members of the consumer's household and employees shall use the water furnished by the city only for consumption. The consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection or other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal or discontinuance of service. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-120; Code 1989, § 10-6; Ord. of 3-7-1983, § 6) 
Sec. 36-126. - Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape. 
(a)  Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the city may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not restrict the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(4.1), which shall include: 
a.  The raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; 
b.  Commercial feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; 
c.  The commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; 
d.  Producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or 
e.  The commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(4.1); 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(b)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in ordinance. 
(c)  The City of Hartwell Police Department shall be the enforcement authority for this section. The city manager may also authorize other departments, as may be deemed necessary, to support enforcement. 
(d)  Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the municipal court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 1-3-2011) 
Reference: Ord. No. 2010-04, adopted Jan. 3, 2011, was adopted by the City of Hartwell pursuant to requirements established in Ordinance on Outdoor Landscape Watering Restrictions (SB 370). 
Secs. 36-127-36-148. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INSTALLATION AND CONNECTION 

Sec. 36-149. - Service line and meter. 
(a)  The city shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line where the distribution line exists or is to be constructed, and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. 
(b)  No service charge, other than a connection fee in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution, will be made for a five-eighths-inch by three-fourths-inch meter. A proportionately greater charge than the connection fee stated in this subsection will be made for a meter of larger dimensions. 
(c)  The city may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the city's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-120; Code 1989, § 10-5; Ord. of 3-7-1983, § 5) 
Sec. 36-150. - Service extensions. 
    The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon the payment of reasonable costs for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render such service. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-120; Code 1989, § 10-5; Ord. of 3-7-1983, § 5) 
Sec. 36-151. - Meters placed on consumer's property. 
    Where a meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, the customer shall provide a suitable place therefor, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cutoff valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-120; Code 1989, § 10-6; Ord. of 3-7-1983, § 6) 
Sec. 36-152. - Consumer responsible for installation and maintenance of piping and apparatus. 
    The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed on the consumer's property and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state health authorities. 
(Comp. 1976, § 10-120; Code 1989, § 10-6; Ord. of 3-7-1983, § 6) 
Secs. 36-153-36-172. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SEPARATE METERING OF CERTAIN DEDICATED LINES 

Sec. 36-173. - Application. 
    Residential customers of the city's water service shall be permitted to apply for the installation of a water line, which shall be separate from any existing lines on the customer's property, and shall have a separate water meter. If the customer and the conditions of usage for the line comply with this section, then the line shall be installed, and no sewer charge or fee shall be assessed or collected for any water usage in this line. 
(Ord. No. 99-007, § 10-16, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 36-174. - Qualified uses. 
    Before installing a separate water line pursuant to this division, the city manager or his designee shall determine that the intended use of the water to be supplied by the line will not result in any wastewater being deposited into the city's sanitary sewer system. Uses that should normally qualify for a separate line pursuant to this division include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Lines for water supply to swimming pools which do not drain into the city's sanitary sewer system; and 
(2)  Lines dedicated solely to watering residential lawns and gardens. 
(Ord. No. 99-007, § 10-16, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 36-175. - Criteria for installation. 
    If the city manager or his designee determines that the intended use of the water to be supplied by the line will not result in any wastewater being deposited into the city's sanitary sewer system, then the city shall install the line to the customer's property. The line shall be installed in accordance with, and the customer shall comply with, the terms and conditions of this Code and any applicable laws, regulations and ordinances, unless expressly provided otherwise in this division. No other water lines or pipes of any type or description shall be attached to or connected with a water line installed pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 99-007, § 10-16, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 36-176. - Inspections. 
    During the installation of the line, city personnel shall be authorized to conduct a reasonable investigation of the customer's property to confirm that the intended uses of the line will not result in any wastewater being deposited into the city's sanitary sewer system. Additionally, after the line is installed, city personnel shall be authorized to enter onto the customer's property for the purpose of inspecting the line, its uses and the property to determine that the line is not being used in a manner that results or is likely to result in the deposit of any wastewater into the city's sanitary sewer system. These rights of inspection shall be cumulative of any other rights to inspect the customer's property provided by this Code or any applicable laws, regulations or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 99-007, § 10-16, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 36-177. - Authority to shut off service. 
    If at any time during the application process, installation of the line, or subsequent inspection after installation, the city or any of its personnel shall determine or have reasonable cause to conclude that any wastewater from the line is being deposited into the city's sanitary sewer system, the city manager or his designee shall be authorized to shut off water to the line without any advance notice. After any shutoff pursuant to this section, the city shall promptly notify the customer of the shutoff and the reason for such shutoff. 
(Ord. No. 99-007, § 10-16, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 36-178. - No sewer charges under certain conditions. 
    As long as city personnel have not determined or had reasonable cause to conclude that any wastewater from the line is being deposited into the city's sanitary sewer system, the city shall not assess a sewer charge or fee in connection with the water used in such line. If city personnel determine that a water line has been used in violation of this division the city shall be authorized to assess a sewer fee for such line for the period of such violation in accordance with this Code. 
(Ord. No. 99-007, § 10-16, 6-7-1999) 
Secs. 36-179-36-209. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL 

Sec. 36-210. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Auxiliary intake means any piping connection or other device whereby water may be secured from a source other than that normally used. 
    Bypass means any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the water may be diverted around any part or portion of a water purification plant. 
    Cross connection means any physical connection whereby the public water supply is connected with any other water supply system, whether public or private, either inside or outside of any building, in the manner that a flow of water into the public water supply is possible either through the manipulation of valves or because of ineffective check or backpressure valves, or because of any other arrangement. 
    Interconnection means any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the public water supply is connected directly with a sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir or other device that does or may contain sewage or other waste or liquid which would be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply. 
    Person means any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual firm or association, and any municipal or private corporation organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country. 
    Public water supply means the waterworks system furnishing water to the city for general use and which supply is recognized as the public water supply by the state department of natural resources/environmental protection division. 
(Code 1989, § 10-166; Ord. of 6-5-1989, § 1) 
Sec. 36-211. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this division shall be subject to general penalties as set forth in section 1-9. 
(b)  In addition, the water department superintendent shall immediately discontinue the public water supply service at any premises upon which there is found to be a cross connection, auxiliary intake, bypass or interconnection, and service shall not be restored until the cross connection, auxiliary intake, bypass or interconnection has been discontinued. 
(Code 1989, § 10-175; Ord. of 6-5-1989, § 10) 
Sec. 36-212. - Compliance with state and federal regulations required. 
    The city's public water supply shall comply with chapter 391-3-5.13 of the Georgia Rules for Safe Drinking Water (Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. § 391-3-5-.01 et seq.) and the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act (42 USC 300f et seq.) that pertain to cross connections and establish an effective, ongoing program to control these undesirable water uses. 
(Code 1989, § 10-167; Ord. of 6-5-1989, § 2) 
Sec. 36-213. - Cross contamination prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a cross connection, auxiliary intake, bypass or interconnection to be made, or allow one to exist for any purpose whatsoever. 
(Code 1989, § 10-168; Ord. of 6-5-1989, § 3) 
Sec. 36-214. - Statement of compliance. 
    Any person whose premises are supplied with water from the public water supply, and who also has on the same premises a separate source of water supply or stores water in an uncovered or unsanitary storage reservoir from which the water stored therein is circulated through a piping system, shall file with the water department superintendent a statement of the nonexistence of unapproved or unauthorized cross connections, auxiliary intakes, bypasses or interconnections. The statement shall also contain an agreement that no cross connection, auxiliary intake, bypass or interconnection will be permitted upon the premises. 
(Code 1989, § 10-169; Ord. of 6-5-1989, § 4) 
Sec. 36-215. - Inspections. 
    It shall be the water department superintendent's duty to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply are deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the city water department superintendent. 
(Code 1989, § 10-170; Ord. of 6-5-1989, § 5) 
Sec. 36-216. - Right of entry. 
    The water department superintendent or his authorized representative shall have the right to enter, at any reasonable time, any property served by a connection to the city public water supply for the purpose of inspecting the piping system thereof for cross connections, auxiliary intakes, bypasses or interconnection. On request, the owner, lessee or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system on the property. The refusal of the information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(Code 1989, § 10-171; Ord. of 6-5-1989, § 6) 
Sec. 36-217. - Backflow prevention devices-Required. 
(a)  The city water department superintendent or his designated representative shall require the use of an approved protective device on the service line serving the premises, to ensure that any contamination that may originate in the customer's premises is contained therein, in the following circumstances: 
(1)  The use is of such nature as to make it impractical to provide an effective air-gap separation; 
(2)  The owner or occupant of the premises cannot or is not willing to demonstrate to the official in charge of the system or his designated representative that the water use and protective features of the plumbing are adequate to ensure that there is no threat to the safety or potability of the water supply; 
(3)  The nature and mode of operation within a premises are such that frequent alterations are made to the plumbing; or 
(4)  There is the likelihood that protective measures may be subverted, altered or disconnected. 
(b)  The protective devices shall be a reduced pressure zone type backflow preventer approved by the water department superintendent as to manufacturer, model and size. The water department superintendent must approve the method of installation of any backflow protective devices prior to installation. 
(c)  Installation shall be at the expense of the owner or occupant of the premises. 
(Code 1989, § 10-173; Ord. of 6-5-1989, § 8) 
Sec. 36-218. - Same-Inspection and testing. 
    The water works department shall have the right to inspect and test the device on an annual basis or whenever deemed necessary by the water department superintendent or his designated representative. Water service shall not be disrupted to test the device without the knowledge of the occupant of the premises. 
(Code 1989, § 10-173; Ord. of 6-5-1989, § 8) 
Sec. 36-219. - Duplicate devices required; notice of testing; repairs. 
(a)  Where the use of water is critical to the continuance of normal operations or the protection of life, property or equipment, duplicate units shall be provided to avoid the necessity of discontinuing water service to test or repair the protective device. 
(b)  Where only one unit is installed and the continuance of service is critical, the water department superintendent shall notify the occupant of the premises in writing of plans to discontinue water service and arrange for a mutually acceptable time to test or repair the device. 
(c)  The water system shall require the occupant of the premises to make all repairs indicated promptly, and the expense of the repairs shall be borne by the owner or occupant of the premises. Qualified personnel shall make repairs acceptable to the city water department superintendent. 
(Code 1989, § 10-173; Ord. of 6-5-1989, § 8) 
Sec. 36-220. - Labels required for unsafe drinking water. 
    The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified in this chapter. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: "Water Unsafe for Drinking." Minimum acceptable signs shall have black letters one-inch high located on a red background. 
(Code 1989, § 10-174; Ord. of 6-5-1989, § 9) 
Secs. 36-221-36-248. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-249. - Definitions. 
    Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. 
    24-hour, proportional composite sample or composite sample means a sample consisting of at least eight portions collected during a 24-hour period or the total period of waste flow if less than 24 hours and in which, if feasible, the sample portions are collected proportionate to the flow and then proportionately combined into a single "flow proportional" sample. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the city manager may authorize the use of time proportional sampling with samples taken at specified intervals and combined into a single sample. 
    Accidental discharge means any unintentional or unforeseen release of significant quantities or strengths of wastewater into the POTW that fails to comply with any prohibition or limitation of this article, any applicable pretreatment standard or the requirements of the discharge permit. 
    Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.). 
    Approval authority means the director of the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division (EPD). 
    Authorized representation of the user. 
(1)  If the user is a corporation, the term "authorized representation of the user" means: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer or a vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decisionmaking functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in second quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility, a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) of this section may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is: 
a.  In writing; 
b.  Specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
c.  Is submitted to the city. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD 5 means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees Celsius, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
    Building sewer or house connection means the connecting pipe from a building to the sanitary sewer. 
    Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR 405 through 471. 
    City manager means the administrative officer of the city that is charged with administrative control of all operations of the POTW as designated by the city council and is responsible directly to the city council. As used in this article, the term "city manager" includes any city employee delegated to act for the city by the city manager or city council. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and wastewater. 
    Constituents means the specific compounds and components that comprise the wastewater. 
    Control authority means the city. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
    Domestic wastewater means all liquid and waterborne pollutants exclusive of unpolluted wastewater, as defined in this section, or wastewater or wastes from processes or operations of industrial users. 
    Environmental protection agency or EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director, or other duly authorized official of the agency. 
    Existing source means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by the EPA of the proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to the source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Act (33 USC 1317). 
    Grab sample means a sample that is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
    Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks of vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, vacuum-pump tank trucks and septic tank haulers. 
    Indirect discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act (33 USC 1317). 
    Industrial waste means the liquid or other wastes resulting from any process of industry, manufacture, trade or business or from the development of natural resources. 
    Infiltration. 
(1)  The term "infiltration" means the water entering sewers and building sewer connections from the soil through defective joints, broken or cracked pipes, improper connections, manhole walls, etc. 
(2)  The term "infiltration" does not include, and is distinguished from, inflow. 
    Inflow. 
(1)  The term "inflow" means the water discharged into sewer lines from such sources as roof leaders, cellar and yard area drains, foundation drains, commercial and industrial discharges of unpolluted wastewater, as defined in this section, drains from springs and swampy areas, etc. 
(2)  The term "inflow" does not include, and is distinguished from, infiltration. 
    Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
    Interference means a discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal, and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: 
(1)  Section 405 of the Act (33 USC 1317); 
(2)  Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901 et seq.), including title II which is commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); 
(3)  Any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901 et seq.); 
(4)  Clean Air Act (42 USC 1857 et seq.); 
(5)  Toxic Substances Control Act (15 USC 2601 et seq.); and 
(6)  Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act (33 USC 1401 et seq.). 
    Medical waste means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes. 
    National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Pretreatment Standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) which apply to a specific category of industrial users. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or NPDES permit means a permit to discharge wastewater issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1317). 
    New source. 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of the proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) which will be applicable to the source if the standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section; provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site on which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b. or c. of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended for use in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts that can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection. 
    Noncontact cooling water means water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product. 
    Normal waste means a waste having average concentrations of 300 mg/l of BOD or less, 600 mg/l of COD or less, and 300 mg/l of suspended solids or less, as determined by 24-hour composite samples taken before entering the sewerage system. 
    Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, are a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. The term "person" includes all federal, state and local governmental entities. 
    pH means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. The term "pH" is expressed as the logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor). 
    Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing the pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by: 
(1)  Physical, chemical or biological processes; 
(2)  Process changes; or 
(3)  Other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment standards or standards means prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local limits. 
    Private wastewater disposal system means any facilities for wastewater treatment and disposal not maintained and operated by the city. 
    Process wastewater means any water used in the industrial process that has become contaminated by dissolved materials, suspended solids or has been heated in the industrial process and is discharged to the POTW. 
    Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the organic wastes resulting from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to the degree that all particles will be carried freely under flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle being greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Publicly owned treatment works or POTW means the term "treatment works," as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292) that is owned by the city. The term "publicly owned treatment works or POTW" includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances that convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
    Receiving stream means that body of water, stream or watercourse receiving the discharge from a wastewater treatment plant or that body of water, stream or watercourse formed by the effluent from a wastewater treatment plant. 
    Sanitary sewage means sewage excluding process wastes from industrial users. 
    Sanitary sewer means a public sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility that carries liquid and waterborne wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with minor quantities of ground and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
    Septic tank waste means any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks. 
    Sewage means human excrement and gray water (e.g., household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.) from residences and water-carried wastes from industrial users. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater. 
    Sewerage system means all facilities for collection, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater, generally referred to as the publicly owned treatment works or POTW. 
    Significant industrial user means: 
(1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW, excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater; 
b.  Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent of more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as a significant industrial user by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that the user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
    Slug load or slug means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration that could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 36-278. The term "slug load or slug" includes any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or noncustomary batch discharge. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC) code means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
    Standard methods means the analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, or "EPA Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes," as per 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, but which excludes sanitary sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting from the precipitation, including snowmelt. 
    Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Total metals means the combined total recoverable concentration of the following metals: arsenic (As), cadmium (Cd), chromium (Cr), cobalt (Co), copper (Cu), lead (Pb), mercury (Hg), nickel (Ni), silver (Ag), tin (Sn) and zinc (Zn). 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in the regulations promulgated by the EPA under the provisions of section 307(a) of the Act (33 USC 1317) or by the state. 
    Unpolluted wastewater means any wastewater that is substantially free of pollutants and is discharged from the following: 
(1)  Rain downspouts and drains. 
(2)  Footing drains. 
(3)  Storm and surface water drains. 
(4)  Cooling water systems. 
    User or industrial user means a source of indirect discharge. The term "user or industrial user" includes any person who contributes, carries or permits the contribution of wastewater into the sewerage system. 
    Wastewater means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
    Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant means that portion of the POTW that is designated to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial wastewater. 
(Code 1989, § 10-24; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1.5) 
Sec. 36-250. - Purpose; intent. 
    This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403). The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
(3)  To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel, who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment, and the general public; 
(4)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works; 
(5)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works; and 
(6)  To enable the city to comply with its national pollutant discharge elimination system permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal and state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject. 
(Code 1989, § 10-20; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1.1) 
Sec. 36-251. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. This article: 
(1)  Authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; 
(2)  Provides for monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities; 
(3)  Establishes administrative review procedures; 
(4)  Requires user reporting; and 
(5)  Provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established in this chapter. 
(Code 1989, § 10-20; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1.1) 
Sec. 36-252. - Review procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall be the reviewing authority for all appeals of administrative actions or administrative determinations made by the city pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Within 30 days of an adverse administrative action or administrative determination, notice of the intent to appeal and request for a hearing shall be addressed to the mayor, in writing, and shall detail the nature of the appeal. 
(c)  The city council shall set an early date for the hearing and promptly notify the appellant in writing. 
(d)  The city council's decision after the hearing shall be final and conclusive and shall be conveyed to the persons involved in writing. 
(e)  Appeals from any action or determination of the city council shall be by certiorari as set out in the city Charter for the municipal court. 
(Code 1989, § 10-21; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1.2) 
Sec. 36-253. - Article not to affect contracts and agreements. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as preventing the execution of a contract, special agreement or arrangement between the city and any person whereby water or wastewaters of unusual strength, character or quantity may be admitted into the sewerage system upon the terms and conditions as the city deems appropriate so long as the objectives of this article, limitations established by 40 CFR 403 and NPDES permit requirements of the city and other state laws, regulations and permits are complied with. 
(Code 1989, § 10-21; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1.2) 
Sec. 36-254. - Administration. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the city manager shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the city manager may be delegated by the city manager to an industrial pretreatment coordinator and to other city personnel. 
(Code 1989, § 10-22; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1.3) 
Sec. 36-255. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand CFR Code of Federal Regulations COD Chemical oxygen demand EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency EPD State of Georgia, Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division gpd Gallons per day l Liter mg Milligrams mg/l Milligrams per liter NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System O&M Operation and maintenance OSHA Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration PL Public Law POTW Publicly owned treatment works RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act SIC Standard industrial classification SS Suspended solids TSS Total suspended solids USC United States Code  
(Code 1989, § 10-23; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1.4) 
Sec. 36-256. - Inspection authority. 
(a)  The city manager and other duly authorized employees and contractors of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, flow measurement, sampling and testing of industrial wastes and other pollutants, in accordance with this article. 
(b)  The city manager and other duly authorized employees and contractors of the city are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes that have a direct bearing on the kinds and sources of discharges to the sewerage system. As required by federal regulations, industrial users must disclose information on processes; however, the city agrees that the trade secret information will not be disclosed and will be held confidential. 
(c)  Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city manager and other duly authorized employees and contractors of the city ready access at all reasonable times to all points on the premises where wastes are discharged into sewers for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of their duties. 
(d)  The city manager and other duly authorized employees and contractors of the city shall have the right to set up on the user's property the devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring or metering operations. 
(e)  Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into his premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with his security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city manager and other duly authorized employees and contractors of the city will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(f)  While performing the necessary work on private properties, the city manager and other duly authorized employees and contractors of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the user. 
(Code 1989, § 10-25; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1.6) 
Sec. 36-257. - Protection of equipment. 
    No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, deface, tamper with or remove any equipment or materials which are a part of the POTW or any equipment or materials used by the city for the purpose of making waste examinations and waste flow measurements and left upon the premises of a user discharging wastes into the POTW. Only persons authorized by the city will be allowed to uncover, adjust, maintain and remove the equipment and materials. 
(Code 1989, § 10-26; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 1.7) 
Secs. 36-258-36-277. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 36-278. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21 including, but not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, fuel oil, motor oil, mineral spirits, commercial solvents, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohol, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides and hydrides; 
(2)  Wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or more than 10.0, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment including, but not limited to, concentrated acids or alkalies and high concentrations of compounds of sulfur, chlorine, and fluorine, and substances which may react with water to form strongly acidic or basic products; 
(3)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case solids greater than one-half inch in any dimension including, but not limited to, eggshells from egg processors, ashes, cinders, ceramic wastes, sand, mud, straw, shavings, thread, glass, rags, metal, feathers, bones, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, insulation materials, fibers of any kind, stock or poultry feeds, processed grains, viscera or other fleshy particles from processing or packing plants or lime or similar sludges; 
(4)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
(5)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius); 
(6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
(8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the city manager; 
(9)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
(10)  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the city's NPDES permit; 
(11)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(12)  Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water and noncontact cooling water unless specifically authorized by the city manager; 
(13)  Sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
(14)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the city manager in a wastewater discharge permit; 
(15)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test; 
(16)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
(17)  Fats, oils or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 50 mg/l, or nonbiodegradable oil and grease in concentrations greater than 20 mg/l. 
(18)  Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more than five percent or any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit of the meter; 
(19)  Any form of inflow including storm drainage and uncontaminated thermal process water; 
(20)  Infiltration in excess of 200 gallons per inch of pipe diameter per mile of pipe per day; 
(21)  Any substance which may cause wastewater treatment plant effluent or any other product of the POTW, such as residue, sludge or scum, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the system to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed by city, state or federal authorities; or 
(22)  Any substance that will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit or the quality standards of the receiving stream. 
Pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in a manner where they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(Code 1989, § 10-31; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 2.1) 
Sec. 36-279. - Local limits. 
(a)  No user shall discharge into any sewer forming part of the POTW any of the following materials in concentrations exceeding the stated limits: 
(1)  Any water or wastes that contain more than ten mg/l of sulfur dioxide or nitrous oxide, or more than five mg/l of hydrogen sulfide. More stringent limits may be imposed by the city manager for individual discharges where necessitated by the physical characteristics of the sewage collection system serving the area; 
(2)  Any water or wastes that contain more than 100 mg/l of chlorides, 15 mg/l phosphorus, ten mg/l of nitrates, 70 mg/l of sodium, or 1.8 mg/l of fluoride; 
(3)  Any toxic or poisonous substance or any other materials in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with the wastewater treatment processes, or to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to cause a violation of the water quality standards or effluent standards for the stream or watercourse receiving the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant or to exceed limitations set forth in categorical pretreatment standards; 
(4)  Any waters containing suspended solids of the character and quantity that unusual provisions, attention or expense is required to handle the materials at the wastewater treatment plant; or 
(5)  Any waters containing quantities of radium or naturally occurring or artificially produced radioisotopes in excess of presently existing or subsequently accepted limits for drinking water as established by current drinking water regulations promulgated by the EPA. 
(b)  No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the fixed upper limits for constituents (milligrams per liter) following startup of the land application disposal system. The maximum daily average is shown in the following table. 
Element Maximum Daily Average (24 hour flow proportion composite) 
(mg/l) Arsenic 0.203 Cadmium 0.022 Chromium, Hexavalent 1.447 Chromium, total 1.447 Copper 0.520 Cyanide 0.020 Lead 0.116 Mercury 0.009 Nickel 0.360 Phenol -- Silver 0.504 Tin 1.00 Zinc 0.493 TTO 2.13  
(c)  The admission into the POTW of any waters or waste having biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), chemical oxygen demand (COD), or suspended solids (SS), or ammonia nitrogen (NH 3 -N) in excess of the prohibition limits listed in the following table will not be allowed, unless otherwise stated in the individual industrial discharge permit. Sewer use surcharges will be applied for discharges having BOD, COD, SS or NH 3 -N concentrations in excess of normal maximum levels, but below the prohibition limits established in the SIC permit. Where necessary in the opinion of the city manager, the user shall provide and operate, at his own expense, the pretreatment facilities as may be required to reduce the BOD, COD, SS and NH 3 -N concentrations to levels below the normal maximum levels. 
Pollutant (based on 24-hour composite sample) Normal Daily Maximum (Surcharge) Limit (mg/l) Prohibition Limit (mg/l) BOD 300 500 COD 600 1,000 SS 300 500 NH 3 -N 20 50  
(d)  Upon the promulgation of the national categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the categorical standards, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article. All affected users shall notify the city of the applicable reporting. 
(e)  State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those of this article. 
(f)  The city reserves the right to establish by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
(Code 1989, § 10-32; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 2.2; Ord. No. 2005-09, §§ 1, 2, 11-7-2005) 
Sec. 36-280. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
    The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR 405 through 471 are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the city manager may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(2)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the city manager shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(3)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by the EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(4)  A user may petition for a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(Code 1989, § 10-33; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 2.3) 
Sec. 36-281. - Use of public sewers required; prohibited acts; compliance with division required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the city's jurisdiction, any human excrement, garbage or objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge to any outlet other than a sanitary sewer, within the corporate city limits, any domestic or industrial wastes except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this article and an appropriate NPDES permit has been obtained from the EPA pursuant to section 402 of the Act. 
(c)  Where a storm sewer is adjacent to a property, it shall be legal to discharge cooling water which meets the requirements of the definition of unpolluted wastewater contained in section 36-249, into the storm sewer in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article and where the city determines that sufficient capacity exists in the storm sewer to carry the cooling water without exceeding the design storm drainage capacity of the storm sewer and where an appropriate NPDES permit has been obtained from the EPA pursuant to section 402 of the Act. 
(d)  The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, abutting the property a public sanitary sewer of the city that discharges to the city POTW, is hereby required at the owners' expense to connect the facilities directly with the proper public sanitary sewer in accordance with provisions of this article within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so; provided that the public sanitary sewer is within 200 feet of the property line of the property except as follows: 
(1)  When the city or the county health department determines that a problem exists with an existing private wastewater disposal system which cannot be corrected by any means less than by replacement of a significant portion of the system, connection to the public sanitary sewer will be required. 
(2)  Where a public sanitary sewer is available within 200 feet of the property line of a property, no new private wastewater disposal system will be permitted. 
(3)  Where the city determines that connection to a public sanitary sewer would not be technically or economically feasible, connection to a public sanitary sewer will not be required if a private wastewater disposal system is provided in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(e)  All new connections to the city POTW shall be made in accordance with provisions of this division. 
(Code 1989, § 10-34; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 2.4) 
Sec. 36-282. - Private wastewater disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available, the toilet and other facilities necessary for the discharge of domestic or industrial wastes shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the requirements of the state, county or city. 
(b)  Before the commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the city. The application for the permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other information as deemed necessary by the city. At least two percolation tests shall be required within the area of a septic tank drain field. Appropriate permit and inspection fees shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the city's satisfaction. The city shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within two workdays of the receipt of notice by the city. 
(d)  The type, capacity, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state and county health departments. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 20,000 square feet (0.46 acres). No septic tank shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)  At the time as a public sewer becomes available to property served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer as provided in this article and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(f)  The owners shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(g)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by federal or state agencies. 
(Code 1989, § 10-35; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 2.5) 
Sec. 36-283. - Building sewers, connections and permits. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(b)  There shall be two classes of sewer permits: 
(1)  Building sewer permits for residential, commercial, industrial or public facilities; and 
(2)  Industrial discharge permits for significant industrial users as defined in this chapter. 
(c)  Building sewer permits for all connections shall be obtained under this article and in accordance with the requirements promulgated by the city. 
(d)  In addition to the other requirements of this article, any person who, after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, proposes to originate the discharge of any industrial waste for the first time into the POTW or who proposes to make a significant change in the character or volume of any industrial waste theretofore discharged into the POTW, shall make an application to the city for an industrial discharge permit in accordance with the requirements of this article, and obtain a permit prior to connecting to the POTW or making a significant change in his contribution thereto. The application shall be supplemented by any information that may have been furnished by the applicant to any other governmental agency and by the other plans or other data as the city may reasonably require for purposes of determining whether the qualifications are met. 
(e)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer for the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from the single connection aforementioned. 
(f)  Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found on examination and test by the city to meet all the requirements of this article. 
(g)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the city's building codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(h)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(i)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the city's building codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All the connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city before installation. 
(j)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the city's supervision. 
(k)  All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(l)  All construction activities shall conform to all applicable OSHA regulations. 
(Code 1989, § 10-36; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 2.6) 
Sec. 36-284. - Measurement of flow. 
(a)  The volume or quantity of industrial waste discharged by a user into the POTW shall be measured by one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  If the volume of water used by any user is substantially the same as the volume secured from the municipal waterworks system, the volume of water purchased shall be considered to be the volume of waste discharged. 
(2)  If a substantial portion of the water secured by a user from the municipal waterworks system is not returned to the POTW, the quantity of wastewater shall be determined as follows: 
a.  By a meter on the water supply line to his industrial or process operations not discharging to the POTW; or 
b.  By a meter on his waste line which discharges into the POTW; 
c.  If a meter as required under subsection (a)(2)a. or b. of this section shall not have been installed, or if at any time the installed meter stop accurately recording flows discharged into the sewage system, the user shall immediately install or repair the meter. For the first 90 days from the enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived, that the meter is not installed or if installed, not accurately recording flow, the sewer charge will be based on the average percentage of flow calculated upon the previous three-month flow. If after 90 days the meter is not installed, or if installed is not operational, the sewer charge will be based on 100 percent of the volume of water purchased. If a sewer meter shows incorrect or suspected incorrect flows over four times in one 12-month period, then for the next 12-month period the sewer charge will be based on 100 percent of the volume of water purchased and will continue beyond the 12-month period until the time as it can be demonstrated to the city in a manner satisfactory to the city that the sewer meter is accurately measuring the sewerage flows. 
(3)  If any user (now discharging or proposing to discharge industrial waste into the POTW) does not secure his entire water supply requirements from the municipal waterworks system, the user shall install and maintain a meter on his waste line which discharge into the POTW or shall install the additional meter on the private water supply as required to permit determination of the total quantity discharged to the POTW from both sources under procedures comparable to those provisions in this chapter. 
(b)  All sources of water supply and all discharges of wastewater into the POTW must be identified in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Any omission shall be considered as an unauthorized use of the POTW. 
(c)  The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from each of the following: 
(1)  Regulated process streams; and 
(2)  Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
The city manager may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified by cost or feasibility considerations. 
(Code 1989, § 10-37; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 2.7) 
Sec. 36-285. - Dilution. 
    No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The city manager may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Code 1989, § 10-38; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 2.8) 
Secs. 36-286-36-303. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER 

Sec. 36-304. - Facilities. 
    Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in this article within the time limitations specified by the EPA, state or city manager, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing the facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city manager for review, and shall be acceptable to the city manager before the facilities are constructed. The review of the plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1989, § 10-41; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 3.1) 
Sec. 36-305. - Additional measures. 
(a)  Whenever deemed necessary, the city manager may: 
(1)  Require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods; 
(2)  Designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers; 
(3)  Relocate or consolidate points of discharge; 
(4)  Separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams; and 
(5)  Establish other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The city manager may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on his property and at his expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(c)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the city manager's opinion, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand, except that the interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city manager and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. The interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, as needed, by the users at their expense. 
(d)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Code 1989, § 10-42; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 3.2) 
Sec. 36-306. - Accidental discharge/slug control plans. 
    At least once every two years, the city manager shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The city manager may require any user to develop a plan for the user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the city manager of any accidental or slug discharge, as required in this article; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. The procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Code 1989, § 10-43; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 3.3) 
Sec. 36-307. - Hauled wastewater. 
(a)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the city manager, and at the times as are established by the city manager. The waste shall not violate this article or any other requirements established by the city. 
(1)  No person owing vacuum-pump or septic tank trucks or other liquid waste transport trucks shall discharge directly or indirectly the wastewater into the POTW unless the person shall first have applied for and received a wastewater haulers discharge permit from the city. All applicants for wastewater haulers discharge permits shall complete the forms as required by the city, pay appropriate fees, and agree in writing to abide by the provisions of this section and any special conditions or regulations established by the city council by resolution or ordinance. The owners of the vehicles shall affix and display a permit on the side of each vehicle used for such purposes. The permits shall be valid for a maximum period of one year from date of issuance; provided that the permit shall be subject to revocation by the city council for a violation of any provision of this article or reasonable regulation established by the city. The permits shall be limited to the discharge of sanitary sewage containing no industrial waste. The city manager shall designate the locations and times where the trucks may be discharged, and may refuse to accept any truckload of waste at his absolute discretion where it appears that the waste could interfere with the effective operation of the POTW. 
(2)  Pumpage from commercial grease traps is specifically prohibited from discharge into the sewerage system. 
(3)  No person shall discharge or empty any matter or contents of septic tank and portable toilets into the city wastewater system without paying the charge imposed in this article and discharging the same at the point indicated in this article. All applicants for a wastewater discharge permit shall pay an annual permit and renewal fee prior to a permit being issued or renewed. The annual fee for a permit and a renewal shall be in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution. The charge for emptying matter from a septic tank and portable toilets or the contents thereof into the city's wastewater system shall be a fee in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution. The point of emptying of the same shall be at the city's wastewater treatment plant located at 402 Hodges Mill Road in accordance with the rules, regulations, policies and procedures as shall be established by, and during hours established by, the city manager. 
(4)  Liquid waste or byproducts transported over highways or public roads or streets of the city shall be watertight and completely covered containers or vehicles. 
(b)  The city manager shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The city manager may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The city manager also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this article. 
(1)  No person shall discharge any industrial process wastes into the POTW unless he shall have applied for and have been issued a permit by the city. Unless otherwise allowed under the terms and conditions of the permit, a separate permit must be secured for each separate discharge. The permit shall state the specific location of discharge, the time of day the discharge is to occur, the volume of the discharge, and shall limit the wastewater constituents and characteristics of the discharge. The user shall pay any applicable charges or fees therefor, and shall comply with the conditions of the permit issued by the city. Any and all such fees and charges shall be set from time to time by city council resolution. 
(2)  No person shall operate a dumping station for the discharge of sanitary sewage from recreational vehicles into the POTW unless the user of the dumping station has first applied for and received a recreational vehicle dumping station permit from the city. All applicants for recreational vehicle dumping station permits shall complete the forms as required by the city, pay appropriate fees and agree in writing to abide by the provisions of this article and any special conditions or regulations established by the city. These permits shall be issued only for approved facilities designed to receive sanitary sewage. Any and all such fees and charges shall be set from time to time by city council resolution. 
(3)  Industrial waste haulers shall provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(c)  The owner of any vehicle for which a wastewater haulers discharge permit is requested must be a resident of the county and the business of the user must be located in the county. 
(Code 1989, § 10-44; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 3.4; Ord. No. 2002-07, § 1, 11-4-2002) 
Sec. 36-308. - New or increased contributions of pollutants. 
    The city manager may deny or condition new or increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants, to the POTW by industrial users where the contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or where the contributions would cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit. 
(Code 1989, § 10-45; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 3.5) 
Secs. 36-309-36-334. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT 

Sec. 36-335. - Wastewater analysis. 
    When requested by the city manager, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the request. The city manager is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. Failure to submit the requested wastewater analysis will constitute grounds for enforcement action by the city. 
(Code 1989, § 10-51; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 4.1) 
Sec. 36-336. - Required. 
(a)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the city manager, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
(b)  The city manager may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(c)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions in this chapter. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state and local law. 
(Code 1989, § 10-52; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 4.2) 
Sec. 36-337. - Existing conditions. 
    Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and who wishes to continue the discharges in the future shall, within 30 days after the date, apply to the city manager for a wastewater discharge permit and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the city manager. 
(Code 1989, § 10-53; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 4.3) 
Sec. 36-338. - New connections. 
    Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit that proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain the permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of the discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit must be filed at least 30 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(Code 1989, § 10-54; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 4.4) 
Sec. 36-339. - Application-Required; contents. 
    All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The city manager may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: 
(1)  All information required by other provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
(3)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
(4)  Each product produced by type, amount, process and rate of production; 
(5)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation and all points of discharge; 
(7)  Time and duration of discharges; and 
(8)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the city manager to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(Code 1989, § 10-55; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 4.5) 
Sec. 36-340. - Same-Signatories and certification. 
    All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
    "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Code 1989, § 10-56; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 4.6) 
Sec. 36-341. - Decisions. 
    The city manager will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 30 days of receipt of a completed wastewater discharge permit application, the city manager will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The city manager may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(Code 1989, § 10-57; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 4.7) 
Sec. 36-342. - Duration. 
    A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. At the city manager's discretion, a wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period of less than five years. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(Code 1989, § 10-58; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 5.1) 
Sec. 36-343. - Contents. 
    A wastewater discharge permit shall include the conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the city manager to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(1)  An industrial discharge permit will be issued or renewed by the city when satisfactory information has been submitted to indicate that: 
a.  POTW capacity is available for receiving the discharge of industrial waste at the proposed point of discharge. 
b.  The waste being discharged or proposed to be discharged is amenable to treatment by the processes employed in the wastewater treatment plant and will not impair the city's ability to comply with water quality standards or effluent standards established by the state or federal regulatory agencies. 
c.  The waste being discharged, or proposed to be discharged, will not cause damage to the POTW including the wastewater treatment facilities, will not constitute a hazard to humans or animals, and will not be capable of creating a public nuisance. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years; 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with section 36-346 and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
c.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards or local limits provided in division 3 of this article; 
d.  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency and sample type based on federal, state and local law; 
e.  A requirement to notify the city manager within 24 hours of becoming aware of any spills, bypasses, upsets, nonpermitted slug loading, significant change in discharge characteristics or similar violation. Resampling is required whenever meaningful information related to the violation can be obtained, with resampling results submitted to the city manager within 30 days; and 
f.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. The schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law. 
(3)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
a.  Limits on the average or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated or nonroutine discharges; 
d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
e.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for the installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
g.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of the responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
h.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city manager to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(Code 1989, § 10-59; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 5.2) 
Sec. 36-344. - Appeals. 
    The city manager shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the city manager to reconsider the terms of a wastewater permit within 30 days of notice of its issuance. 
(1)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(2)  In his petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection and the alternative condition, if any, he seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(3)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(4)  If the city manager fails to act within 30 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
(5)  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the county superior court within 60 days. 
(Code 1989, § 10-60; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 5.3) 
Sec. 36-345. - Modification. 
    The terms and conditions of the industrial discharge permit may be subject to modification by the city during the term of the individual discharge permit as limitations or requirements are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his industrial discharge permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the change. Any changes or new conditions in the industrial discharge permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. The city manager may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city personnel or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permits; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
(Code 1989, § 10-61; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 5.4) 
Sec. 36-346. - Transferability. 
    Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 30 days' advance notice to the city manager and the city manager approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the city manager must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(Code 1989, § 10-62; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 5.5) 
Sec. 36-347. - Revocation. 
    The city manager may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the city manager of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the city manager of changed conditions; 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow the city manager timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit of this article. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(Code 1989, § 10-63; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 5.6) 
Sec. 36-348. - Reissuance. 
    A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a completed permit application a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(Code 1989, § 10-64; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 5.7) 
Sec. 36-349. - Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions (intermunicipal agreements). 
(a)  If another municipality, or user located within another municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the city manager shall enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality. 
(b)  Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection (a) of this section the city manager shall request the following information from the contributing municipality: 
(1)  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality; 
(2)  An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and 
(3)  Other information as the city manager may deem necessary. 
(c)  An intermunicipal agreement, as required by subsection (a) of this section, shall contain the following conditions: 
(1)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use ordinance that is at least as stringent as this article and local limits that are at least as stringent as those set out in this article. The requirement shall specify that the ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the city's ordinance or local limits; 
(2)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis; 
(3)  A provision specifying which: 
a.  Contributing municipality will conduct the pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling and enforcement; 
b.  Activities will be conducted by the city manager; and 
c.  Activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the city manager; 
(4)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the city manager with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
(5)  Limits on the nature, quality and volume of the contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW; 
(6)  Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's discharge; 
(7)  A provision ensuring the city manager access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling and any other duties deemed necessary by the city manager; and 
(8)  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the intermunicipal agreement. 
(Code 1989, § 10-65; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 5-9) 
Secs. 36-350-36-371. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - REPORTING AND COMPLIANCE MONITORING 

Sec. 36-372. - Baseline monitoring report. 
(a)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the city manager a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the city manager a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b) of this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(b)  Users described in subsection (a) of this section shall submit the following information: 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production and standard industrial classification of the operations carried out by the user. This description should include a schematic process diagram that indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, or mass, where required by the standard or city manager, of the regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and longterm average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set forth in this article. 
c.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with the procedures provided in this division. 
(6)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide the additional pretreatment or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this subsection must meet the requirements set forth in this article. 
(8)  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified. 
(Code 1989, § 10-71; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 6.1) 
Sec. 36-373. - Compliance schedule progress report. 
    The city may require the user to develop a compliance schedule for the installation of technology required to meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required hereby: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. The events include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Hiring an engineer; 
b.  Completing preliminary and final plans; 
c.  Executing contracts for major components; 
d.  Commencing and completing construction; and 
e.  Beginning and conducting routine operation; 
(2)  No increment referred to in subsection (1) of this section shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the city manager no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between the progress reports to the city manager. 
(Code 1989, § 10-72; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 6.2) 
Sec. 36-374. - Compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
    Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to the pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the city manager a report containing the information described in this division. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's longterm production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified. 
(Code 1989, § 10-73; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 6.3) 
Sec. 36-375. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(a)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the city manager, but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified. 
(b)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(c)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in subsection (a) of this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the city manager, using the procedures prescribed in this chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Code 1989, § 10-74; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 6.4) 
Sec. 36-376. - Report of changed conditions. 
(a)  Each user must notify the city manager of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system that might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change. 
(1)  The city manager may require the user to submit the information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application. 
(2)  The city manager may issue a wastewater discharge permit or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(b)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20 percent or greater and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(Code 1989, § 10-75; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 6.5) 
Sec. 36-377. - Report of potential problems. 
(a)  In the case of any discharge including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the city manager of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(b)  Within five days following the discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the city manager, submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. The notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability that may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property, nor shall the notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties or other liability that may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (a) of this section. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause the discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Code 1989, § 10-76; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 6.6) 
Sec. 36-378. - Reports from unpermitted users. 
    All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the city manager as he may require. 
(Code 1989, § 10-77; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 6.7) 
Sec. 36-379. - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. 
    If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the city manager within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city manager within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the city manager monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the city manager samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Code 1989, § 10-78; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 6.8) 
Sec. 36-380. - Discharging hazardous waste prohibited. 
(a)  The discharge into the POTW of a substance that, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261, is prohibited. 
(b)  The discharge into the POTW of a substance which, although not a hazardous waste in the concentrations at which it is discharged, accumulates in treatment plant sludges to an extent sufficient to cause the plant sludge to be classified a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261, is prohibited. 
(Code 1989, § 10-79; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 6.9) 
Sec. 36-381. - Analytical requirements. 
    All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136, does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA. 
(Code 1989, § 10-80; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 6.10) 
Sec. 36-382. - Sample collection. 
(a)  Except as indicated in subsection (b) of this section, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the city manager may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(b)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(Code 1989, § 10-81; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 6.11) 
Sec. 36-383. - Timing. 
    Written reports will be deemed submitted on the date postmarked. For reports that are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Code 1989, § 10-82; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 6.12) 
Sec. 36-384. - Recordkeeping. 
(a)  Users subject to the reporting requirements of this division shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of the requirements. 
(b)  Records shall include: 
(1)  The date, exact place, method and time of sampling; 
(2)  The name of the person taking the samples; 
(3)  The dates on which the analyses were performed; 
(4)  Who performed the analyses; 
(5)  The analytical techniques or methods used; and 
(6)  The results of the analyses. 
(c)  The records required in this section shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the city manager. 
(Code 1989, § 10-83; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 6.13) 
Sec. 36-385. - Right of entry; inspection and sampling. 
    The city manager or his designee shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article. Users shall allow the city manager ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city manager will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The city manager shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, the devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The city manager may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at least once per year to ensure their accuracy. When deemed necessary by the city, continuous recording or sampling equipment shall be installed and maintained at the user's expense. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the city manager and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing the access shall be borne by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city manager access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(6)  When so requested by the industrial user, samples collected by the city will be split with the industrial user for verification of analytical results. However, final determination of the character, strength or quantity of the wastes as made by the city shall be binding as a basis for computation of charges or for actions by the city. 
(Code 1989, § 10-84; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 7.1) 
Secs. 36-386-36-413. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CONFIDENTIALITY, NONCOMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 36-414. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits and monitoring programs, and from the city manager's inspection and sampling activities shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the city manager's satisfaction, that the release of the information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. 
(b)  When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that the information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Code 1989, § 10-91; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 8) 
Sec. 36-415. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
    The city manager shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users that, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant noncompliance" means: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants, except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the city manager believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city manager's exercise of his emergency authority to halt or prevent the discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation that the city manager determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Code 1989, § 10-92; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 9) 
Sec. 36-416. - Enforcement remedies-Administrative. 
(a)  Notification of violation. When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city manager may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within ten days of the receipt of the notice, the user shall submit to the city manager an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the city manager's authority to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(b)  Consent orders. The city manager may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. The documents will include the specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. The documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to the provisions in this article and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(c)  Show cause hearing. The city manager may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement to appear before the city manager or city council and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for the action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days prior to the hearing. The notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges therefor. 
(d)  Compliance orders. When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city manager may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(e)  Cease and desist orders. When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirements, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the city manager may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all violations and directing the user to immediately comply with all requirements and take the appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(f)  Administrative fines and bonds. 
(1)  When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city manager may fine the user in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. The fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other longterm average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
(2)  Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of one percent per month. A lien against the user's property may be sought for unpaid charges, fines and penalties. 
(3)  Users desiring to dispute the fines must file a written request for the city manager to reconsider the fine along with the full payment of the fine amount within 15 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the city manager may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, along with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The city manager may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
(4)  The city manager may require that a user causing or allowing a violation of any provision of this article furnish a bond or other security, with terms specified by the city, to hold harmless the city from any loss or expense that it may incur as a result of the violation or of any future noncompliance. 
(5)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(g)  Emergency suspensions. The city manager may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever the suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The city manager may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city manager may take the steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The city manager may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the city manager's satisfaction that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in subsection (h) of this section are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution, and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the city manager prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing. 
Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this subsection. 
(h)  Termination of discharge. In addition to other penalties provided in this article, any user that violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(1)  A violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in division 2 of this article. 
The user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the city manager shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Code 1989, § 10-93; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 10) 
Sec. 36-417. - Same-Judicial. 
(a)  Injunctive relief. When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued under this article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city manager may petition the county superior court through the city's attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The city manager may also seek other action as is appropriate for legal or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(b)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  The city may commence an action for appropriate civil penalties in the county superior court, where the same is necessary to enforce this article or to recover damages caused by the failure of any user to comply with this article. 
(2)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(3)  The city manager may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(4)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the city manager shall take into account all relevant circumstances including, but not limited to: 
a.  The extent of harm caused by the violation; 
b.  The magnitude and duration of the violation; 
c.  Any economic benefit gained through the user's violation; 
d.  Corrective actions by the user; 
e.  Compliance history of the user; and 
f.  Any other factor as justice requires. 
(c)  Criminal prosecution. 
(1)  A violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued under this article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, including the willful furnishing of false information relative to same for the use of the sewerage system, shall be and hereby is declared to be a misdemeanor. Upon trial in the city recorder's court and conviction, any person or user in violation of or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article or the use of any of the POTW in violation of this article, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 per violation per day, or by imprisonment of not more than the maximum length of time as provided by the city Charter, or both, for each violation. Each day a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate violation under this article. Every person concerned in the violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with same, or who furnishes false information relative to his use of the POTW whether he directly commits the acts or aids and abets same and whether present or absent, may be proceeded against and held as a principal. 
(2)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least $1,000.00 per violation per day, or be subject to imprisonment for not more than the maximum length of time provided by the city Charter, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(3)  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued under this article, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than the maximum length of time as provided by the city Charter, or both. 
(d)  Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The city manager may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the city manager may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the city manager is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Code 1989, § 10-94; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 11) 
Sec. 36-418. - Same-Supplemental action. 
(a)  Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued under this article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. The restoration of service shall be conditioned on full payment of all delinquent user charges and penalties and any expenses incurred in the enforcement proceedings and restoration of service. 
(b)  Public nuisances; abatement. A violation of any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued under this article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the city manager. Any person creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of this Code governing the nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating or remedying the nuisance. 
(Code 1989, § 10-95; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 12) 
Sec. 36-419. - Affirmative defense-Upset. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  The term "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards, city ordinance limits or discharge permit limits because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. 
(2)  The term "upset" does not include: 
a.  Noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error; 
b.  Improperly designed treatment facilities; 
c.  Inadequate treatment facilities; 
d.  Lack of preventive maintenance; or 
e.  Careless or improper operation. 
(b)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards, city ordinance limits or discharge permit limits, if the requirements of subsection (c) of this section are met. 
(c)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(3)  The user has submitted the following information to the city manager within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
a.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
b.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
c.  Steps being taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(d)  In any enforcement proceedings, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(e)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(f)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards, city ordinance limits, or discharge permit limits, upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(Code 1989, § 10-96; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 13) 
Sec. 36-420. - Same-Prohibited discharge standards. 
    A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general or specific prohibitions of this article if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit and, in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(Code 1989, § 10-97; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 13.2) 
Sec. 36-421. - Bypass. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: 
    Bypass means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
    Severe property damage. 
(1)  The term "severe property damage" means: 
a.  Substantial physical damage to property; 
b.  Damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable; or 
c.  Substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. 
(2)  The term "severe property damage" does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(b)  Permitted. A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  Notice. 
(1)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the city manager, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the city manager of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain: 
a.  A description of the bypass and its cause; 
b.  The duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times; 
c.  If the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and 
d.  Steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the bypass. 
The city manager may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(d)  Criteria for approval. 
(1)  Where a bypass is prohibited, the city manager may take an enforcement action against a user, unless: 
a.  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage; 
b.  There are not feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
c.  The user submitted notices as required under subsection (c) of this section. 
(2)  The city manager may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the city manager determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (d)(1) of this section. 
(Code 1989, § 10-98; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 13.3) 
Secs. 36-422-36-440. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - WASTEWATER TREATMENT RATES 

Sec. 36-441. - User charges. 
    The purpose of user charges as provided in this division is to provide for the recovery of costs from users of city POTW for the implementation of the program established in this chapter and for the construction, operation and maintenance of the system. 
(1)  The city will adopt charges and fees which may include: 
a.  Service connection charges. 
b.  User charges. 
c.  Surcharges for high strength wastewater. 
d.  Fees for the reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city pretreatment program. 
e.  Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures. 
f.  Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction. 
g.  Fees for permit applications. 
h.  Fees for filing appeals. 
i.  Other fees as the city council may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this article. 
(2)  All charges, fees and other penalties shall be maintained in a schedule separate from this article and may be revised from time to time as the city council finds necessary for maintenance of the purposes set forth in this article. 
(3)  These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city. 
(Code 1989, § 10-101; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 14.1) 
Sec. 36-442. - Surcharges. 
    Sewer use surcharges will be applied for discharges having a five-day BOD greater than 300 mg/l, for discharges containing more than 300 mg/l of suspended solids, for discharges containing more than 20 mg/l of ammonia nitrogen, and for discharges that exceed maximum permitted volume. Where, in the city manager's opinion, the BOD does not provide a meaningful measurement of wastewater strength, the city manager may substitute COD limits and apply surcharges for wastewater having a COD greater than 600 mg/l. 
(1)  For the purposes of applying surcharges, it has been determined that the costs of operating the POTW can reasonably be subdivided into four components, as follows: 
a.  Flow related components including collection system elements, pumping facilities and hydraulic capacity at the treatment facilities, which together make up 20 percent of overall operating costs. 
b.  Oxygen demand components, including biological treatment process elements, which together make up 25 percent of overall operating costs. 
c.  Solids handling components, including clarifiers, digesters, drying beds and sludge disposal facilities, which together make up 35 percent of overall operating costs. 
d.  Ammonia nitrogen handling components including a portion of the biological treatment process elements, which together make up 20 percent of overall operating costs. 
_____ 
(2)  In any case where wastewater flow volume exceeds permit limits, or where the wastewater strength exceeds the surcharge limits established by this article, surcharge factors will be computed and applied to the user charges that would otherwise be due. Surcharge factors will be calculated for any or all components exceeding the surcharge limits, and individual components added together to produce a total surcharge factor to be applied as follows: 
a.  Where BOD is used with 24-hour composite samples: 

b.  Where COD is used with 24-hour composite samples: 

c.  Where BOD is used with a single grab sample: 

d.  Where COD is used with a single grab sample: 

(Code 1989, § 10-102; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 14.2) 
_____
Secs. 36-443-36-467. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 36-468. - Pretreatment charges and fees. 
    The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program that may include: 
(1)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing the applications; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Fees for filing appeals; and 
(5)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this chapter. 
These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the city. 
(Code 1989, § 10-111; Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 15) 
Secs. 36-469-36-489. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NATURAL GAS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 36-490-36-516. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - METERS 

Sec. 36-517. - City to supply and install. 
    The city will furnish gas through meters only, the meters to be furnished and installed by the city gas department. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 15, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 36-518. - Location. 
(a)  The customer or builder shall provide a location for the gas meter acceptable to the city. The city reserves the right to refuse to set a meter in an unacceptable location. 
(b)  Where there is only one riser in a building, it must extend to a point within 24 inches, measured in a horizontal direction, of the head of the service and to the right of the same. 
(c)  Meters shall not be located within less than six feet of heating appliances, near furnaces, under houses with less than two feet of clearance above the ground or placed in any situation where they will be inaccessible or liable to injury. 
(d)  The city reserves the sole right to disconnect, remove or reset gas meters. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 12, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 36-519. - Separate meters for each living unit and business. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, separate gas meters are required, and shall be installed, in each living quarter, living unit or place of business in the city to which gas is supplied by the city. 
(b)  When, to accommodate different tenants, two or more meters are desired in a building, the city will set as many meters as there are separate customers, connecting the meters to one service pipe, provided the risers of pipes leading to these different tenants are terminated according to the city specifications. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 13, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 36-520. - Tampering prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than employees of the gas department to tamper with any meters, valves, pipes, fittings, regulators, wires and other gas utility equipment furnished by the city and installed on or over private property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to interfere with or molest in any way the gas metering station, regulating stations, mains, plants or other equipment installed either on the public rights-of-way or on private property. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 18, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 36-521. - Unauthorized connection prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person using or desiring to use gas currently furnished by the city, where a meter is installed for the measuring of the gas service, to make or cause to be made any connection for the supply of the gas on the primary or lead side of the meter. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 18, 4-6-1998) 
Secs. 36-522-36-550. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RATES, FEES AND CHARGES 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 36-551. - Tap fee. 
    The applicant for installation, relocation or reconnection of all classes of gas service shall have his residence or place of business piped for the use of natural gas and the piping extended to a point, outside of the building, satisfactory to the gas superintendent as a meter location. Tap fees shall be paid in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution. In consideration of the tap fee that shall be paid to the gas system fund in advance, the city will do all or any part remaining to be done of the following: 
(1)  Tap the gas main; 
(2)  Extend service pipe to meter location; 
(3)  Furnish and set meter and regulator; 
(4)  Install meter riser; 
(5)  Install an excess flow valve; 
(6)  Leave outlet connection for meter after a 24-hour test at ten psi is approved by the gas department. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 21, 4-6-1998; Ord. No. 99-006, 5-3-1999; Ord. No. 2000-02, § 1, 4-3-2000) 
Sec. 36-552. - Connection charge. 
(a)  The charge for installing gas services and setting gas meters for all classes of customers shall be an amount equal to the materials and labor costs to the city. 
(b)  There will be no charge for an extension of the gas main if 25 or more customers sign individual contracts for service within a mile of where the gas main is to be installed and minimum usage of 75 Mcf per year. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 24, 4-6-1998) 
Secs. 36-553-36-582. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Service Rates 

Sec. 36-583. - Based on classification. 
    The natural gas rates in this subdivision are established for consumers of natural gas of and from the city's natural gas system. Each customer is subject to the retail rate schedule that best matches its classification according to type of use and historic consumption level. A customer without a billing history shall be categorized based on estimated usage and may be reclassified to a different rate schedule based on actual consumption patterns once established. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 22, 4-6-1998; Ord. No. 2000-04, 9-5-2000; Ord. No. 2001-012, § 1(22(a)), 11-5-2001; Ord. No. 2002-001, § 1(22(a)), 2-4-2002; Ord. No. 2002-05, § 1(22(a)), 2-3-2003; Ord. No. 2003-07, § 1(22(a)), 11-3-2003) 
Sec. 36-584. - Residential/small commercial service. 
(a)  Availability. The residential/small commercial service rate schedule shall be available to all customers using less than 100 Mcf per year on average. 
(b)  Monthly charges. The monthly charges for this service inside the city and outside the city shall consist of a fixed base service charge plus a volumetric rate, as follows: 
(1)  Base service charge. Each customer, regardless of the amount of gas consumed or purchased, and even if no gas is consumed or purchased, shall pay a service charge in an amount as established by city council resolution. 
(2)  Volumetric rate. In addition to the base service charge provided in subsection (b)(1) of this section, each customer shall pay an amount equal to the city's cost of the gas purchased or consumed by the customer, plus an amount per 1,000 cubic feet of gas purchased or consumed by the customer as established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(c)  Minimum monthly charge. There shall be a minimum monthly charge in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(d)  Sales tax. State and local sales tax shall be added where applicable. 
(e)  Reconnect fee. If a customer disconnects service and then later reconnects within 12 months of the disconnection, the customer shall be required to pay a reconnect fee of seven times the base service charge before the customer is reconnected. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 22, 4-6-1998; Ord. No. 2000-04, 9-5-2000; Ord. No. 2001-012, § 1(22(b)), 11-5-2001; Ord. No. 2002-001, § 1(22(b)), 2-4-2002; Ord. No. 2002-05, § 1(22(b)), 2-3-2003; Ord. No. 2003-07, § 1(22(b)), 11-3-2003) 
Sec. 36-585. - Medium commercial/industrial service. 
(a)  Availability. The medium commercial/industrial service rate schedule shall be available to all customers using between 100 Mcf and 1,000 Mcf per year on average. 
(b)  Applicability. Applicable to any customer using between 100 Mcf and 1,000 Mcf per year on average for any purpose exclusive of resale and for service at any one location through one metering point from lines of adequate capacity. 
(c)  Monthly charges. The monthly charges for this service inside the city and outside the city shall consist of a fixed base service charge plus a volumetric rate, as follows: 
(1)  Base service charge. Each customer, regardless of the amount of gas consumed or purchased, and even if no gas is consumed or purchased, shall pay a service charge in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(2)  Volumetric rate. In addition to the base service charge provided in subsection (c)(1) of this section, each customer shall pay an amount equal to the city's cost of the gas purchased or consumed by the customer, plus an amount per 1,000 cubic feet of gas purchased or consumed by the customer as established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(d)  Minimum monthly charge. The minimum monthly charge shall be in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(e)  Sales tax. State and local sales tax shall be added where applicable. 
(f)  Reconnect fee. If a customer disconnects service and then later reconnects within 12 months of the disconnection, the customer shall be required to pay a reconnect fee of seven times the base service charge before the customer is reconnected. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 22, 4-6-1998; Ord. No. 2000-04, 9-5-2000; Ord. No. 2001-012, § 1(22(c)), 11-5-2001; Ord. No. 2002-001, § 1(22(c)), 2-4-2002; Ord. No. 2002-05, § 1(22(c)), 2-3-2003; Ord. No. 2003-07, § 1(22(c)), 11-3-2003) 
Sec. 36-586. - Large commercial/industrial service. 
(a)  Availability. The large commercial/industrial rate schedule shall be available to all customers using over 1,000 Mcf per year. 
(b)  Applicability. Applicable to any commercial user for any purpose exclusive of resale and for service at any one location through one metering point from lines of adequate capacity. 
(c)  Monthly charges. The monthly charges for this service inside the city and outside the city shall consist of a fixed base service charge plus a volumetric rate, as follows: 
(1)  Base service charge. Each customer, regardless of the amount of gas consumed or purchased, and even if no gas is consumed or purchased, shall pay a service charge in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(2)  Volumetric rate. In addition to the base service charge provided in subsection (c)(1) of this section, each customer shall pay an amount equal to the city's cost of the gas purchased or consumed by the customer, plus an amount per 1,000 cubic feet of gas purchased or consumed by the customer as established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(d)  Minimum monthly charge. The minimum monthly charge shall be in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(e)  Sales tax. State and local sales tax shall be added where applicable. 
(f)  Reconnect fee. If a customer disconnects service and then later reconnects within 12 months of the disconnection, the customer shall be required to pay a reconnect fee of seven times the base service charge before the customer is reconnected. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 22, 4-6-1998; Ord. No. 2000-04, 9-5-2000; Ord. No. 2001-012, § 1(22(d)), 11-5-2001; Ord. No. 2002-001, § 1(22(d)), 2-4-2002; Ord. No. 2002-05, § 1(22(d)), 2-3-2003; Ord. No. 2003-07, § 1(22(d)), 11-3-2003) 
Sec. 36-587. - Commercial agricultural firm service. 
(a)  Availability. Throughout the city's service area from existing lines of adequate capacity. This service is available to any agricultural user of at least 300 Mcf per year on average. 
(b)  Applicability. Applicable only to a location in which a customer: 
(1)  Operates a business actively engaged in the commercial production and sale of agricultural products such as poultry or livestock or other agricultural products; and 
(2)  Utilizes at least 300 Mcf of natural gas per year. 
The service is applicable to a customer meeting these qualifications only for the location of the business, and the service shall not be available to the customer's residence or any other location, unless the location independently qualifies for this service. 
(c)  Monthly charges. The monthly charges for this service inside the city and outside the city shall consist of a fixed base service charge plus a volumetric rate, as follows: 
(1)  Base service charge. Each customer, regardless of the amount of gas consumed or purchased, and even if no gas is consumed or purchased, shall pay a service charge in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(2)  Volumetric rate. In addition to the base service charge provided in subsection (c)(1) of this section, each customer shall pay for all gas consumed at a rate as provided for by special agreement with the city, administered by the city manager at his sole discretion, or if a separate agreement is not in effect, each customer shall pay an amount equal to the city's cost of the gas purchased or consumed by the customer, plus an amount per 1,000 cubic feet of gas purchased or consumed by the customer as established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(d)  Minimum monthly charge. The minimum monthly charge shall be in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(e)  Sales tax. State and local sales tax shall be added where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 22, 4-6-1998; Ord. No. 2000-04, 9-5-2000; Ord. No. 2001-012, § 1(22(e)), 11-5-2001; Ord. No. 2002-001, § 1(22(e)), 2-4-2002; Ord. No. 2002-05, § 1(22(e)), 2-3-2003; Ord. No. 2003-07, § 1(22(e)), 11-3-2003) 
Sec. 36-588. - Interruptible natural gas service. 
(a)  Availability. Throughout the city's service area from existing lines of adequate capacity. This service is available to any interruptible user of at least 1,250 Mcf per month on average. 
(b)  Applicability. Applicable to any interruptible user for any purpose exclusive of resale and for service at any one location through one metering point from lines of adequate capacity. Service under this rate schedule is dependent upon the city's having the natural gas supply and capacity in excess of the existing requirements of higher priority customers. A customer without the ability to switch to an alternate fuel during periods when service must be interrupted, in order to maintain service to the city's higher priority customers, must either curtail its consumption of natural gas or be a subscriber to standby service. A customer under this rate schedule is required to execute a separate service agreement with the city. 
(c)  Monthly rate. The monthly charges for this service inside the city and outside the city shall consist of a fixed base service charge plus a volumetric rate, as follows: 
(1)  Base service charge. Each customer, regardless of the amount of gas consumed or purchased, and even if no gas is consumed or purchased, shall pay a service charge in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(2)  Volumetric rate. In addition to the base service charge provided in subsection (c)(1) of this section, each customer shall pay for all gas consumed at a rate as provided for in a separate service agreement with the city, administered by the city manager. 
a.  Calculation. In general, the interruptible volumetric rate is determined monthly according to the rate calculation that all volumes consumed shall be charged at a rate per Mcf, which is the sum of the following components: 
1.  Underlying commodity charge. The first of the month Spot Market Index Price for gas delivered into Transco (50 percent of zone 3 price plus 50 percent of zone 4 price), as posted in "Inside FERC's Gas Market Report;" 
2.  Fuel recovery charge. Applicable fuel retention factor as posted in Transco's FERC approved tariff; 
3.  Interstate pipeline transportation charge. The currently effective market rate for interruptible transportation on Transco's interstate pipeline system; plus 
b.  City distribution charge. 
Mcf Amount per Mcf First 2,000 $1.25 Next 3,000 $0.85 Next 5,000 $0.75 Over 10,000 $0.55  
(d)  Minimum monthly charge. The minimum monthly charge shall be in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution. 
(e)  Sales tax. State and local sales tax shall be added where applicable. 
(f)  Unauthorized use of gas. The city shall have the right at any time, following a one-hour notice, to interrupt or limit the quantity of gas it delivers to a customer under this rate schedule. If a customer refuses to honor the limitation notice, the customer shall pay all pipeline penalty charges incurred by the city for gas consumed, plus the cost of gas. The payment of a penalty charge shall not, under any circumstances, be considered as giving the customer the right to take unauthorized gas. 
(g)  Emergency gas. If a customer finds it impossible to continue operations on standby fuel because of a bona fide emergency during a limitation period, the city may at its sole discretion furnish emergency gas service, upon request, out of its storage or peak shaving facilities. The customer shall pay an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution multiplied by each Mcf delivered under emergency service, plus the cost of gas delivered. The city may discontinue this service at any time. 
(h)  Standby service. Interruptible customers without operational alternate fuel systems, and without the ability to curtail natural gas consumption when ordered by the city, may purchase seasonal firm capacity for each month, November through March. The standby service charge will be in addition to all rate components stated in subsection (c) of this section, and will generally be calculated as follows: 
    The total standby service charge will equal the daily firm Mcf requirement of the customer multiplied by the market price of firm capacity/Mcf multiplied by five (the number of winter months November through March). The specific terms and conditions associated with this service will be established through a separate service agreement, which may vary from the general terms and conditions described in this article. 
(i)  Delivered gas service. Interruptible customers without operational alternate fuel systems, and without the ability to curtail natural gas consumption when ordered by the city, but which do not want to purchase standby service, can elect to purchase a delivered gas service. If a service is available at the time, the Municipal Gas Authority of Georgia will complete this transaction on behalf of the customer. The customer will be required to pay for all costs associated with the delivered gas service in addition to the city distribution charges listed in subsection (c)(2)b of this section for the gas. This service is available at the city's sole discretion, and may be cancelled at any time. 
(j)  Alternate fuel discount. In the event a customer desires to burn an alternate fuel in lieu of natural gas, the city may at its sole discretion discount the delivery charge stated in subsection (i) of this section. The customer must contact the city and provide adequate proof that the delivered price of its alternate fuel is less than the total monthly charge calculated in accordance with the rate structure contained in subsection (c) of this section and that natural gas consumption will be reduced if a discount is not offered. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 22, 4-6-1998; Ord. No. 2000-04, 9-5-2000; Ord. No. 2001-012, § 1(22(f)), 11-5-2001; Ord. No. 2002-001, § 1(22(f)), 2-4-2002; Ord. No. 2002-05, § 1(22(f)), 2-3-2003; Ord. No. 2003-07, § 1(22(f)), 11-3-2003) 
Sec. 36-589. - Subject to change. 
(a)  Mayor and council. The mayor and city council at any regular or special meeting shall have the authority by resolution to increase or decrease the cost of natural gas to any customer of the city, or to change the method by which the cost of natural gas to any one or more classes of customers is calculated. 
(b)  City manager. Further, the city manager shall have the authority to increase or decrease the cost of natural gas to any one or more classes of customers on an interim basis, and to change the method by which the cost of natural gas to any one or more classes of customers is calculated on an interim basis, which change shall remain in effect for a period of 90 days, unless the city council shall rescind the change by resolution duly passed at a regular or special meeting of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 23, 4-6-1998; Ord. No. 2002-05, § 2, 2-3-2003) 
Secs. 36-590-36-611. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EXCAVATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-612. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approximate location of underground utilities means a strip of land at least three feet wide along a designated or marked centerline. 
    Damage includes: 
(1)  The substantial weakening of structural or lateral support of an underground utility; 
(2)  The penetration or destruction of any protective coating, housing or other protective device of an underground utility; and 
(3)  The partial or complete severance of an underground utility. 
    Demolish or demolition means any operation by which a structure or mass of material is wrecked, razed, rendered, moved or removed by means of any tools, equipment or discharge of explosives. 
    Excavate or excavation means an operation for the purpose of the movement or removal of earth, rock or other materials in or on the ground by use of mechanized equipment or by discharge of explosives, including auguring, backfilling, digging, ditching, drilling, grading, plowing-in, pulling-in, ripping, scraping, trenching and tunneling, but not including the tilling of soil for agricultural purposes. 
    Imminent danger to life, health or property means a substantial likelihood that loss of life, health or property will result before the requirements of this article can be fully complied with. 
    Interruptible customer means any industrial customer utilizing more than 5,000 Mcf per billing period and having an alternate energy source. 
    Mechanical equipment means equipment operated by means of mechanical power, including trenchers, bulldozers, power shovels, augers, backhoes, scrapers, drills, cable and pipe plows and other equipment used for plowing-in or pulling-in cable or pipe. 
    Operator means any person who owns or operates a utility. 
    Utility means any line, system or facility used for producing, storing, conveying, transmitting or distributing natural gas. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 3, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 36-613. - Restrictions. 
    Except as provided in this Code, no person may excavate in a street, highway, public space, private easement of an operator or near the location of a utility installed on the premises of a customer or demolish a building without having first ascertained, in the manner provided in this article, the location of all underground city utilities in the area that would be effected by the proposed excavation or demolition. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 5, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 36-614. - Emergency work. 
    Compliance with the notice requirements of division 2 of this article is not required for an emergency excavation or demolition to ameliorate an imminent danger to life, health or property; provided, however, that the persons responsible must give, as soon as practicable, oral notice of the emergency excavation or demolition to the city public works department where the excavation or demolition is to be performed and request emergency assistance from the city gas department in locating and providing immediate protection to its underground utilities. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 8, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 36-615. - Duty of person excavating or demolishing to protect utilities. 
    In addition to the notification requirements of division 2 of this article, each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in this Code shall: 
(1)  Plan the excavation or demolition to avoid damage to or minimize interference with underground utilities in and near the construction area; 
(2)  Maintain a clearance between an underground utility and the cutting edge or point of any mechanized equipment, taking into account the known limit of control of the cutting edge or point, as may be reasonably necessary to avoid damage to the utilities; and 
(3)  Provide the support for underground utilities in and near the construction area, including during backfill operations, as may be reasonably necessary for the protection of the utilities. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 9, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 36-616. - Immediate notice required upon damage to utility. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in this Code that results in any damage to an underground utility shall, immediately upon discovery of the damage, notify the city's director of public works or his designee of the location and nature of the damage and shall allow the operator reasonable time to accomplish necessary repairs before completing the excavation or demolition in the immediate area of the utility. 
(b)  Each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in this Code that results in damage to an underground utility permitting the escape of any flammable, toxic or corrosive gas or liquid shall, immediately upon discovery of the damage, notify the operator, police and fire departments and take any other action as may be reasonably necessary to protect persons and property and to minimize the hazards until arrival of the operator's personnel or police and fire departments. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 10, 4-6-1998) 
Secs. 36-617-36-635. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NOTICE 

Sec. 36-636. - Intent to excavate or demolish. 
(a)  Required. Except as otherwise provided in this article, before commencing any excavation or demolition operation, the person responsible for the excavation or demolition shall serve written or telephone notice of the intent to excavate or demolish at least three but not more than ten full working days to the city's director of public works or his designee. 
(b)  Contents. The written or telephone notice must contain: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person filing the notice of intent, and if different, the person responsible for the excavation or demolition; 
(2)  The starting date, anticipated duration and type of excavation or demolition operation to be conducted; 
(3)  The location of the proposed excavation or demolition; and 
(4)  Whether explosives are to be used. 
(c)  Record of telephone notice required. If the notification required by this section is made by telephone, an adequate record of the notification shall be maintained by the city public works department to document compliance with the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 6, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 36-637. - Information provided by city. 
    The city public works department shall within two working days after receipt of the notice of intent, unless a shorter period is provided by agreement between the person responsible for the excavation or demolition and the operator or the city's representative, supply by appropriate means the following information to the person responsible for the excavation or demolition: 
(1)  The approximate location and description of all of its underground utilities that may be damaged as a result of the excavation or demolition; 
(2)  The location and description of all temporary utility markers indicating the approximate location of the underground utilities in the area of excavation or demolition activity before, as far as practical, the activity begins; and 
(3)  Any other information that would assist that person in locating and thereby avoiding damage to the underground utilities. 
(Ord. No. 98-001, § 7, 4-6-1998) 
Chapter 38 - VEGETATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREES 

Sec. 38-19. - Prohibited acts. 
    No person shall, without the owner's consent in the case of a tree or shrub on private property or without permission from the committee in the case of a tree or shrub on city property, do any of the following acts: 
(1)  Secure, fasten or run any rope, wire, sign or other device or material to, around or through a tree or shrub. 
(2)  Break, injure, mutilate, deface, kill or destroy any tree or shrub or permit any fire to burn where it will injure any tree or shrub. 
(3)  Permit any toxic chemical, gas, smoke, brine, oil or other injurious substance to seep, drain or be emptied upon any tree or shrub. 
(4)  Place any stone, concrete, brick or any other impervious material in such a manner as to obstruct the free access of air and water to the roots of the tree or shrub. 
(Comp. 1976, § 17-125; Code 1989, § 15-4; Ord. of 10-1-1983, § 4) 
Sec. 38-20. - Report on removal application. 
(a)  Required; recommendation to be included. The street tree committee shall report to the city council on each application to remove a tree or shrub. Each report shall include a recommendation of approval or disapproval of the application. 
(b)  City council action. After the street tree committee has submitted the report and its recommendation the city council shall approve or disapprove such application in writing. 
(Code 1989, § 15-4.1; Ord. of 11-6-1995) 
Chapter 40 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 40-1-40-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 40-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Driver means the individual actually driving the taxicab. 
    Highway means any of the public streets, boulevards, avenues, drives or alleys of the city. 
    Permit means the written authority granted by the city council to engage in the taxicab business in the city. 
    Taxicab means a motor-driven vehicle, operated for hire, the destination of which is under the direction of the passenger transported therein. 
(Comp. 1976, § 18-203; Code 1989, § 17-20; Ord. of 8-15-1949, § 1) 
Sec. 40-20. - Penalties. 
    Any owner or driver violating any provision of this article shall, at the city council's option, have such person's permit or license, or both, revoked and shall be punished as provided in general penalty section 1-9. 
(Code 1989, § 17-37; Ord. of 8-15-1949, § 20) 
Secs. 40-21-40-46. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OPERATOR'S PERMIT 

Sec. 40-47. - Required. 
    No person shall operate taxicabs upon the city highways until a permit has been granted as provided in this article. 
(Comp. 1976, § 18-203; Code 1989, § 17-21; Ord. of 8-15-1949, § 3) 
Sec. 40-48. - Application. 
(a)  Required. Any person desiring to engage in the business of operating taxicabs shall first make an application to the city council for a permit to operate such vehicles on the city highways. The application shall be in writing on the form provided by the clerk and shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(b)  Contents. The application shall contain the full name and address of the applicant and if the applicant is a corporation, the names of its officers. It shall state: 
(1)  The location from which the business is to be operated; 
(2)  The type of equipment to be used; 
(3)  The maximum number of passengers each vehicle is manufactured to carry; 
(4)  The number of vehicles to be operated; and 
(5)  Any other information requested by the city council. 
(Comp. 1976, § 18-203; Code 1989, § 17-22; Ord. of 8-15-1949, § 2) 
Sec. 40-49. - City council action. 
(a)  Hearing; factors to consider. Upon the filing of such application, the city council shall fix a time and place for a public hearing thereon. At such public hearing, the city council shall hear evidence for or against the granting of the permit. In granting or refusing the permit the city council shall take into consideration: 
(1)  The number of taxicab businesses operating within the city; 
(2)  The convenience and necessity of the public; and 
(3)  The financial responsibility of the applicant. 
(b)  Next regularly scheduled meeting. After consideration, the city council shall, at its next regular meeting, and at its discretion, either grant or deny the application. 
(c)  Issuance of permit. If the application is granted the city clerk shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(Comp. 1976, § 18-203; Code 1989, § 17-23; Ord. of 8-15-1949, § 3) 
Sec. 40-50. - Nontransferable. 
    Any permit issued under this article shall not be sold, assigned, transferred, leased or mortgaged by the person to whom issued. 
(Comp. 1976, § 18-203; Code 1989, § 17-24; Ord. of 8-15-1949, § 4) 
Sec. 40-51. - Driver list; compliance with law by driver. 
    Any person operating a taxicab service shall furnish the police chief with the names and addresses of all drivers, and shall notify the police chief in writing within five days of the name of any driver who has left the service of such company. No person shall allow any person to drive taxicabs without the driver having first complied with the provisions of this article and state law. 
(Comp. 1976, § 18-203; Code 1989, § 17-25; Ord. of 8-15-1949, § 9) 
Sec. 40-52. - Driver to be owner or employee; securing proper licenses. 
    Only the owner of the vehicle, or his duly authorized employee, shall drive any vehicle regulated by this article. No vehicle shall be operated under the provisions of this article unless the proper licenses have been obtained therefor. 
(Comp. 1976, § 18-203; Code 1989, § 17-34; Ord. of 8-15-1949, § 11) 
Sec. 40-53. - Prohibited acts. 
    It shall be a violation of this article for any owner or driver of a taxicab to: 
(1)  Engage in the selling or transporting of alcoholic beverages; 
(2)  Transport any person who is in the possession of any alcoholic beverage; 
(3)  Engage in the furtherance of, or to use the vehicle for, any immoral purpose; or 
(4)  Use the vehicle for any purpose other than that of transporting passengers. 
(Comp. 1976, § 18-203; Code 1989, § 17-35; Ord. of 8-15-1949, § 12) 
Sec. 40-54. - Complaint procedure. 
(a)  Notice. Upon receiving a complaint that any owner has violated any of the provisions of this article, the city council shall notify the person to whom such permit was issued by registered or certified mail at the last known address of the time and place for a hearing, setting forth the complaint made, and shall cite the person to show cause that the permit should not be revoked. 
(b)  Hearing. At the time and place set forth for the hearing the person shall have the right to introduce such evidence in such person's defense as is deemed necessary. Likewise, the city council shall hear evidence and either dismiss the proceedings against the person or order that such permit and any license be revoked. If such person shall fail to appear at the time and place set for a hearing the city council shall proceed with the hearing the same as if the person were represented. 
(Comp. 1976, § 18-203; Code 1989, § 17-32; Ord. of 8-15-1949, § 15) 
Secs. 40-55-40-74. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRIVER'S PERMIT 

Sec. 40-75. - Required; application. 
    All drivers, before they shall drive a taxicab upon the city highways, shall make a written application to the police chief for and obtain a driver's permit. 
(Comp. 1976, § 18-203; Code 1989, § 17-26; Ord. of 8-15-1949, § 5) 
Sec. 40-76. - Description sheet; health certificate. 
    Upon filing such application the applicant shall be required to fill out and file with the police chief a personal description sheet containing such information as the chief may require. Each application shall be accompanied by a certificate from a reputable city physician certifying that, in such physician's opinion, the applicant is not afflicted with any disease or infirmity which might make such person an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver of a public vehicle. 
(Comp. 1976, § 18-203; Code 1989, § 17-27; Ord. of 8-15-1949, § 5) 
Sec. 40-77. - Investigation of applicant; temporary permit. 
    The police chief shall make an investigation of the applicant and a copy of the traffic, criminal and police records of the applicant, if any, together with a recommendation, shall be attached to the application and forwarded to the city council. The police chief is authorized, after such investigation, and in such officer's discretion, to grant temporary permits to drivers, which temporary permits shall be valid until the next regular city council meeting. 
(Comp. 1976, § 18-203; Code 1989, § 17-28; Ord. of 8-15-1949, § 6) 
Sec. 40-78. - Hearing. 
    The city council at such regular meeting shall hear all applications for drivers' permits. At such hearing the applicant may appear personally before the city council and present such evidence as such applicant deems necessary for the granting of such permits. 
(Comp. 1976, § 18-203; Code 1989, § 17-29; Ord. of 8-15-1949, § 7) 
Sec. 40-79. - Determination; grounds for denial. 
    The city council, after hearing all the evidence and seeing the police chief's report shall, at its discretion, grant or refuse the permit. The city clerk, in the event the application is granted, is then authorized to issue to the applicant a driver's permit. However, no applicant shall be granted a permit where it is shown that the applicant: 
(1)  Is under 21 years of age; 
(2)  Is of bad moral character; 
(3)  Is mentally or physically incompetent to operate a public vehicle; or 
(4)  Has not obtained a proper driver's license from the state. 
(Comp. 1976, § 18-203; Code 1989, § 17-30; Ord. of 8-15-1949, § 8) 
Sec. 40-80. - Driver's compliance with state and city law required; duty to drive safely. 
    The driver of a taxicab shall drive the same in accordance with state laws and city ordinances. The driver shall have due regard for the safety, comfort and convenience of the passengers, and for the safe and careful transportation of property and the safety of the general public. 
(Comp. 1976, § 18-203; Code 1989, § 17-36; Ord. of 8-15-1949, § 14) 
Sec. 40-81. - Suspension or revocation; hearing. 
(a)  The chief of police is hereby given the authority to: 
(1)  Suspend any driver's permit for any length of time not exceeding 60 days as a result of such driver failing or refusing to comply with the provisions of this article; or 
(2)  Cite the driver before the city council for the purpose of having such driver's permit revoked. 
(b)  After hearing evidence on the same, the city council shall either dismiss the proceedings or order that such permit be revoked. 
(Comp. 1976, § 18-203; Code 1989, § 17-31; Ord. of 8-15-1949, § 16) 
Sec. 40-82. - Regulation of rates and charges. 
    The city council reserves the right, at any time, to regulate the rates and fares to be charged by taxicabs in the city. 
(Comp. 1976, § 18-203; Code 1989, § 17-33; Ord. of 8-15-1949, § 10) 
Chapter 42 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Downtown development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq.; municipal business improvement districts, O.C.G.A. § 36-43-1 et seq.; redevelopment authority of municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-44-1 city and county development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; county and municipal urban development, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-1 et seq.; city and county zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local zoning proposal review procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-67-1 et seq.; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; coordinated and comprehensive planning and service delivery by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Definitions. 
    When used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section. 
    Abandonment means the cessation of the use of the property by the owner or lessee without any intention of transferring rights to the property to another owner or of resuming the use of the property. 
    Abutting means having property or district lines in common, or having property separated by only an alley. Separation by a street right-of-way is not considered abutting. 
    Accessory apartment means a second dwelling unit either in or added to an existing owner-occupied single-family dwelling, for use as a complete, independent living facility for a single housekeeping unit, with provision within the accessory apartment for cooking, eating, sanitation and sleeping. Such a dwelling is considered an accessory use or structure to the main dwelling that shall not be rented. 
    Accessory building or use means: 
(1)  A building that is not more than two stories in height; 
(2)  A use that is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use; 
(3)  A use that is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building or use served; 
(4)  Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of the occupants of the principal building or principal use; and 
(5)  Is located on the same lot as the principal building or principal use. 
    Adaptive reuse means the development of a new use for an older building or for a building originally designed for a specific purpose. 
    Agriculture means the cultivation or growth of a field or horticultural crop, including dairying, livestock and poultry raising, farm forestry, and other similar enterprises or uses. 
    Airport means any area of land, water or mechanical structure which is used for the landing and takeoff of aircraft, including any appurtenant structures and areas which are used or intended to be used for airport buildings, other airport facilities, rights-of-way or easements. 
    Alley means a private or public thoroughfare that affords only a secondary means of access to a building or abutting property and is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Alteration means: 
(1)  Any change in the supporting members of a building; 
(2)  Any modification or change in construction; 
(3)  Any addition which increases the area or height; or 
(4)  Any change in use from that of one district classification to another. 
    Amusement arcade means a building or part of a building in which three or more pinball machines, coin-operated billiard tables, video games or other similar player-operated amusement devices are maintained. 
    Amusement park means a facility, primarily outdoors, that may include structures and buildings, where there are various devices for entertainment, including: 
(1)  Rides; 
(2)  Booths for the conduct of games or sale of items; 
(3)  Buildings or structures for shows and entertainment; and 
(4)  Food services and souvenir sales areas. 
    Animal hospital means a facility operated by a licensed veterinarian specifically for the practice of veterinary medicine. 
    Antique shop means a store or shop for the sale of relics, objects of ancient times or of an earlier period, works of art, pieces of furniture or decorative objects made at a much earlier period than present. 
    Apartment house means a multifamily dwelling located on a parcel of land under a single ownership, designed for use by three or more housekeeping units, living independently of each other, and doing their own cooking on the premises. 
    Art gallery means a facility, structure or building used for the display of sculptures, paintings, photographs or other artistic works for public viewing with only incidental sales. 
    Auction house means a place where objects of art, furniture and other goods are offered for sale to persons who bid on the object in competition with each other. 
    Automated teller means an accessory facility through which certain banking functions such as deposits and withdrawals can be completed without the personal assistance of a bank employee. 
    Automobile sales lot means an area of land on which more than one car, truck, van, boat, agricultural vehicle or implement, motorcycle, recreational vehicle or other motorized vehicle exists, and where such vehicles are indicated as for sale, as evidenced by "for sale" signs, dealer tags, warranty signs in windows or other such indications. 
    Automotive repair garage means a use of land or structures involving maintenance, repair, conversion and other such services on cars, trucks, boats, motorcycles, recreational vehicles and mobile/manufactured homes, typically including vehicle storage and incidental sales of parts. Also referred to as automotive services. 
    Bed and breakfast inn means a dwelling unit, or portion thereof, where short-term lodging rooms, with or without meals, are provided for compensation, and where the operator of the inn resides on the premises. 
    Berm means an earthen structure used as a screening device in conjunction with the planning of grass, shrubbery and trees. 
    Biomedical waste means: 
(1)  Pathological waste; 
(2)  Biological waste cultures and stocks of infectious agents and associated biologicals; 
(3)  Contaminated animal carcasses (body parts, their bedding and other wastes from such animals); 
(4)  Sharps; 
(5)  Chemotherapy waste; and 
(6)  Discarded medical equipment and parts. 
    Boardinghouse means a dwelling unit or part thereof in which, for compensation, lodging and meals are provided; personal services may be offered as well. 
    Broadcasting studio means a room of suite or rooms operated as a radio or television broadcasting studio or station with local broadcast capability or intended for satellite distribution of programs. 
    Buffer means: 
(1)  A landscaped open space or screen located between incompatible land uses for the purpose of visibly separating uses through distance and to shield or block noise, light, glare, or visual or other nuisances; 
(2)  The portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, pavement, parking, access and service areas, established for the purpose of screening and separating properties with incompatible land uses, the width of which is measured from the common property line and extending the developed portion of the common property line; and 
(3)  A buffer consisting of trees, shrubs and other natural vegetation undisturbed by grading or site development and replanted where sparsely vegetated or where disturbed for approved access and utility crossings. 
    Buildable area means the portion of a lot remaining after required yards, buffers and building setbacks have been provided, where construction of principal buildings is permitted. Also known as "building envelope." 
    Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, above or below ground, having a roof or other covering, and designed, built, or used as a shelter or enclosure for persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
    Building inspector means the city building inspector or his authorized representative. 
    Building, principal, means a building or structure in which is conducted the main use of the property on which the building or structure is located. In any residential district, any structure containing a dwelling unit shall be defined to be the principal building on the lot on which said structure is located. 
    Building setback line means a line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the main or front wall of a building, including any covered porches, and the street right-of-way or property line when measured perpendicularly thereto. 
    Bus terminal means an area and building where buses stop to load and unload passengers and luggage or packages and which may include the sale of bus tickets. 
    Carport means an accessory structure or portion of a principal structure, consisting of a roof and supporting members such as columns or beams, unenclosed from the ground to the roof on at least two sides, and designed or used for the storage of motor vehicles or boats. 
    Carwash means an establishment engaged in the business of washing vehicles with self-serve automated or staffed facilities. 
    Cemetery. 
(1)  The term "cemetery" means land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes. 
(2)  The term "cemetery" does not include crematories and mortuaries. 
    Centerline of street means that line surveyed and monumented by the city and designated as the center of a public street. If a centerline has not been surveyed, it shall be the line running midway between the outside curbs, ditches, right-of-way edges, or pavement edges of such street. 
    Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
    Certificate of occupancy means a legal statement or document issued by the building inspector indicating that the building and use or reuse of a particular building or land is in conformity with all applicable codes and regulations, and that such building or land may be occupied for the purpose stated therein. 
    Change of use means any use that substantially differs from the previous use of a building or land. 
    Church means an institution that people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services, meetings and other purposes, including education, day care and recreation facilities when owned and operated by such church. 
    Circus means the temporary use of land offering entertainment and instruction in the form of such things as thrill rides, games of chance and skill, educational exhibits, display of oddities and the like. The term "circus" also includes carnivals and fairs. 
    City engineer means the engineer or engineering firm in the employ of the city, or its authorized representative. 
    Clinic means a building designed and used for the diagnosis and treatment of patients that does not include overnight care facilities. 
    Club, nonprofit, means a building or facilities owned or operated by a group for social, educational or recreational purposes, but not customarily for profit or to render a service that is customarily carried on for gain. 
    Commercial recreation facility means any use of a building and/or land that involves the provision of sports and leisure activities to the general public for a fee including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Amphitheaters and stadiums; 
(2)  Assembly halls, auditoriums and meeting halls; 
(3)  Billiard halls, poolrooms and amusement/video arcades; 
(4)  Bowling alleys; 
(5)  Firearms shooting ranges and turkey shoots; 
(6)  Golf driving ranges, public golf courses, miniature golf courses and baseball batting cages; 
(7)  Private clubs operated for profit, racetracks for animals and motor-driven vehicles, ice and roller skating rinks; 
(8)  Horse and pony-riding rinks; 
(9)  Circuses and carnivals; 
(10)  Indoor and drive-in theaters; 
(11)  Physical fitness facilities and health clubs; 
(12)  Botanical gardens and zoological gardens; 
(13)  Commercial museums and art galleries; 
(14)  Racquetball courts; and 
(15)  Bungee jumping. 
    Compatibility means the characteristics of different uses or activities that permit such uses or activities to be located near each other in harmony and without conflict. Some elements affecting compatibility include: 
(1)  Intensity of occupancy as measured by dwelling units per acre or gross square footage per acre; 
(2)  Pedestrian or vehicular traffic generated; 
(3)  Volume of goods handled; and 
(4)  Such environmental effects as noise, vibration, odor, glare, air pollution or radiation. 
    Comprehensive plan means: 
(1)  Those coordinated plans or portions thereof which have been prepared by or for the city for the physical development of the jurisdiction; or 
(2)  Any plans that designate plans or programs to encourage the most appropriate use of the land in the interest of public health, safety and welfare. 
    Conditional use means a use (principal and, in some cases, accessory) which would not be appropriate without restriction throughout a zoning district and is not automatically permitted by right within a zoning district, but which may be permitted within a zoning district subject to meeting specific conditions (such as controls on number, size, area, location and activities) contained in these regulations or required by the city. Such uses may be permitted only if approved by the city in accordance with the regulations established in this chapter. 
    Conditional zoning means the granting or adoption of zoning for property subject to compliance with restrictions as to use, size, density or actions stipulated by the city to mitigate adverse impacts that are anticipated without imposition of such conditions. 
    Condominium (residential building) means a building or complex of multiple-unit dwellings in which a tenant holds full title to his unit and joint ownership in the common grounds. 
    Continuing care retirement community means an age restricted development or facility that provides, to individuals of retirement status, accommodations and care such as board, independent living, licensed nursing care and medical or other health-related services, and that typically enters into contracts to provide care. 
    Contractor's establishment means an establishment engaged in the provision of construction activities including, but not limited to, plumbing, electrical work, building, paving, carpentry and other such contracting activities, including the storage of materials and the overnight parking of commercial vehicles. 
    Convalescent home means a home for the care of children or the aged or infirmed, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, wherein two or more persons are professionally cared for. 
    Convenience store means a small retail store which sells prepackaged food products, household items and other items and which may include the sale of gasoline and diesel fuel. 
    Conversion means any change in the original use or purpose of a building or lot to a different use. 
    Curb cut means a provision for vehicular ingress and/or egress between property and an abutting public street. 
    Day care center means any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution or group wherein are received for pay for group care, for fewer than 24 hours per day without transfer of legal custody, seven or more children under 18 years of age. A day care center of six children or less may be considered to be a home occupation. 
    Density means the number of dwelling units developed, or to be developed, per gross acre of land, or the gross square footage of a building per acre of land. 
    Development means any manmade change on improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
    Developmentally disabled person means a person with a disability resulting in substantial functional limitations in such person's major life activities, which disability is attributable to mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy or autism or is attributable to any other condition related to mental retardation because such condition results in the impairment of general intellectual functioning or adaptive behavior similar to that of mentally retarded persons. 
    District, zoning, means a geographical area designated with the use of symbols on the official zoning map, wherein uses of land are restricted in type, size, height and other limitations as established in these regulations. 
    Dormitory means a building, the primary purpose of which is to provide living accommodations for individuals, but does not include individual kitchen facilities. 
    Drive-in means a retail or service enterprise wherein service is provided to the customer who is within a motor vehicle on the outside of the principal building. 
    Drive-in theater means a facility designed for the outdoor projection of motion pictures onto a permanent screen to be viewed from the patron's automobile. 
    Dry cleaners means an establishment engaged in providing laundry, dyeing and dry cleaning services to individual customers. 
    Dry cleaning plant means an establishment engaged in providing laundry, dyeing and dry cleaning services on a large scale for institutions, businesses or other such establishments. 
    Dwelling means a building, or portion thereof, designed, arranged or used for permanent living, and/or sleeping quarters. 
    Dwelling, multifamily. 
(1)  The term "multifamily dwelling" means a building designed for or occupied exclusively by three or more single housekeeping units with separate kitchen and bath facilities for each family or housekeeping unit, including apartment houses, row houses, townhouses and similar housing types. 
(2)  The term "multifamily dwelling" does not including motels, hotels, lodginghouses, hospitals, nursing homes or public institutions such as prisons and mental institutions. 
    Dwelling, single-family, means a building designed or arranged to be occupied by one single housekeeping unit only. 
    Dwelling, two-family (duplex), means a building designed or arranged to be occupied by two single housekeeping units living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling unit. 
(1)  The term "dwelling unit" means a building, or portion thereof, designed, arranged and used for living quarters for one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit with cooking facilities. 
(2)  The term "dwelling unit" does not include units in hotels or other structures designed for transient residence. 
    Easement means: 
(1)  A nonpossessory interest in land; and 
(2)  A grant by a property owner for the use by the public, a corporation or person, of a portion of land for a specified purpose. 
    Emergency shelter means a facility providing temporary housing for one or more individuals who are otherwise temporarily or permanently homeless. 
    Enlargement means an increase in the size of an existing structure or use, including the physical size of the property, building, parking and other improvements. 
    Erect means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix. 
    Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of the building or other structure including, but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
    Exterior environmental features mean all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site that affect the historical character of the property. 
    Exterminator means an establishment or person engaged in the service of killing insects, mice, rats or other pests. 
    Family means an individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship, or a group of not more than five unrelated persons, occupying a single dwelling unit and using the same cooking facilities; provided, however, that domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as a separate family. The term "family" includes any group that is licensed by the state, or any political subdivision thereof, which contains up to six developmentally disabled persons and up to two supervisors or surrogate parents residing on the premises at one time. 
    Farm means an area of land principally devoted to agriculture. 
    Farm supply store means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of animal feeds, fertilizers, agricultural chemicals, pesticides, seeds and other such farm supplies. 
    Fence means: 
(1)  A structural barrier for enclosure, screening or demarcation presenting a solid face or having openings amongst or between its constituents members; and 
(2)  A wall separate from or extending from a building. 
    Finance, insurance and real estate establishments includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Banks, savings and loan institutions and credit unions; 
(2)  Security and commodity exchanges; 
(3)  Insurance agents, brokers and service; 
(4)  Real estate brokers, agents, managers and developers; 
(5)  Trusts; and 
(6)  Holding and investment companies. 
    Flea market means the use of land, structure or buildings for the sale of produce or new or used goods, usually of second quality or at cut-rate prices, in which more than two vendors are accommodated in spaces on the same lot or within the same building. 
    Floor area means the gross heated, finished horizontal area of the floor of a dwelling unit, exclusive of the basement, attic, carport or garage. 
    Funeral home means a building or part thereof used for human funeral services, which may contain space and facilities for: 
(1)  Embalming and the performance of other services used in preparation of the dead for burial; 
(2)  The performance of autopsies; 
(3)  The storage of caskets; and 
(4)  Chapel services. 
    Garage means an accessory building or portion of a principal building used only for the private storage of motor vehicles and other personal property as an accessory use. 
    Glare means a sensation of brightness within the visual field that causes annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual performance and visibility. 
    Grade means the average of the finished ground levels at the center of all walls of a building. 
    Greenhouse. 
(1)  The term "greenhouse" means a building designed or used for growing or propagating plants with walls or a roof usually designed to transmit light. 
(2)  The term "greenhouse" does not include commercial horticultural activities. 
    Guesthouse means a lodging unit for temporary guests in an accessory building. No such lodging unit shall contain independent cooking or kitchen facilities and shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling. 
    Hazardous waste means any solid waste that is capable of posing a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of or otherwise, based on factors set forth in applicable regulations of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
    Height, building, means the vertical distance measured from the grade: 
(1)  To the highest point of the coping of a flat roof; 
(2)  To the declines of a mansard roof; or 
(3)  To the mean height level between the eaves and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. 
    Heliport means an area, either at ground level or elevated on a structure, licensed or approved for the landing and taking off of helicopters, and including auxiliary facilities such as parking, waiting room, or fueling and maintenance equipment. 
    Helistop means a heliport, but without auxiliary facilities such as parking, waiting room, fueling and maintenance equipment. 
    Historic district means a geographically definable area designated as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established by chapter 20. 
    Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, object or work of art including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof, designated by the city as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established by chapter 20. 
    Home occupation means any occupation or profession engaged in by any occupant of a dwelling. 
    Hospital means an institution providing health services, for inpatients and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, including as an integral part of the institution, such related facilities as laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, central service facilities and staff offices. 
    Hotel means a public commercial lodging facility intended for use as temporary residence which may make provisions for meals, entertainment and various personal services provided for compensation to persons traveling for business, tourism or other visitation purposes in which ingress and egress from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. 
    Household pet means an animal which is customarily kept for company or pleasure within a home or yard which is not exhibited to the public and raised for commercial purposes, (e.g., "show dogs"). The term "household pets" include domestic canines, felines, tropical birds, fish, rabbits, rodents and other animals customarily sold in pet stores. 
    Impervious surface means any material that substantially reduces or prevents the infiltration of stormwater into previously undeveloped land. 
(1)  The term "impervious surface" includes, but is not limited to, buildings, paved roads, parking lots and driveways, decks, swimming pools and patios. 
(2)  The term "impervious surface" does not include graveled driveways and parking areas. 
    Inoperable vehicle means any motorized vehicle, other than those vehicles temporarily disabled, incapable of immediately being driven. The term "inoperable vehicle" includes any motorized vehicle without a current vehicle registration tag. 
    Junk means any scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris, whether or not stored, for sale or in the process of being dismantled, destroyed, processed, salvaged, stored, baled, disposed, or other use or disposition. The term "junk" includes inoperable vehicles, tires, vehicle parts, equipment, paper, rags, metal, glass, building materials, household appliances, machinery, brush, wood and lumber. 
    Junkyard/salvage yard means any property involving the abandonment, parking, storage or disassembly of junk including inoperable vehicles or junked machinery, the abandonment, storage, sale, or resale of used auto parts, tires, scrap iron, metal, used plumbing fixtures, old stoves, refrigerators and/or other old household appliances, used brick, wood, or other building/structural materials, used paper, rags or other scrap materials. 
    Kennel means the housing, breeding, boarding or training of four or more dogs, cats or other domestic animals, operated for the purpose of providing income or revenue. 
    Laboratory. 
(1)  The term "laboratory" means a place devoted to experimental study, such as testing and analyzing. 
(2)  The term "laboratory" does not include the manufacturing of products. 
    Land disturbing activity. 
(1)  The term "land disturbing activity" means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state water or onto lands of the state including, but not limited to: 
a.  The clearing, dredging, grading, scraping, excavating, transporting or filling of land; and 
b.  Any construction, rebuilding or alteration of a structure. 
(2)  The term "land disturbing activity" does not include agricultural and gardening practices. 
    Landfill. 
(1)  The term "landfill" means an area wherein solid wastes are placed, under license, compacted and covered. 
(2)  The term "landfill" does not include hazardous or radioactive wastes. 
    Landscape strip means that portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, pavement, parking, access and service areas, established as landscaped open space, the width of which is measured from a given property line and extending the developed portion of the property line. A landscape strip, as distinguished from a buffer, may be disturbed by grading or side development but is maintained as landscaped open space. The term "landscape strip" includes grass lawns, decorative planting, berms, walls, fences or other features designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically pleasing effect within and outside of the development. 
    Landscaping means changing, rearranging or adding to the original vegetation or scenery of a piece of land to produce an aesthetic effect appropriate for the use to which the land is put. The term "landscaping" includes reshaping the land by moving the earth, as well as preserving the original vegetation. 
    Landscaping service means an establishment engaged in performing a variety of lawn and landscaping services such as lawn fertilizing, mowing, spraying and planting, and the planting and maintenance of landscaping. 
    Laundromat means a business that provides home-type washing and drying machines for hire to be used by customers on the premises. 
    Library means a building in which literary, musical, artistic or reference materials are kept for use but not generally for sale. 
    Loading and unloading space means a space, typically with dimensions of 12 feet by 60 feet, logically and conveniently located for pickups and/or deliveries or for loading and/or unloading, scaled to delivery vehicles to be used, and accessible to such vehicles. 
    Lodginghouse means a fraternity house, sorority house, dormitory or other such building designed and occupied, with or without separate kitchen or housekeeping facilities for each unit. 
    Lot means: 
(1)  A parcel of land having principal frontage on a public street; 
(2)  A developed or undeveloped tract of land in one ownership legally transferable as a single unit of land. 
    Lot area means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of public street rights-of-way but inclusive of easements. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
    Lot coverage. 
(1)  The term "lot coverage" means the part or percent of a lot occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory buildings and structures. 
(2)  The term "lot coverage" does not include unenclosed parking areas. 
    Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance from the front lot line to the rear lot line. 
    Lot, double frontage, means any lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on two streets that do not intersect at a point abutting the property. 
    Lot, flag, means a tract or lot of land of uneven dimensions in which the portion fronting on a public street is less than the required minimum width for construction of a building or structure on that lot. 
    Lot frontage means the width in linear feet of a lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
    Lot of record means: 
(1)  A lot that is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the records of the county superior court clerk; or 
(2)  A parcel of land, the deed of which has been recorded in the county superior court clerk's office as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which these regulations are derived. 
    Lot width means the horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at the minimum required front yard (regulatory front building setback) line. 
    Mail order office. 
(1)  The term "mail order office" means an establishment that engages in the taking of requests for mail order or telephone or facsimile machine for catalog merchandise. 
(2)  The term "mail order office" does not include: 
a.  The storage or distribution of catalog merchandise. 
b.  An establishment where orders are picked up or taken in person. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, built to conform to national standards embodied in the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 USC 5401 et seq.) administered by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body-feet or more in width or 40 body-feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes mandatory plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. A manufactured home displays a certificate from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
    Manufactured home park means a parcel of land under single ownership which has been planned or improved for the placement of two or more manufactured homes for residential use, including land, buildings and facilities used by the occupants of manufactured homes on such property. 
    Manufactured home space means a parcel of land within a manufactured home park that is reserved or leased for the placement of an individual mobile home and accessory structures for the exclusive use of its occupants. 
    Manufactured home subdivision means parcels of land planned or improved for the placement of manufactured homes on individual lots for residential use. 
    Manufacturing, processing and assembling means the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products. The term "manufacturing, processing and assembling" includes: 
(1)  Land uses described as plants, factories or mills and characteristically use power driven machines and materials handling equipment; 
(2)  Establishments engaged in assembling component parts of manufactured products if the new product is neither a fixed structure nor other fixed improvement; and 
(3)  The blending of materials such as lubricating oils, plastic resins or liquors. 
    Marina means a facility for the storing, servicing, fueling, berthing and securing of boats. 
    Marquee means a permanent roof-like structure made of metal or other durable material affixed to the wall of a building. 
    Material change in appearance means: 
(1)  A change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, landscape feature or work of art within a historic district, such as a reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible for the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements or other appurtenant features. 
    Materials recovery facility means a solid waste handling facility that provides for the extraction from solid waste of recoverable materials, materials suitable for use as a fuel or soil amendment, or any combination of such materials. 
    Metes and bounds means a system of describing and identifying land by distances or measures (metes) and bearings or direction (bounds) from an identifiable point of reference, such as a monument or other marker or the corner of intersecting streets. 
    Miniwarehouse means a building or group of buildings that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized stalls or lockers used for storage. The term "miniwarehouse" also means a self-service storage facility. 
(1)  The term "miniwarehouse" includes any accessory office or night watchman's residence. 
(2)  The term "miniwarehouse" does not include retail sale on the premises, commercial repair or other services, manufacturing or any other commercial use. 
    Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections that in the traveling mode, is eight body-feet or more in width or 40 body-feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. 
    Mobile home park means a parcel of land or any portion thereof under single ownership that has been designed, planned or improved for the placement of two or more mobile homes for residential use, including land, buildings and facilities used by the occupants of mobile homes on such property. 
    Modular structure means a factory-fabricated, transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated on a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential or commercial purposes and which bears a seal of compliance with regulations of either the Southern Building Code Congress International or the Georgia Industrialized Building Act. 
    Motel means a public commercial lodging facility intended for use as temporary residence, which may also include the provision of meals, entertainment and various personal services, provided for compensation to persons traveling for business, tourism or other visitation purposes, distinguished from a hotel in that ingress and/or egress to and from all rooms is made primarily from an exterior walkway rather than from an interior lobby. 
    Museum means an establishment engaged in the procurement, care, study and display of objects of historical, educational and cultural value and interest. 
    Nonconforming lot means a lot, the area, width or other characteristic of which fails to meet requirements of the zoning district in which it is located and which was of record as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which these regulations are derived. Any lot that was subsequently annexed into the city limits which does not meet the requirements of the particular zoning district shall also be considered a nonconforming lot. 
    Nonconforming structure means any building or structure that does not conform to the regulations governing the bulk, location, height or size of buildings or structures permitted in the district. 
    Nonconforming use means any building or use of land or building lawfully existing at the date of adoption of the ordinance from which these regulations are derived or as a result of subsequent amendments to these regulations, which does not conform to the permitted use provisions established in this chapter for the district in which it is located. 
    Nuisance means: 
(1)  Anything that interferes with the use or enjoyment of property, endangers public health or safety, or is offensive to the senses; or 
(2)  Anything that causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another even though it may otherwise be lawful. 
    Nursing home means a long-term care facility that admits patients by medical referral and provides for continuous medical supervision via 24-hour-a-day nursing care and related services in addition to food, shelter, and personal care. A nursing home may be licensed as a skilled nursing facility, an intermediate care facility or an intermingled facility. 
    Off-street means not located on a street as defined by this section. 
    Office means a building or portion thereof wherein predominantly administrative, professional or clerical operations are performed, and not involving retail sales or other sales of any kind on the premises. 
    Official zoning map means the map, which accompanies this chapter text and is on file in the city clerk's office, that delineates the geographic location of the boundaries of the zoning districts established in this chapter in relation to natural features, manmade features and/or property uses. 
    Open air business means any commercial establishment that displays products in a nonenclosed area. 
    Open space, landscaped, means that portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, pavement, parking, access and service areas, set aside and maintained as a buffer, landscape strip or other approved open area. 
    Outdoor display. 
(1)  The term "outdoor display" means the keeping of any goods, junk, material or merchandise outside of a business, building or establishment or in an area visible from a public street, for display, advertisement or purposes of attracting rental or sales. 
(2)  The term "outdoor display" does not include the temporary loading or unloading of such goods, junk, material or merchandise to or from an enclosed area. 
    Outdoor storage means the keeping of any goods, junk, material, merchandise or commercial vehicles in the same outdoor place for more than 24 hours. 
    Parking lot means any public or private open area used for the express purpose of temporary parking of private motor vehicles. A parking lot may be the principal use on a given lot or an accessory use to the principal use on a given lot. 
    Parking space means an area having an area of at least 160 square feet, or 300 square feet including maneuvering space within a parking lot, to be used exclusively as a temporary parking space for a motor vehicle. 
    Permitted use means a use that is specifically authorized in a particular zoning district. 
    Personal care means protective care and watchful oversight of a resident who needs a watchful environment but who does not have an illness, injury or disability which requires chronic or convalescent care including medical and nursing services. 
    Personal care home means a building or group of buildings, a facility or place in which is provided two or more beds and other facilities and services, including room, meals and personal care for nonfamily ambulatory adults. 
    Personal care home, congregate, means a personal care home for adults offering care to 16 or more persons. 
    Personal care home, family, means a personal care home for adults in a family-type residence, non-institutional in character, which offers care to two through six persons. 
    Personal care home, group, means a personal care home for adult persons in a residence or other type building, non-institutional in character, which offers care to seven through 15 persons. 
    Photography studio means an establishment engaged in photography for hire for the general public including, but not limited to, portrait, passport, wedding and other special occasion photographs. 
    Planned unit development means a form of development usually characterized by a unified site design for a number of housing units, clustered buildings, common open space, and a mix of building types and land uses in a more dense setting than allowable on separate zoned lots. 
    Planning commission means the city planning commission as previously established in this Code. 
    Pool hall means an establishment containing one or more billiard tables, operated for profit, and open to the general public. 
    Premises means a lot as otherwise used in this chapter. 
    Public use means any building, structure or use owned and/or operated by the federal government, state, this county or other county, the city or other municipality, or any authority, agency, board or commission of the governments enumerated in this definition, which is necessary to serve a public purpose, such as, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Government administrative buildings; 
(2)  Police and fire stations; 
(3)  Public health facilities and hospitals; 
(4)  Public works camps; 
(5)  Parks and community centers; 
(6)  Public roads and streets; 
(7)  Airports; 
(8)  Water and sanitary sewerage storage, intake, collection and treatment and pumping facilities; 
(9)  Public housing facilities; and 
(10)  Jails and correctional centers. 
    Quarry means a place where rock, ore, stone and similar materials are excavated for sale or off-tract use. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicular type of portable structure which can be towed, hauled or driven and is primarily designed as temporary living accommodations for recreational, camping and travel uses. 
    Recreational vehicle (RV) park means any lot of land upon which two or more recreational vehicle sites are located, established or maintained for occupancy on a temporary basis by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living quarters by campers, vacationers or travelers. 
    Recycling collection center means a principal or accessory use that serves as a neighborhood or regional dropoff point for temporary storage of recoverable resources such as cans, bottles and newspapers, but specifically excluding processing of such resources. 
    Recycling plant means a facility in which recoverable resources such as cans, bottles and newspapers are recycled, reprocessed and treated to return such products to a condition in which they may again be used in packaging or for production. 
    Rehabilitation means the process of returning a property to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions of the property which are significant to its historic, architectural and cultural values. 
    Rehabilitation center means facilities authorized or licensed by appropriate agencies for the primary purpose of rehabilitation of: 
(1)  Offenders against the law; 
(2)  Persons with drug or alcohol abuse problems; 
(3)  Mentally handicapped; and 
(4)  Physically handicapped. 
    Residence for caretaker or night watchman means an accessory residence, located inside or in addition to the principal structure or use of a parcel of land, designed or occupied by security personnel for security reasons only. 
    Residential district means any R-1, R-1A, R-1B, R-2 or MHP zoning district as indicated on the official zoning map. 
    Restaurant means any place or premises used for sale, dispensing or service of food, refreshment or beverage. 
    Restaurant, drive-in, means any place or premises used for sale, dispensing or service of food, refreshment or beverage to persons in automobiles, including those establishments where customers may eat or drink on the premises. 
    Retail sales means establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. 
    Retail trade establishment, enclosed, means any business offering goods and products for sale to the public, which operates entirely within a structure containing a roof and walls on all sides, except for outdoor display or other use during business hours and accessory storage in enclosed, subordinate buildings. Incidental repair is also included in this definition. The term "enclosed retail trade establishments" includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Paint, glass and wallpaper stores; 
(2)  Grocery and miscellaneous food stores, including convenience stores that sell gasoline and retail bakeries; 
(3)  Apparel, shoe and accessory clothing stores; 
(4)  Furniture, floor covering and home furnishing stores; 
(5)  Household appliance stores; 
(6)  Radio, television and computer stores; 
(7)  Musical instrument stores; 
(8)  Record, tape and compact disc stores; 
(9)  Eating and drinking places not involving drive-in or drive-through facilities; 
(10)  Drug stores and proprietary stores; 
(11)  Liquor stores; 
(12)  Used merchandise stores; 
(13)  Sporting goods and bicycle shops; 
(14)  Book, art and stationary stores; 
(15)  Hobby, toy and game shops; 
(16)  Jewelry, gift, novelty, souvenir and antique shops; 
(17)  Camera and photographic supply stores; 
(18)  Luggage and leather goods stores; 
(19)  Sewing, needlework and piece goods stores; 
(20)  Catalog and mail order stores; 
(21)  Florists; 
(22)  Tobacco stores; 
(23)  Optical goods stores; 
(24)  Newsstands; 
(25)  Automotive parts stores not involving repair; 
(26)  Video rental and sales stores; 
(27)  Watches and clocks; 
(28)  Pawnshops; and 
(29)  Convenience stores with or without retail gasoline sales. 
    Retail trade establishment, unenclosed means any business offering goods and products for sale to the public, which does not operate entirely within a structure containing a roof and walls on all sides, and which all or a portion of the goods and products are displayed and/or stored, or business transacted, in the open-air or other shelter not completely enclosed. The term "unenclosed retail trade establishment" includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Lumber and building materials; 
(2)  Retail nurseries and garden supply stores; 
(3)  Mobile and manufactured home/modular building dealers; 
(4)  New and used car, truck, boat, recreational vehicle, camper, motorcycle and other motorized vehicle sales and leasing; 
(5)  Eating and drinking places, including drive-in and drive-through facilities; 
(6)  Fuel oil and liquefied petroleum dealers; 
(7)  Agricultural implement and equipment sales and rental; 
(8)  Christmas tree sales; 
(9)  Flea markets; 
(10)  Monument sales establishments; 
(11)  Automatic teller facilities; 
(12)  Gas stations; 
(13)  Produce stands; and 
(14)  Firewood sales. 
    Rezoning means an amendment to or a change in the official zoning map. 
    Right-of-way means that area, distinguished from an easement, which is owned in fee-simple title by the city or other government, for the present or future use of roads, streets and highways, together with its drainage facilities and other supporting uses and structures. 
    Roominghouse means a building where, for compensation, lodging only is provided. 
    Sanitarium means a hospital used for treating chronic and usually long-term illness. 
    Satellite dish antenna means a round, parabolic antenna intended to receive signals from orbiting satellites and other sources. 
    Scale of development means the relationship of a particular project or development, in terms of size, height, bulk, intensity and aesthetics, to its surroundings. 
    School means a facility that provides a curriculum of elementary and secondary academic instruction. A school is considered public if operated by a unit of government. 
    School, trade, technical or business means an establishment in which is offered, for compensation, instruction in a trade, craft, technical field or business skills. 
    Screening means: 
(1)  A method of shielding, obscuring or buffering one use or building from another use or building by fencing, walls, berms, densely planted vegetation, natural vegetation or other means; or 
(2)  A visual and acoustical barrier which is of such nature and density that provides yearround maximum opacity from the ground to a height of at least six feet or that screens structures and activities from view from the normal level of a first story window on an abutting lot. Screening methods include opaque fences, walls, hedges, berms and other features. 
    Semi-public use means any building, structure or use owned and/or operated by private utilities or private companies for a public purpose, or which is reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities, such as, but not limited to, underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water distribution or transmission lines or systems, electric power substations, wires, towers, cables, and poles, railroad facilities and bus and air terminals. 
    Septic tank means an approved watertight tank designed or used to receive sewage from a building sewer and to effect separation and organic decomposition of sewage solids, and discharging sewage effluent to an absorption field or other management system. 
    Service, automotive means an establishment providing services and repairs to motor-driven vehicles including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Rental care facilities; 
(2)  Automobile parking lots; 
(3)  Top and body, paint, automotive glass, transmission and tire repair shops; 
(4)  Carwashes, including automated and full-service facilities; and 
(5)  Oil change and lubrication. 
    Service establishment, business, means a facility engaged in support functions to establishments operating for a profit, on a fee or contract basis including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Advertising agencies; 
(2)  Photocopying, blueprinting and duplication services; 
(3)  Mailing agencies; 
(4)  Commercial art and graphic design; 
(5)  Disinfecting, exterminating and pest control; 
(6)  Personnel supply services and employment agencies; 
(7)  Computer and data processing services; 
(8)  Detective, protective and security system services; 
(9)  Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services; 
(10)  Publications and business consulting firms; 
(11)  Food catering; 
(12)  Interior decorating; and 
(13)  Locksmiths. 
    Service establishment, personal, means a facility engaged in the provision of services to persons and their apparel including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Barbershops and beauty shops; 
(2)  Coin-operated and full-service laundries and dry cleaners; 
(3)  Photographic studios; 
(4)  Shoe repair and shoeshine parlors; 
(5)  Dance studios, schools and halls; 
(6)  Specialized instructional studios and schools; 
(7)  Day care centers; 
(8)  Massage parlors; and 
(9)  Travel agencies. 
    Service, health, means: 
(1)  Health care facilities as well as establishments providing support to the medical profession and patients, such as medical and dental laboratories, blood banks, oxygen and miscellaneous types of medical supplies and services; 
(2)  Offices of doctors, dentists and other medical practitioners. 
    Service, lodging, means a facility which offers temporary shelter accommodations, or place for such shelter, open to the public for a fee including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Hotels, motels and motor hotels; 
(2)  Roominghouses and boardinghouses; 
(3)  Bed and breakfast inns; and 
(4)  Recreational vehicle parks and campgrounds. 
    Service, miscellaneous, means those service establishments not otherwise specifically classified including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics; 
(2)  Funeral homes, mortuaries and mausoleums; 
(3)  Construction contractors' establishments not involving outside storage of vehicles or materials; 
(4)  Palm reading and fortunetelling; 
(5)  Pet grooming, pet psychologists and dog obedience schools; and 
(6)  Taxidermists. 
    Service station means any building, structure or land used for the retail sale of motor vehicle fuel, oil, accessories and motor vehicle servicing, except that major repairs, body repairs and painting of motor vehicles shall not be considered motor vehicle servicing. 
    Setback means the minimum horizontal distance between a street, alley or the property boundary lines of a lot and the front, rear or sidelines of a building located on that lot. 
    Shopping center means a group of commercial establishments, planned, developed, owned and managed as a unit, with off-street parking on the property. 
    Sign means any surface, fabric, device or display that bears lettered, pictorial or sculptured matter designated to convey information visually and which is exposed to public view on the exterior of the building or on surrounding property. For purposes of this chapter, the term "sign" includes: 
(1)  All structural members. 
(2)  A display surface or device containing organized and related elements composed to form a single unit. 
    Site plan means a graphic illustration, two-dimensional, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, the boundaries of a lot or tract and the location of all buildings, structures, uses and principal site development features proposed for a specific lot or tract of land. 
    Slaughterhouse means an establishment where animals are killed, butchered, prepared for further processing or processed in a final form. 
    Solid waste means discarded putrescible and nonputrescible waste, except water-carried body waste and recovered materials. The term "solid waste" includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Garbage; 
(2)  Rubbish such as paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture and appliances, metal, tin cans, glass, crockery, or dunnage; ashes; 
(3)  Street refuse; 
(4)  Dead animals; 
(5)  Sewage sludges; 
(6)  Animal manures; 
(7)  Industrial waste, such as waste materials generated in industrial operations; 
(8)  Residue from incineration; 
(9)  Food processing wastes; 
(10)  Demolition wastes; 
(11)  Abandoned automobiles; and 
(12)  Drudging and construction waste. 
    Story means that portion of a building comprised between a floor and the floor or roof next above. 
    Street means a public or private thoroughfare which is open to the general public and which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Street, arterial, unless otherwise specified by the comprehensive plan, transportation element of the comprehensive plan or major thoroughfare plan, means those streets and highway facilities, including full and partial access controlled highways and major urban area entrance highways, which are designed to carry the highest traffic volumes and the longest trips through and within an urban area. 
    Street, collector, unless otherwise specified by the comprehensive plan, transportation element of the comprehensive plan or major thoroughfare plan, means those streets that collect traffic from minor streets or other collector streets and channel it to the arterial system. Collector streets provide land access and traffic circulation within residential neighborhoods, commercial and industrial areas. 
    Street, public, means a dedicated and accepted public right-of-way that affords the principal means of access to abutting properties. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent or semi-permanent location on the ground, or which is attached to something having more or less permanent location on the ground, not including utility poles. The term "structure" includes tents, bleachers, gasoline pumps, recreational vehicles, travel trailers signs and structures from which products are vended and similar objects. 
    Subdivision means the division of a parcel or tract of land into two or more lots for the purposes of creation of lots for development, the rearrangement of existing lot lines, or for the purpose of transfer of ownership. 
    Taxi cab station means an establishment engaged in furnishing passenger transportation by automobile or van, not operating on regular schedules or between fixed terminals and containing space for taxicab fleets and related office facilities. 
    Temporary ECHO unit means a removable home which is placed as an accessory structure on the same lot as a detached single-family residence for a specified, limited duration of time. ECHO is an acronym for "Elder Cottage Housing Opportunity." 
    Temporary use means a use intended for a specified limited duration. 
    Townhouse means one of a group of three or more attached dwelling units under fee simple ownership. 
    Transitional use means a permitted use, building or structure that by nature or level and scale of activity acts as a transition or buffer between two or more incompatible uses. 
    Transportation, communication and utility facilities, includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Bus passenger stations and terminals; 
(2)  Airports, heliports and helistops; 
(3)  Taxi cab and limousine services; 
(4)  Radio and television studios and broadcasting towers; 
(5)  Recycling collection centers; 
(6)  Truck stops and truck terminals; 
(7)  Trucking and courier services; 
(8)  Marinas; 
(9)  Railroad facilities; 
(10)  Gas, electric and water supply services; 
(11)  Emergency medical services; and 
(12)  Ultralight flight parks. 
    Travel trailer means a portable dwelling or lodging unit having no other foundation than wheels, distinguished from a mobile or manufactured home, designed for short-term travel, recreational or vacation use. The term "travel trailer" includes pickup campers and motor homes. 
    Tree means any self-supporting, woody perennial plant having a single trunk diameter of two inches or more that normally grows at maturity to an overall height of a minimum of 15 feet. 
    Truck stop means an area principally devoted to the service, refueling, temporary storage or parking of trucks, including accessory buildings, structures and uses such as restaurants. 
    Truck terminal means an area where cargo is stored for routing or reshipment and where trucks load and unload cargo on a regular basis, or an area in which semitrailers and/or trucks are parked and stored. 
    Underground storage tank means any one or combination of tanks, including underground pipes connected thereto, which is used to contain an accumulation of regulated substances and the volume of which, including the volume of the underground pipes connected thereto, is ten percent or more beneath the surface of the ground. 
    Unenclosed area means any area of a given lot or structure that is not covered with a roof and protected by opaque walls on each of the sides of said area or structure. 
    Use means any purpose for which a building or structure or a tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained or occupied; or any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in a building or structure or on a tract of land. 
    Utility means public or private water and sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, cable television lines, roads, driveways, river/lake access facilities, stormwater facilities, railroads, airports and bus terminals. 
    Variance means a minimal relaxation or modification of the strict terms of the height, area, placement, setback, yard, buffer, landscape strip, parking and loading regulations as applied to specific property when, because of particular physical surroundings, the shape or topographical condition of the property, compliance would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or a desire to make a profit. 
    Warehouse means a building or group of buildings for the storage of goods or wares, with controlled access to contents. 
    Wholesale distribution means an establishment engaged in selling merchandise to retailers, to industrial, commercial, institutional or professional business users or to other wholesalers. 
    Wrecked motor vehicle compound means an area used to store disabled motor vehicles until such time as their disposition either by junk, salvage or repair has been determined by the insurance company, the owner of the vehicle or his legal representative. 
    Yard means a space on the same lot with a principal building, which is open, unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. A yard may contain a parking and/or loading area unless otherwise specified by these regulations. 
    Yard, front, means a space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the street right-of-way and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. In the case of a corner lot, both spaces with street frontage shall be considered front yards. In the case of double frontage lots, the spaces as defined in this section shall both be considered front yards. 
    Yard, rear, means the space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
    Yard sale means the temporary sale of home furniture, appliances, clothing or domestic items owned by an occupant of a residential dwelling and taking place on the premises on which such occupant resides, whether in the yard or in a carport or garage, usually as a result of the occupant moving or relocating to another place of residence. Yard sales that do not take place on the premises on which such occupant resides are considered open-air businesses. 
    Yard, side, means a space on the same lot with a principal building, situated between the building and the side lot line and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
    Zero lot line means the location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more building sides have no side-building setback and rest directly on a side lot line. 
    Zoning means a legislative procedure in which the community is divided into districts or zones within which permitted uses, and in some cases conditional uses, are established as well as regulations governing lot size, bulk, height and other development requirements. 
    Zoning administrator means the city manager or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-301) 
Secs. 42-2-42-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 42-21. - Established. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into use districts as set out in the following table: 
R-1 Single-Family Residential District R-1A Single-Family Residential District R-1B Single-Family Residential District R-2 Multiple-Family Residential District MHP Mobile Home Park District O-I Office-Institutional District B-1 Neighborhood Business District B-2 General Business District M-1 Light Industrial District M-2 Heavy Industrial District PUD Planned Unit Development District  
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-401) 
Sec. 42-22. - Official zoning map-Created. 
(a)  The location and boundaries of the districts listed in section 42-21 are hereby established as shown on a map entitled "Official Zoning Map of the City of Hartwell, Georgia." The zoning map, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby incorporated and adopted by reference as if fully set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk, and bear the city seal or that of a notary public under the following words: 
    "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Chapter 42 of the Code of the City of Hartwell, Georgia," 
together with the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. The official zoning map may be reproduced so that additional copies of said map are made available, upon proper certification as described in this subsection. 
(c)  If in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the applicable laws of the state, changes are made in boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the city, with appropriate entry or indication of such amendment on the official zoning map. The formal action by the city commission to change the boundaries of the official zoning map shall be sufficient to make such zoning district change effective. Upon such changes, the zoning administrator is authorized to enter such changes on the official zoning map, and readoption of the said map shall not be required. 
(d)  No changes of any nature shall be made in the official zoning map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this chapter. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person shall be considered a violation of this chapter. 
(e)  Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map that may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map shall be located in the zoning administrator's office and shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land, water areas, buildings and other structures in the city. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-402) 
Sec. 42-23. - Same-Replacement. 
(a)  In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the city may adopt a new official zoning map that shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk, and bear the city seal or a notary public under the following words: 
    "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced) as part of the Chapter 42 of the Code of the City of Hartwell, Georgia." 
(b)  Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining, shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-403) 
Sec. 42-24. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
(a)  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline of streets or highways, street right-of-way lines or railroad right-of-way lines or such lines extended, such centerline, street right-of-way lines, or railroad right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(b)  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the corporate city limit line, such corporate limit line shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(c)  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following property lines or such lines extended, such property lines or such lines extended, as indicated by boundary survey, deed or legal description maintained in the official file of said zoning adoption or amendment, if available, shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(d)  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline of streambeds or riverbeds, such centerline shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(e)  In the case where the exact location of a boundary cannot be determined by the foregoing methods, the city shall, upon application, determine the location of the boundary. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-404) 
Sec. 42-25. - District boundary line divides lot of single ownership. 
    Where a boundary line as appearing on the official zoning map divides a lot in single ownership at the time of the enactment of these regulations, the requirements for the district in which the greater portion of the lot lies may be extended to the balance of the lot without recourse or amendment procedure; provided that this provision shall not apply to a double frontage lot. In the case of a double frontage lot, the restrictions of the district applying to the adjoining lots which front on the same street as the lot frontage in question shall apply. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-405) 
Sec. 42-26. - Designation after street abandonment. 
    Where a public street, alley or other right-of-way is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the property to which it reverted shall apply to such vacated or abandoned public street, alley or right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-406) 
Secs. 42-27-42-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES 

Sec. 42-56. - Purpose; intent. 
    Within the districts established by this chapter, there exist certain incompatible lots, buildings, structures, signs and uses of land which were lawful before these regulations were adopted but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of these regulations or future amendments. It is the intention of this article to permit these nonconformities to continue but that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, neither expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for variances or for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-501) 
Sec. 42-57. - Lots of record. 
(a)  In any district, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of these regulations, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings or any other permitted use may be erected on any single lot of record existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, applicable to the particular district involved; provided that building setbacks are observed and the lot shall otherwise conform to the regulations for the district in which the lot is located. 
(b)  Except for those lots described in subsection (a) of this section, if two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which these regulations are derived, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area as established by these regulations, the lands involved shall be considered an undivided parcel for the purposes of these regulations, and no portion of said parcel shall be used which does not meet lot width and area requirements established by these regulations, nor shall any division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot with width or area below the applicable requirements. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-502) 
Sec. 42-58. - Continuance of use. 
(a)  The lawful use of any building, structure, sign or land existing at the time of enactment of the ordinance from which these regulations are derived may be continued, even though such use does not conform with the provisions of these regulations, except that the use of a building, structure or land containing a nonconforming use shall not be: 
(1)  Changed from its existing nonconforming use to any other nonconforming use; 
(2)  Reestablished after discontinuance or abandonment for six months. For purposes of this section a use shall be considered discontinued or abandoned if it has not been actively engaged in any nonconforming activity during the subject period; 
(3)  Expanded, enlarged or extended, unless such use is changed to a use permitted in the district in which such use is located; 
(4)  Rebuilt, altered or repaired after damage exceeding 50 percent of its replacement value at the time of destruction as determined by the building official and provided such rebuilding, alteration or repair is completed within one year of such damage; 
(5)  Moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot occupied by such use, except in conformity with these regulations. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any building, structure, or portion thereof, declared to be unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public safety or health, upon order of such official. 
(c)  Changes in ownership or tenancy of a nonconforming use are permitted. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-503) 
Sec. 42-59. - Expansion of buildings. 
    A nonconforming building which contains a conforming use may be expanded, enlarged or extended provided that any such additions meet the applicable yard and building setbacks, buffer and landscape strip requirements and all other regulations for the district in which it is located. This section shall not, however, be construed as to authorize the expansion of a nonconforming building for a use which is not permitted by the regulations for the district within which such building is located. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-504) 
Sec. 42-60. - Buildings under construction. 
    Nothing in this article shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which these regulations are derived. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-505) 
Secs. 42-61-42-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS 

Sec. 42-79. - Defined; purpose. 
    Special exceptions and uses are those which would not normally be appropriate in a zoning district unless strictly controlled as to the size, lot coverage, impact on public services, visibility, traffic and other such related characteristics that are determined by the city council. A procedure is established in this article to integrate the special exception uses with other land uses located in the zoning district. These special exceptions shall be reviewed and authorized or rejected under the procedure set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 4-7-1997, § 506) 
Sec. 42-80. - Application. 
(a)  An application for a special exception permit shall be filed with the zoning administrator at least 30 days prior to the next regularly scheduled planning commission meeting. 
(b)  An application shall be on the forms prescribed by the zoning administrator. Such application shall contain floor plans, elevations and all information pertinent to the request that the city may require and shall contain the notation that appropriate fees have been paid. 
(Ord. of 4-7-1997, §§ 506.1, 506.2) 
Sec. 42-81. - General standards. 
    A special exception may be granted when the city council finds from a preponderance of the evidence produced at the hearing that: 
(1)  The proposed use, including its nature, intensity and location, is in harmony with the orderly and appropriate development of the zone. The specific use must be identified. 
(2)  Adequate water supply, sewage disposal, storm drainage, and fire and police protection are, or can be, provided for the use. 
(3)  The use of adjacent land and buildings will not be discouraged and the value of adjacent land and buildings will not be impaired by the location, nature and height of buildings, walls and fences. 
(4)  The use will have proper location with respect to existing or future streets giving access to it, will not create traffic congestion or cause industrial or commercial traffic to use residential streets. 
(5)  The use will not have an adverse impact on the physical, visual or spatial characteristics of the overall plan for the tract to be developed. 
(6)  The use will enhance the overall development plan for the tract, and without the special exception there will be an adverse impact of the existing streetscape, neighborhood and/or district in which such development is located or the city generally. 
(7)  Adequacy of landscaping, lighting, signage, safety and other proposed site improvements are included in the plan. 
(Ord. of 4-7-1997, § 506.3) 
Sec. 42-82. - Authority to attach conditions. 
    The city council may attach conditions considered to protect the public welfare and the comprehensive plan, including conditions more restrictive than those established for other uses in the same zone. 
(Ord. of 4-7-1997, § 506.4) 
Sec. 42-83. - Burden of proof. 
    The applicant for a special exception shall have the burden of proof, including the burden of persuasion on all questions of fact that are to be determined by the city council. 
(Ord. of 4-7-1997, § 506.5) 
Sec. 42-84. - Hearing. 
    The public hearing on the special exception shall be conducted pursuant to section 42-537. 
(Ord. of 4-7-1997, § 506.6) 
Sec. 42-85. - Reconsideration after denial. 
    If the city council's decision is to deny a special exception permit, the same property may not again be considered for such a permit until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the denial of the special exception permit by the city council. 
(Ord. of 4-7-1997, § 506.7) 
Sec. 42-86. - Change in ownership or tenancy prohibited. 
    Changes in ownership or tenancy of a special exception use will not be permitted. 
(Ord. of 4-7-1997, § 506.8) 
Sec. 42-87. - Expiration upon failing to obtain building permit or certificate of occupancy. 
    Unless otherwise specified or extended by the city council, a special exception authorized by the city council will expire if the applicant fails to obtain, where required to do so, a building permit or certificate of occupancy within six months of the date of the authorization of the special exception. 
(Ord. of 4-7-1997, § 506.9) 
Secs. 42-88-42-117. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

Sec. 42-118. - Spaces-Required. 
(a)  Off-street automobile parking and loading spaces shall be provided, as specified in this article, for uses and structures hereafter established in all districts at the time of initial construction of any principal building, unless otherwise exempted from this article. For developments phased in timing, parking and loading requirements may also be phased in accordance with the requirements applying to each particular time phase of development. 
(b)  Any building or use that is subsequently enlarged or converted to another use shall meet the off-street parking and loading space requirements of this article for the enlarged or new use. 
(c)  Required parking and loading spaces shall be maintained and shall not be encroached upon by refuse containers, signs or other structures, unless an equal number of spaces are provided elsewhere in conformance with these regulations. 
(d)  Required parking and loading spaces shall be provided with vehicular access to a public street or alley. 
(e)  Off-street parking and loading facilities required shall be located contiguous to the principal building or use. However, as much as 25 percent of the required number of parking spaces may be located within 200 feet of the principal building or use, provided proof of ownership of such premises is provided to the zoning administrator. Such distance shall be measured between the nearest point of the parking facility and the nearest point of the principal building or use. If this option of nearby parking is utilized, the parking area may not be discontinued or otherwise converted to another use unless the parking area continues to meet the minimum required number of off-street parking spaces. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-601) 
Sec. 42-119. - Same-Minimum number. 
    The minimum number of required off-street parking spaces for each type of permitted use shall be as indicated below. For uses not specifically listed, the off-street parking requirements shall be those of the most similar use as determined by the zoning administrator. When the application of these parking requirements results in a fractional space requirement, the fractional space requirement shall be construed to mean one additional space. 
Use Classification Minimum Parking Space Requirements Amusement park One square foot of parking for each square foot of public activity area Apartment and other multiple-family residential uses Two spaces per dwelling unit plus four spaces per leasing office and ten spaces per clubhouse or recreation center Art gallery One space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area Auction facility One space for each four patron seats Auditorium, stadium, assembly hall, gymnasium or community center One space per four fixed seats in largest assembly room or area Automobile service and repair One space for each 150 square feet of gross floor area Auto parts store Three and one-third spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area Automobile sales Six spaces per 1,000 square feet of showroom gross floor area, plus one for each employee and one additional parking space for each service bay. Such parking spaces shall be for the exclusive use of customers and employees and shall not be used for sales Automobile service and repair One space for each 150 square feet of gross floor area Bank or financial institution One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area Barbershop and beauty shop Two spaces for each operator or chair Bed and breakfast inn One space per guestroom, plus one space for each permanent resident Billiard hall, amusement arcade One space for each 200 feet of gross floor area Boardinghouse or roominghouse One space for each guestroom, plus one additional space for each manager or resident owner Bowling alley Four spaces for each alley plus one space for each employee Church or place of worship One space per three fixed seats in largest assembly room Convenience retail store One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area Dance studio or school One space for each employee plus one space per 150 square feet of gross floor area Day care center One space for each eight children, plus one space per employee Duplex Two spaces per dwelling unit Elderly housing One space per two bedrooms Exterminator One space per 800 square feet of gross floor area Funeral home or mortuary One space for each four seats in largest assembly room Furniture or appliance store One space per 800 square feet of gross floor area Gasoline service station Two spaces per gasoline pump at the pump plus three spaces per service bay Golf course (exclusive of pro shop or restaurant) Three spaces for each hole plus one space for each employee Hardware store Three spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor plan Health club, spa One space for each 150 square feet of gross floor area Hospital, clinic, nursing home One space for each two beds plus one space for each staff doctor, plus one space for each two employees (non-doctors) Hotel, motel One space for each guestroom plus one space for each two employees on largest shift Industrial or manufacturing Two spaces for each three employees on largest shift Laundry, self-service One space for each two washer-dryer combinations Library, museum One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area Lodge, club One space for each three seats in largest assembly room Marina One space for each boat slip Miniature golf course Two spaces per hole Mobile home or park Two spaces per dwelling unit plus one space for each on-duty manager and additional spaces for public park or use areas Office, general or professional One space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area Office, medical or dental Six spaces per practitioner Personal service establishment One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area Post office One space per 150 square feet of gross floor area Restaurant or lounge One space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area, plus one additional space for every four outside seats Retail business, indoor One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area Retail business, outdoor One space for each 500 square feet of open sales/display area, plus one space per employee Sanitarium, rest and convalescent home, personal care home One space for each four patient beds, plus one space for each doctor and staff member School, college, trade, vocational, or high school Ten spaces per classroom plus one space for each administrative or staff person School, elementary Two spaces per classroom and administrative or staff person Self-service storage facility, miniwarehouse One space for each twenty storage stalls, plus two spaces for resident manager's office Shopping center One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area Single-family residence Two spaces for dwelling unit Skating rink One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area Theater, cinema One space for each three seats Veterinarian, animal hospital Four space for each practitioner Wholesale merchandise One space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area  
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-602) 
Sec. 42-120. - Handicapped parking requirements. 
    Each parking area of six or more spaces devoted to uses other than residential shall provide handicapped parking spaces (a minimum of 12 feet in width) counted as a part of the total parking required, in accordance with the following scale: 
Total Parking 
Requirements Handicapped Spaces Required 6-25 1 26-50 2 51-75 3 76-100 4 101-150 5 151-200 6 201-300 7 301-400 8 401-500 9 501 or more 2 percent of total required  
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-603) 
Sec. 42-121. - Parking space and lot design flexibility. 
    Individual parking spaces shall be a minimum of 160 square feet. The angle of design for parking spaces and parking lots may be 30, 45, 60, 90 degrees or parallel to the curb provided that sufficient maneuvering isle width is provided subject to the zoning administrator's approval. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-604) 
Sec. 42-122. - Minimum number of loading spaces. 
(a)  On the same lot with every building, structure or part thereof, erected or occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehouse, truck freight terminal, goods display, department store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning, retail business or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for the standing, loading and unloading services to avoid undue interference with public use of streets and alleys. 
(b)  The loading and unloading space, unless otherwise adequately provided for, shall be an area 12 feet by 60 feet, with 14-foot height clearance, and shall be provided according to the schedule contained in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  For the uses described in subsection (a) of this section, one loading space shall be provided for the first 25,000 square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof. Uses in excess of 25,000 square feet shall provide loading spaces according to the following schedule: 
Square Feet Number of Spaces 25,001-99,999 2 100,000-159,999 3 160,000-239,999 4 240,000-349,999 5 For each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional  
All plans for off-street loading areas shall be subject to the zoning administrator's approval. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-605) 
Sec. 42-123. - Parking and loading area design requirements. 
(a)  Improvement of parking lots. All parking areas containing more than five spaces shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  They shall be graded to ensure proper drainage, surfaced with concrete or asphalt, and maintained in good condition free of obstructions. 
(2)  Parking areas shall not be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicle, equipment, materials or supplies. 
(3)  Each parking space shall be clearly marked, and directional arrows or signs shall be provided wherever necessary. Markers, directional arrows and signs shall be properly maintained at all times. 
(4)  A parking lot pavement setback of ten feet from any public street right-of-way and five feet from any exterior property line shall be provided, except where access points and interconnections to other parcels have been approved. The parking lot pavement setback shall be increased to ten feet where such lot abuts a residential district. Concrete or other suitable curb stops shall be installed so as to prevent vehicle encroachment onto setback areas. 
(5)  Not less than ten percent of the total area devoted to parking shall be landscaped open space. 
(6)  Any lighting facilities installed shall be so arranged to prevent the direct illumination of adjacent residential properties or public streets. 
(7)  A site plan indicating property lines, parking areas, location of parking spaces, pavement setbacks, drainage facilities, paving materials, access and other features required to ensure compliance with this article shall be submitted to the zoning administrator. A permit shall be required prior to the construction of new parking areas, or for the expansion or alteration of existing parking areas. 
(b)  Curb cut and access specifications. Access from public streets to all parking areas, regardless of the number of parking spaces provided, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Curb cuts or access breaks for service drives, entrances and exits on public streets shall not be located within 50 feet of the intersections of two curblines, street pavement lines or such lines extended, or any street intersection nor within 40 feet of another curb cut or access break on the same side of the street. 
(2)  Curb cuts shall be no greater than 40 feet in width and no closer than 25 feet to any property line, unless common use of driveways for an abutting lot is required or approved by the city. 
(3)  No more than two curb cuts or access breaks shall be permitted for any lot or parcel with a frontage of 200 feet or less on any one street. 
(4)  All curb cuts or access breaks onto public streets, except for those serving single-family detached residences, shall require a permit from the building inspector. 
(5)  Curb cuts for driveways that serve commercial, office or industrial zoning districts shall not be permitted to pass through residential zoning districts or to access alleys that abut a residential zoning district. 
(6)  Where the side of an accessed public street or alley does not contain curbing, such curbing or other method of approved access control shall be provided. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-606) 
Secs. 42-124-42-144. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 42-145. - Use, occupancy and erection. 
    No building, structure, land, open space or water shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, structurally altered or maintained, and no new use or change shall be made or maintained of any building, structure, land, open space or water, unless in conformity with all the regulations in this chapter specified for the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-701) 
Sec. 42-146. - Applicability. 
    Within each district, the regulations set forth shall be minimum requirements and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of building, structure or land. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-702) 
Sec. 42-147. - Height. 
(a)  No building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, except as otherwise specifically exempted in this article, to exceed the maximum height for the district in which said building or structure is located; provided, however, that the city may permit buildings and structures to exceed height limitations upon approval of a conditional use as specified in these regulations. 
(b)  The height limitations established in this article shall not apply to chimneys, smokestacks, church spires and steeples, domes, flag poles, public monuments, observation towers, water towers, noncommercial radio and television towers, electricity transmission towers, utility poles and similar structures. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-703) 
Sec. 42-148. - Every use to be upon lot of record. 
    No building or structure shall be erected or use established upon a lot of record as defined by these regulations except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-704) 
Sec. 42-149. - One principal building on lot. 
    Only one principal building and its accessory buildings may hereafter be erected on any one lot intended for such use; provided, however, that more than one multiple dwelling, office, institutional, commercial or industrial building may be located upon a lot, subject to setbacks, separation and zoning district as provided in these regulations. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-705) 
Sec. 42-150. - Separation between principal buildings. 
    No principal building shall be located closer than 20 feet to another principal building. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-706) 
Sec. 42-151. - Reduction in lot size prohibited. 
    No lot shall be reduced, divided or changed in size so that lot width, size of yards, lot area per dwelling unit or any other requirement of these regulations is not maintained, unless said reduction or division is necessary to provide land which is acquired for a public purpose. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-707) 
Sec. 42-152. - Annexation. 
    Any land area subsequently added to the incorporated area of the city shall at the time of annexation be placed under a moratorium for a period of not more than 90 days during which no permits of any type shall be issued. Upon application for annexation, the owners of the property to be annexed shall apply for zoning as required by this chapter and state law. Upon the property being rezoned, the moratorium shall be lifted and permits shall be issued according to law. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-708) 
Sec. 42-153. - Street frontage. 
    No building or structure shall hereafter be erected on a lot, and no lot shall be subdivided, that does not abut for at least 30 feet on a public street. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-709) 
Sec. 42-154. - Use prohibited when not specified. 
    Unless otherwise stated, any use not specifically permitted in a use district as provided in these regulations shall be prohibited in that district. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-710) 
Sec. 42-155. - Accessory buildings and uses. 
    All accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted only in side or rear yards, unless otherwise provided by these regulations. Accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted only if they meet the following: 
(1)  Setback a minimum of seven feet from any lot line. 
(2)  Where a building housing an accessory use is structurally attached to the principal building, it shall be subject to and must conform to all regulations applicable to the principal building and shall not be considered an accessory building. 
(3)  In the case of double frontage lots, accessory buildings shall observe front yard requirements on both streets. 
(4)  Detached accessory buildings shall be located a minimum of ten feet from the principal building on a lot. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-711) 
Sec. 42-156. - Regulations for specific accessory structures. 
    The following specified structures shall conform to the following regulations: 
(1)  Fences and walls. All fences and walls shall conform to the following: 
a.  No fence or wall shall be erected closer than two feet from a public right-of-way or in such a manner as to obstruct vision on a public right-of-way. 
b.  Barbed wire top strands six feet above the ground may be permitted in commercial and industrial zoning districts. 
(2)  Gasoline pumps. Gasoline pumps and pump islands shall be setback a minimum of 25 feet from any public right-of-way or property line. 
(3)  Canopies and carports. Canopies and other attached or detached structures intended for cover shall be setback a minimum of ten feet from any public right-of-way or property line. 
(4)  Nonresidential occupancy of mobile homes. Mobile homes, manufactured homes or other temporary portable structures shall not be used as a permanent or temporary office, classroom, storage or for-hire work space in any district; provided, however, that such mobile homes or structures may be used for a temporary construction office for a licensed contractor in any district, upon issuance of a permit by the building inspector. Said permit shall be temporary but renewable once after a period of six months. 
(5)  Portable structures and storage buildings. Portable structures including, but not limited to, ministorage buildings, building sheds, greenhouses, playhouses, home workshops and other similar uses are allowed in residential districts provided that they meet side yard and rear yard setbacks as required by this chapter. 
(6)  Swimming pools. Swimming pools accessory to residences shall be considered accessory structures and shall be enclosed by a security fence a minimum of six feet in height. Said fence shall provide security against unauthorized use of the swimming pool. A permit shall be obtained from the building inspector for siting and construction of a swimming pool. Swimming pools that are operated as an accessory use to hotels, motels or other uses shall be restricted to use by the patrons/guests of the principal use on the subject property and shall not be opened to the general public for a fee. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-712) 
Sec. 42-157. - Home occupations-Conditions. 
    A home occupation as defined by this chapter shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Only residents of the dwelling may be engaged in the home occupation, with the exception that employment of one person not residing in the dwelling may be permitted. 
(2)  The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the residential character of the building or lot. 
(3)  Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of a home occupation. 
(4)  No internal or external alterations of the dwelling solely for the accommodation of a home occupation are permitted. 
(5)  One nonilluminated, nonanimated business identification sign or nameplate not exceeding 11/2 square feet in area indicating the name and/or occupation of occupant shall be permitted. 
(6)  Use of a building for a home occupation shall not exceed 25 percent of one floor of the principal building. Home occupations are not permitted, in whole or part, within accessory buildings. 
(7)  A business license shall be obtained from the city prior to the operation of any home occupation. Said business license shall require approval by the zoning administrator. 
(8)  The following uses are allowable as home occupations (not all inclusive): 
a.  Tutoring, consultation and instruction in music, dance, arts, crafts and similar subjects, limited to six students at one time; 
b.  Day care centers serving six or fewer persons; 
c.  Professional services (e.g., attorneys, architects, accountants, realtors, insurance and travel agents, secretarial services and answering services); 
d.  Mail order and general offices not involving storage of equipment, materials or vehicles; 
e.  Phone solicitations; 
f.  Beauty salons and barbershops limited to two patrons at a time; 
g.  Food catering; and 
h.  Home products sales agents. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-713) 
Sec. 42-158. - Same-Prohibited uses. 
(a)  The following uses are specifically prohibited as home occupations (not all inclusive): 
(1)  Cabinet shops and or metal cutting; 
(2)  Doctors, dentists or other medical professions; 
(3)  Automobile repair or related work, small engine repair shops, landscaping, nursery, or greenhouse operations; 
(4)  Retail business; 
(5)  Manufacturing; and 
(6)  Clairvoyance and fortunetelling. 
(b)  The failure of a home occupation licensee to comply with any of the conditions contained in section 42-157 shall be reasonable grounds for the revocation of a home occupation business license. 
(c)  Upon application, the city is authorized to approve as a conditional use home occupations that fail to meet up to two of these criteria. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-713.1) 
Sec. 42-159. - Standards for accessory apartments. 
    All accessory apartments shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Only one accessory apartment shall be permitted per lot. 
(2)  The lot must meet the minimum lot size for the zoning district in which it is located, and there must be a minimum lot area of 3,000 square feet each for both dwellings. 
(3)  One additional off-street parking space for the accessory apartment is required, which must be located in a side or rear yard. 
(4)  The heated floor area for an accessory apartment shall be at least 400 square feet and shall not exceed the size of the principal dwelling. 
(5)  An accessory apartment must have its entrance at the side or in the rear rather than the front of the principal dwelling, and the apartment shall have an architectural treatment (brick, wood, stucco, etc.) substantially similar to that of the principal dwelling. 
(6)  Accessory apartments must observe the principal building setbacks and maximum lot coverage for the zoning district in which they are located. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-714) 
Sec. 42-160. - Standards for temporary ECHO units. 
    All temporary elder cottage housing opportunity (ECHO) units shall conform to the following: 
(1)  The unit shall have a minimum size of 280 square feet and a maximum area of 900 square feet. 
(2)  All dimensional requirements of the applicable zoning district (principal building setbacks, maximum lot coverage, etc.) must be met. 
(3)  The unit shall be completely skirted with an appropriate barrier, properly ventilated, to enclose the area between the bottom of the structure and the ground. Such skirting shall comply with applicable federal, state, and local law, and may, but need not, consist of a complete masonry or concrete perimeter foundation. Each unit must be installed on a safe and satisfactory foundation, in compliance with applicable federal and state law. It shall not be necessary, however, for the unit to have a complete masonry or concrete perimeter foundation, as long as the foundation utilized is safe and complies with applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations, and as long as complete skirting of an opaque material, properly ventilated, is installed around the entire perimeter of the unit to enclose the area between the bottom of the structure and the ground. The material utilized as skirting shall be a material or product designed or manufactured for the purpose of serving as skirting and enclosing the area between the bottom of such units and the ground. Further, each unit shall be properly ventilated. 
(4)  Conditions requiring unit design enhancements, such as color, siding, roof pitch, window detailing, skirting and roofing materials, may be attached to the necessary conditional use approval by the city to ensure the unit is compatible with adjacent and nearby residences. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-715; Ord. No. 99-011, § 2, 9-7-1999) 
Sec. 42-161. - Visibility at intersections. 
    No fence, wall, sign, hedge or planting which obstructs the sight lines at elevations between 21/2 feet and 12 feet above any roadway shall be placed or permitted to remain on any corner lot within the triangular area formed by the street right-of-way lines, or such lines extended, and a line connecting such right-of-way lines at points 25 feet from the intersection of the right-of-way lines. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-716) 
Sec. 42-162. - Abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles and materials. 
    Except as otherwise expressly permitted, it shall be prohibited in all districts to park or continuously store abandoned, wrecked, junked or inoperable vehicles and power-driven construction equipment. Junk, as defined in section 42-1, that is visible from a public street or adjacent or abutting property is prohibited. These prohibitions shall not be construed as to prohibit the temporary repair or maintenance of automobiles owned by the property owner or the storage of such vehicles, equipment or other materials within an enclosed building provided that such vehicles, equipment or materials are not for commercial sale. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-717) 
Sec. 42-163. - Subdivision plats must comply with minimum requirements. 
    No proposed plat of a subdivision, nor any plat of resubdivision, shall hereafter be approved by the city or by the planning commission unless the lots within such plat equal or exceed the minimum size and width requirements set forth in the various zoning districts in these regulations and unless such plat fully conforms with state statutes and city regulations. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-718) 
Sec. 42-164. - Reference to historic preservation chapter. 
    New construction, signs and exterior material changes in appearance to structures, sites and objects of work proposed to take place within a historic property or historic district shall comply with all applicable provisions of chapter 20, including approval of a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-719) 
Sec. 42-165. - Signs and reference to sign regulations. 
    Signs are considered permitted accessory uses in all zoning districts. Signs shall comply with all applicable provisions of chapter 26. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-720) 
Sec. 42-166. - Manufactured homes. 
    In addition to any requirements specified for the zoning district in which it is located, all manufactured homes shall comply, as applicable, with the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Housing made and promulgated by the state safety fire commissioner pursuant to the authority set forth in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-110 et seq. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-721) 
Secs. 42-167-42-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - R-1-SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 42-186. - Purpose; intent. 
    The R-1-Single-Family Residential District is intended to establish and preserve stable single-family residential neighborhoods at low densities (up to approximately 2.9 units per acre), free from other uses except those that are compatible with and convenient to the residents of such a district. Manufactured homes are intended to be restricted to those meeting standards designed to ensure compatibility with conventional, site-built dwellings. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-801) 
Sec. 42-187. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(b)  Manufactured homes, not to include mobile homes, both as defined in this chapter: 
(1)  Each dwelling shall have a minimum width of 20 feet on each side. 
(2)  All towing devices, wheels, axles and hitches must be removed. 
(3)  Each dwelling must be installed on a safe and satisfactory foundation, in compliance with applicable federal, state and local law. It shall not be necessary, however, for the dwelling to have a complete masonry or concrete perimeter foundation, as long as the foundation utilized is safe and complies with applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations, and as long as complete skirting of an opaque material, properly ventilated, is installed around the entire perimeter of the manufactured home to enclose the area between the bottom of the structure and the ground. The material utilized as skirting shall be a material or product designed or manufactured for the purpose of serving as skirting and enclosing the area between the bottom of such manufactured home and the ground. Further, each manufactured home shall be properly ventilated. 
(4)  Each dwelling shall be provided with an asphalt composition shingle roof or other non-metallic material approved by the zoning administrator, and said roof shall have a pitch or slope of at least 3:12 (three feet of vertical height for each 12 feet of horizontal width). 
(5)  The entire exterior of the dwelling shall be coated or finished with a non-metallic substance such as hardboard siding, wood paneling, "masonite," stucco, vinyl lap or other building material approved by the zoning administrator. 
(6)  Other unit design enhancements such as garages, entryways, porches and special window treatments are encouraged but not required. 
(c)  Churches, temples, synagogues and places of worship, and their solely owned and operated customary accessory facilities, including cemeteries provided: 
(1)  Such uses are located on a lot with a minimum area of one acre; 
(2)  Principal buildings are setback a minimum of 50 feet from any property line; and 
(3)  Parking areas are located outside of the required front yard and separated from any side or rear property line by a minimum six foot high, opaque fence or wall, or a densely planted landscape strip of at least ten feet in width. 
(d)  Parks, playgrounds, community centers, tennis courts, swimming pools, golf courses and other recreational facilities, operated on a nonprofit basis. 
(e)  Public and semi-public buildings, structures and uses. 
(f)  Schools, public elementary, middle and secondary. 
(g)  Schools, parochial and private offering courses in general education substantially similar to that of a public school not offered for profit. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-802; Ord. No. 99-011, § 3, 9-7-1999) 
Sec. 42-188. - Accessory uses and structures-Permitted. 
(a)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the principal residential use of the property including, but not limited to, storage buildings, sheds, guesthouses, enclosures for household pets and home gardens. 
(b)  Each lot with a principal residential building shall be allowed one of the following accessory uses and structures: 
(1)  A home occupation that meets the requirements of this chapter; 
(2)  An accessory apartment that meets the requirements of this chapter; or 
(3)  A conditional accessory use as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-803) 
Sec. 42-189. - Same-Conditional. 
(a)  A home occupation that fails to meet up to two of the requirements for home occupations specified in this chapter. 
(b)  A temporary ECHO unit on a temporary basis not to exceed one calendar year, but renewable on an annual basis as long as the applicant can show suitable evidence of continuing medical hardship and as long as the temporary ECHO unit complies with section 42-160. The temporary ECHO unit shall be removed within 30 days after the medical hardship ceases to exist. 
(c)  A bed and breakfast inn may be allowed under the following conditions: 
(1)  External alterations must maintain and protect the residential and historic character of the neighborhood in which a bed and breakfast is located. 
(2)  Use of building for a bed and breakfast is limited to nine bedrooms for lease on a day-to-day temporary basis only. 
(3)  Bed and breakfast inns are not permitted, in whole or part, within accessory buildings. 
(4)  One externally illuminated, nonanimated business identification sign or nameplate not exceeding three square feet in area indicating the name of the bed and breakfast will be permitted. 
(5)  Bed and breakfast uses are subject to section 42-529 review. 
(6)  If located in a historic district, must be approved by the historic preservation committee. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-804; Ord. of 9-9-1996; Ord. No. 2000-03, § 2, 10-2-2000; Ord. No. 2003-04, 6-2-2003) 
Sec. 42-190. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
    As specified in article XVIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-805) 
Secs. 42-191-42-218. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - R-1A-SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 42-219. - Purpose; intent. 
    The R-1A-Single-Family Residential District is intended to establish and preserve stable single-family residential neighborhoods at low-medium densities (up to approximately 4.3 units per acre), free from other uses except those that are compatible with and convenient to the residents of such a district. Manufactured homes are intended to be restricted to those meeting certain standards designed to ensure compatibility with conventional, site-built dwellings. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-901) 
Sec. 42-220. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(b)  Manufactured homes, not including mobile homes, both as defined in this chapter and subject to the following: 
(1)  All towing devices, wheels, axles and hitches must be removed. 
(2)  Each dwelling must be installed on a safe and satisfactory foundation, in compliance with applicable federal, state, and local law. It shall not be necessary, however, for the dwelling to have a complete masonry or concrete perimeter foundation, as long as the foundation utilized is safe and complies with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, and as long as complete skirting of an opaque material, properly ventilated, is installed around the entire perimeter of the manufactured home to enclose the area between the bottom of the structure and the ground. The material utilized as skirting shall be a material or product designed or manufactured for the purpose of serving as skirting and enclosing the area between the bottom of such manufactured home and the ground. Further, each manufactured home shall be properly ventilated. 
(3)  Each dwelling shall be provided with an asphalt composition shingle roof or other non-metallic material approved by the zoning administrator, and said roof shall have a pitch or slope of at least 3:12 (three feet of vertical height for each 12 feet of horizontal width). 
(4)  The entire exterior of the dwelling shall be coated or finished with a non-metallic substance such as hardboard siding, wood paneling, "masonite", stucco or other building material approved by the zoning administrator. 
(5)  Other unit design enhancements such as garages, entryways porches and special window treatments are encouraged but not required. 
(c)  Churches, temples, synagogues and places of worship, and their solely owned and operated customary accessory facilities, including cemeteries, provided: 
(1)  Such uses are located on a lot with a minimum area of one acre; 
(2)  Principal buildings are setback a minimum of 50 feet from any property line; and 
(3)  Parking areas are located outside of the required front yard and separated from any side or rear property line by a minimum six feet high opaque fence or wall or a densely planted landscape strip of at least ten feet in width. 
(d)  Parks, playgrounds, community centers, tennis courts, swimming pools, golf courses and other recreational facilities operated on a nonprofit basis. 
(e)  Public and semi-public buildings, structures and uses. 
(f)  Schools, public elementary, middle and secondary. 
(g)  Schools, parochial and private offering courses in general education substantially similar to that of a public school not offered for profit. 
(h)  Two-family dwellings (duplexes) with a minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-902; Ord. No. 99-011, § 4, 9-7-1999) 
Sec. 42-221. - Accessory uses and structures-Permitted. 
(a)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the principal residential use of the property including, but not limited to, storage buildings, sheds, guesthouses, enclosures for household pets and home gardens. 
(b)  Each lot with a principal residential building shall be allowed one of the following accessory uses and structures: 
(1)  A home occupation that meets the requirements of this chapter; 
(2)  An accessory apartment that meets the requirements of this chapter; or 
(3)  A conditional accessory use as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-903) 
Sec. 42-222. - Same-Conditional. 
(a)  A home occupation that fails to meet up to two of the requirements for home occupations in this chapter. 
(b)  A temporary ECHO unit on a temporary basis not to exceed one calendar year, but renewable on an annual basis as long as the applicant can show suitable evidence of continuing medical hardship and as long as the temporary ECHO unit complies with the provisions of this chapter. The temporary ECHO unit shall be removed within 30 days after the medical hardship ceases to exist. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-904; Ord. No. 2000-03, § 3, 10-2-2000) 
Sec. 42-223. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
    As specified in article XVIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-905) 
Secs. 42-224-42-254. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - R-1B-SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 42-255. - Purpose; intent. 
    The R-1B-Single-Family Residential District is intended to establish and preserve stable single-family residential neighborhoods at low densities (up to approximately 5.8 units per acre), free from other uses except those that are compatible with and convenient to the residents of such a district. Manufactured homes are intended to be restricted to those meeting some minimum standards designated to ensure compatibility with conventional, site-built dwellings. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1001) 
Sec. 42-256. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(b)  Manufactured homes that shall not include mobile homes, both as defined in this chapter, and subject to the following: 
(1)  All towing devices, wheels, axles and hitches must be removed. 
(2)  Each dwelling must be installed on a safe and satisfactory foundation, in compliance with applicable federal, state and local law. It shall not be necessary, however, for the dwelling to have a complete masonry or concrete perimeter foundation, as long as the foundation utilized is safe and complies with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, and as long as complete skirting of an opaque material, properly ventilated, is installed around the entire perimeter of the manufactured home to enclose the area between the bottom of the structure and the ground. The material utilized as skirting shall be a material or product designed or manufactured for the purpose of serving as skirting and enclosing the area between the bottom of such manufactured home and the ground. Further, each manufactured home shall be properly ventilated. 
(3)  The roof shall have a pitch or slope of at least 2:12 (two feet of vertical height for each 12 feet of horizontal width). 
(4)  Other unit design enhancements, such as garages, entryways, porches and special window treatments, roof pitch, roofing materials and siding are encouraged but not required. 
(c)  Churches, temples, synagogues and places of worship, and their solely owned and operated customary accessory facilities, including cemeteries, provided: 
(1)  Such uses are located on a lot with a minimum area of one acre; 
(2)  Principal buildings are setback a minimum of 50 feet from any property line; and 
(3)  Parking areas are located outside of the required front yard and separated from any side or rear property line by a minimum six foot high opaque fence or wall or a densely planted landscape strip of at least ten feet in width. 
(d)  Parks, playgrounds, community centers, tennis courts, swimming pools, golf courses and other recreational facilities operated on a nonprofit basis. 
(e)  Public and semi-public buildings, structures and uses. 
(f)  Schools, public elementary, middle and secondary. 
(g)  Schools, parochial and private offering courses in general education substantially similar to that of a public school not offered for profit. 
(h)  Two-family dwellings (duplexes) with a minimum lot size of 12,000 square feet. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1002; Ord. No. 99-011, § 5, 9-7-1999) 
Sec. 42-257. - Accessory uses and structures-Permitted. 
(a)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the principal residential use of the property including, but not limited to, storage buildings, sheds, guesthouses, enclosures for household pets and home gardens. 
(b)  Each lot with a principal residential building shall be allowed one of the following accessory uses and structures: 
(1)  A home occupation that meets the requirements of this chapter; 
(2)  An accessory apartment that meets the requirements of this chapter; or 
(3)  A conditional accessory use provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1003) 
Sec. 42-258. - Same-Conditional. 
(a)  A home occupation that fails to meet up to two of the requirements for home occupations specified in this chapter. 
(b)  A temporary ECHO unit on a temporary basis not to exceed one calendar year, but renewable on an annual basis as long as the applicant can show suitable evidence of continuing medical hardship and as long as the temporary ECHO unit complies with this chapter. The temporary ECHO unit shall be removed within 30 days after the medical hardship ceases to exist. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1004; Ord. No. 2000-03, § 4, 10-2-2000) 
Sec. 42-259. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
    As specified in article XVIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1005) 
Secs. 42-260-42-281. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - R-2-MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 42-282. - Purpose; intent. 
    The R-2-Multiple-Family Residential District is intended to establish and preserve quiet, stable residential neighborhoods at high densities (approximately 10.4 units per acre), with the potential for more variety in housing types than in the R-1, R-1A and R-1B zoning districts, free from other uses except those which are compatible with and convenient to the residents of such a district. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1101) 
Sec. 42-283. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(b)  Manufactured homes, which shall include mobile homes, both as defined in this chapter. Each dwelling must be installed on a safe and satisfactory foundation, in compliance with applicable federal, state and local law. It shall not be necessary, however, for the dwelling to have a complete masonry or concrete perimeter foundation, as long as the foundation utilized is safe and complies with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, and as long as complete skirting of an opaque material, properly ventilated, is installed around the entire perimeter of the manufactured home or mobile home to enclose the area between the bottom of the structure and the ground. The material utilized as skirting shall be a material or product designed or manufactured for the purpose of serving as skirting and enclosing the area between the bottom of such manufactured home or mobile home and the ground. Further, each manufactured home or mobile home shall be properly ventilated. 
(c)  Parks, playgrounds, community centers, tennis courts, swimming pools, golf courses and other recreational facilities operated on a nonprofit basis. 
(d)  Public and semi-public buildings, structures and uses. 
(e)  Schools, public elementary, middle and secondary. 
(f)  Schools, parochial and private offering courses in general education substantially similar to that of a public school, not offered for profit. 
(g)  Two-family dwellings (duplexes) with a minimum lot size of 9,000 square feet. 
(h)  Single-family attached dwellings (townhouses) subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
(i)  Apartments, subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
(j)  Condominiums, with a minimum lot size of two acres for any condominium development, and subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
(k)  Personal care homes, "family" and "group." 
(l)  Continuing care retirement communities not to exceed accommodations for 16 residents. 
(m)  Day care centers serving not more than 16 children. 
(n)  Churches, temples, synagogues and places of worship. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1102; Ord. No. 99-011, § 6, 9-7-1999) 
Sec. 42-284. - Accessory uses and structures-Permitted. 
(a)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the principal residential use of the property including, but not limited to, storage buildings, sheds, guesthouses, enclosures for household pets and home gardens. 
(b)  Each lot with a principal residential building shall be allowed one of the following accessory uses and structures: 
(1)  A home occupation which meets the requirements of this chapter; or 
(2)  An accessory apartment which meets the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1103) 
Sec. 42-285. - Same-Conditional. 
(a)  A home occupation which fails to meet up to two of the requirements for home occupations specified in this chapter. 
(b)  A temporary ECHO unit on a temporary basis not to exceed one calendar year, but renewable on an annual basis as long as the applicant can show suitable evidence of continuing medical hardship and as long as the temporary ECHO unit complies with section 42-160. The temporary ECHO unit shall be removed within 30 days after the medical hardship ceases to exist. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1104; Ord. No. 2000-03, § 5, 10-2-2000) 
Sec. 42-286. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
    As specified in article XVIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1105) 
Sec. 42-287. - Development regulations-Townhouse. 
    All developments containing fee-simple townhouses shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Lots. Each townhouse shall be located on its own lot of record, and subdivision plat approval shall be required in accordance with the city subdivision regulations (chapter 32). 
(2)  Minimum lot size; frontage; width. Each townhouse lot shall contain a minimum lot area of 2,000 square feet. The minimum lot width and frontage for each lot shall be 18 feet. The minimum lot area for a townhouse development shall be one acre. 
(3)  Setbacks. Townhouses shall conform to the setbacks established for the R-2 district; provided, however, that the zero lot line (no side building setback) is permitted between individual townhouse units forming the same building. Between buildings, there shall be a side yard of not less than 25 feet. The rear setback shall be a minimum of 25 feet. Dwelling units that form a part of a single building shall have the front setbacks and rooflines varied or staggered by a minimum of two feet. 
(4)  Maximum units per building. No more than six townhouses shall be permitted to form any building. 
(5)  Streets. All streets within a townhouse development shall be built to city specifications as provided in the city subdivision regulations and dedicated to the city. 
(6)  Maximum density. Townhouse developments shall not exceed the maximum density permitted within the particular zoning district. 
(7)  Parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be grouped in bays, either adjacent to streets or in the interior of blocks. No off-street parking space shall be more than 100 feet by the most direct pedestrian route from a door of the dwelling unit it is intended to serve. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1106) 
Sec. 42-288. - Same-Apartment. 
(a)  Site plan approval by the city shall be required. 
(b)  Apartment buildings shall be constructed with a separation of at least 20 feet if one or more buildings contain two stories, and a separation of at least 30 feet if one or more buildings contain three or more stories. 
(c)  No principal building shall be constructed less than 40 feet from any property line. 
(d)  Each apartment development shall have a minimum of 20 percent of the development's total land area as landscaped open space. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1107) 
Sec. 42-289. - Same-Condominium. 
    All developments containing residential condominiums shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Site plan approval by the city shall be required. 
(2)  Condominium developments shall meet all applicable state laws, including the Georgia Condominium Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-3-70 et seq.). 
(3)  Proposed condominium bylaws shall be submitted with the application for site plan approval. 
(4)  Residential condominiums shall conform to the setbacks established for the R-2 district; provided, however, that the rear setback for all residential condominium buildings shall be 25 feet. 
(5)  Maximum density. Residential condominium developments shall not exceed the maximum density permitted within the R-2 zoning district. 
(6)  Parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be grouped in bays, either adjacent to streets or in the interior of blocks. No off-street parking space shall be more than 100 feet by the most direct pedestrian route from a door of the dwelling unit it is intended to serve. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1108) 
Secs. 42-290-42-311. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - MHP-MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT 

Sec. 42-312. - Purpose; intent. 
    The MHP-Mobile Home Park District is intended to provide areas for mobile home and manufactured home pads, which are leased rather than subdivided for individual ownership, that are served by public water, sanitary sewer and recreational amenities. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1201) 
Sec. 42-313. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Mobile homes and manufactured homes that shall not include mobile homes on individual lots under separate ownership. Replacement of nonconforming mobile homes in a conforming or nonconforming mobile home park is permitted. Commercial uses with an individual mobile or manufactured homes are not permitted. Each mobile home or manufactured home must be installed on a safe and satisfactory foundation, in compliance with applicable federal, state and local law. It shall not be necessary, however, for the mobile home or manufactured home to have a complete masonry or concrete perimeter foundation, as long as the foundation utilized is safe and complies with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, and as long as complete skirting of an opaque material, properly ventilated, is installed around the entire perimeter of the manufactured home or mobile home to enclose the area between the bottom of the structure and the ground. The material utilized as skirting shall be a material or product designed or manufactured for the purpose of serving as skirting and enclosing the area between the bottom of such manufactured home or mobile home and the ground. Further, each mobile home or manufactured home shall be properly ventilated. 
(b)  Administration buildings and customary laundry and service buildings. 
(c)  Community centers and recreation facilities intended to serve residents of the district. 
(d)  Customary accessory uses and structures clearly incidental to one or more permitted uses and structures. 
(e)  Public and semi-public buildings, structures and uses. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1202; Ord. No. 99-011, § 7, 9-7-1999) 
Sec. 42-314. - Development regulations. 
    Development for mobile home parks in the MHP-Mobile Home Park District shall conform to the following regulations: 
(1)  Site plan approval required. All mobile home park developments or expansions of existing development shall require site plan approval by the city. 
(2)  Location and frontage. A MHP-Mobile Home Park District development shall be located on property with a minimum frontage of 200 feet on a public street. 
(3)  Street requirement. Interior roads serving the development shall be constructed to city standards as specified in the city subdivision regulations and in addition shall have a minimum pavement width of 20 feet. If dedicated to the public, the roads within the development shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 40 feet. 
(4)  Lot area and width. A MHP-Mobile Home District development shall have a minimum area of 15 contiguous acres and a lot width of at least 200 feet. 
(5)  Density. The maximum density of a MHP-Mobile Home Park District development is 10.4 units per acre. 
(6)  Recreation and other community facilities. Not less than ten percent of the total area of the development shall be devoted to recreation and other community use facilities for those mobile home parks designed for or containing ten or more mobile homes. 
(7)  Perimeter setback required. No mobile home or other building or structure shall be located closer than 40 feet to any mobile home park perimeter property boundary. 
(8)  Perimeter screening required. A landscaped screen consisting of dense evergreen trees and/or shrubs and having a minimum width of 35 feet adjacent to all public rights-of-way and 15 feet along all other property lines shall be required. A minimum six-foot high opaque fence or wall may be erected along property lines not abutting a public right-of-way in lieu of such landscaped screen. All perimeter screening must be maintained. 
(9)  Utilities. All mobile home parks shall be served by approved public water and public sanitary sewer systems. 
(10)  Refuse collection. Each mobile home park shall provide refuse collection pads at locations convenient to each mobile home space, but in no case more than 50 feet from the street serving each mobile home. 
(11)  Space numbering. Each mobile home space shall be provided with a sign, not less than one-half square foot in area, which indicates the appropriate space number or address. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1203) 
Sec. 42-315. - Mobile home and mobile home space requirements. 
    Each mobile home shall be located on a separate pad in accordance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Space size and width. Each mobile home space within the development shall contain a minimum space size of 3,500 square feet and a minimum space width of 20 feet. 
(2)  Setbacks. Each mobile home shall be setback a minimum of ten feet from the front space line or street right-of-way, three feet from the side space line, and five feet from the rear space line. 
(3)  Foundations and tie-downs. Each mobile home shall be supported by piers and foundations and shall be anchored to the ground in accordance with building code requirements to secure the mobile home against uplift, sliding, rotation and overturning. Each dwelling must be installed on a safe and satisfactory foundation, in compliance with applicable federal, state and local law. It shall not be necessary, however, for the dwelling to have a complete masonry or concrete perimeter foundation, as long as the foundation utilized is safe and complies with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, and as long as complete skirting of an opaque material, properly ventilated, is installed around the entire perimeter of the mobile home to enclose the area between the bottom of the structure and the ground. The material utilized as skirting shall be a material or product designed or manufactured for the purpose of serving as skirting and enclosing the area between the bottom of such mobile home and the ground. Further, each mobile home shall be properly ventilated. 
(4)  Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles in mobile home parks shall be limited to motor homes and travel trailers that have toilet, bath and kitchen facilities and such use shall be limited to 120 days with no extensions. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1204; Ord. No. 99-011, § 8, 9-7-1999) 
Sec. 42-316. - Responsibilities-Management. 
(a)  The person to whom a permit for a mobile home park is issued shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)  The park management shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of this article and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this article and regulations issued pursuant to this article. 
(c)  The park management shall supervise the placement of each mobile home on its mobile home space that includes securing its stability and installing all utility connections. 
(d)  The park management shall maintain a register containing the names of all park occupants. Such register shall be available to any authorized person inspecting the park. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1205) 
Sec. 42-317. - Same-Occupant. 
(a)  The park occupant shall comply with all applicable requirements of this article and shall maintain such occupant's mobile home lot, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)  The park occupant shall be responsible for proper placement of such occupant's mobile home on its mobile home space and proper installation of all utility connections in accordance with the instructions of the park management. 
(c)  No owner or person in charge of a dog, cat or other pet animal shall permit it to run at large or to commit any nuisance within the limits of any mobile home park. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1206) 
Secs. 42-318-42-337. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - B-1-NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 42-338. - Purpose; intent. 
    The B-1-Neighborhood Business District is intended to provide areas for limited small-scale commercial uses of a convenience nature serving nearby residential neighborhoods as opposed to a regional market. The district is not intended to accommodate automotive or other types of more intensive commercial activities that are of such magnitude or type that would result in the generation of excessive traffic, noise, odors, pollution, safety hazards or other adverse impacts that would detract from the desirability of adjacent properties for residential use. In general, the neighborhood business district includes offices and retail and service establishments but excludes those highway-oriented, high-traffic-generating uses and those which involve use of chemicals and outside sales, storage or display. Institutionalized residential facilities are considered compatible uses in this district. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1301) 
Sec. 42-339. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Accessory uses and structures normally incidental to principal permitted uses and structures. 
(b)  Art galleries and museums. 
(c)  Churches, temples, synagogues and places of worship, and their customary accessory uses and structures, including cemeteries. 
(d)  Clubs, lodges, fraternal institutions and other places of public assembly for membership groups, nonprofit or for profit, not to exceed l0,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(e)  Continuing care retirement communities. 
(f)  Convalescent homes. 
(g)  Day care centers. 
(h)  Finance, insurance and real estate establishments. 
(i)  Nursing homes. 
(j)  Offices. 
(k)  Personal care homes, family, group and congregate. 
(1)  Public and semi-public buildings, structures and uses. 
(m)  Residences operated as a principal use or in conjunction with one or more permitted uses. Home occupations are permitted as accessory uses, without being subject to the limitations of section 42-157. As used in this section, the term "residences" shall mean and refer to single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings (duplexes), and multifamily dwellings, such as apartment houses, condominiums (residential buildings), and townhouses. 
(n)  Restaurants, but not including drive-in or drive-through facilities. 
(o)  Retail trade establishments, enclosed. 
(p)  Schools, public elementary, middle and secondary, and public and private colleges and universities. 
(q)  Schools, parochial, private vocational, technical, business and others, nonprofit or operated for profit. 
(r)  Services, business. 
(s)  Services, health. 
(t)  Services, personal. 
(u)  Shopping centers. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1302; Ord. No. 2015-04, § 2, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 42-340. - Conditional uses. 
    Planned unit developments, with a minimum lot size of ten acres is permitted as a conditional use. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1303) 
Sec. 42-341. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
    As specified in article XVIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1304) 
Secs. 42-342-42-370. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - B-2-GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 42-371. - Purpose; intent. 
    The B-2-General Business District is intended to provide adequate space for various types of general business uses that serve residents on a community level rather than neighborhood level, including the retailing of major goods and services of large scale, automotive and other types of more intensive commercial activities and establishments that rely on highway-oriented, passerby traffic. Institutional residential facilities are considered compatible uses in this district. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1401) 
Sec. 42-372. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Any use permitted in the B-1-Neighborhood Business District as enumerated in section 42-339, but not subject to any specified square footage limitations. 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures normally incidental to permitted principal uses. 
(c)  Automobile sales lots, new or used. 
(d)  Commercial recreation facilities, enclosed only. 
(e)  Contractor's establishments, building, electrical and plumbing. 
(f)  Convalescent homes, nursing homes, group homes, rehabilitation centers, sanitariums and similar institutionalized residential facilities involving professional care and treatment. 
(g)  Hospitals. 
(h)  Miniwarehouses and mini-storage facilities, where no individual storage stall or compartment exceeds 500 square feet of total floor area. 
(i)  Parking garages and parking lots. 
(j)  Residence for caretaker or night watchman. 
(k)  Restaurants, including drive-in and drive-through facilities. 
(l)  Retail trade establishments, unenclosed, and open air businesses. 
(m)  Services, automotive, including service stations. 
(n)  Services, lodging. 
(o)  Services, miscellaneous. 
(p)  Transportation, communication and utility facilities. 
(q)  Warehousing and storage uses which occupy no more than 20,000 square feet of floor area. 
(r)  Wholesale and wholesale distribution establishments which occupy no more than 20,000 square feet of floor area. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1402) 
Sec. 42-373. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Commercial recreation facilities, unenclosed. 
(b)  Planned unit developments with a minimum lot size of ten acres. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1403) 
Sec. 42-374. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
    As specified in article XVIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1404) 
Secs. 42-375-42-391. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - O-I-OFFICE-INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 42-392. - Purpose; intent. 
    The O-I-Office-Institutional District is intended to establish and preserve a compatible land use arrangement and provide suitable areas for the development of offices and professional enterprises, medical and dental facilities, and institutions. This district is also intended to apply to areas with a transitional character, where such permitted uses provide a buffer or transition between more intensive nonresidential and residential districts. It is most appropriately located on non-local (collector and arterial) streets. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1501) 
Sec. 42-393. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(b)  Clubs, lodges, fraternal institutions and other places of public assembly for membership groups, nonprofit, not to exceed 10,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(c)  Continuing care retirement communities. 
(d)  Convalescent homes, nursing homes, group homes, rehabilitation centers, sanitariums and similar institutionalized residential facilities involving professional care and treatment. 
(e)  Day care centers serving not more than 24 children. 
(f)  Finance, insurance and real estate establishments. 
(g)  Hospitals and clinics. 
(h)  Offices, but not involving retail sales of any kind. 
(i)  Personal care homes, family, group and congregate. 
(j)  Public and semi-public buildings, structures and uses. 
(k)  Restaurants, retail shops, snack bars and personal service establishments, but only in conjunction with the operation of one or more permitted principal uses, enclosed, and predominantly serving the residents or patrons of the facility on site, as opposed to the general public, and provided further that said uses shall have no direct access to a street or public sidewalk. 
(l)  Single-family residences, operated in conjunction with one or more permitted uses. 
(m)  Schools, nonprofit or operated for profit. 
(n)  Services, health. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1502) 
Sec. 42-394. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Planned unit developments with a minimum lot size of ten acres. 
(b)  Commercial recreation facilities, enclosed, when developed in conjunction with one or more permitted uses. 
(c)  Services, business. 
(d)  Services, miscellaneous. 
(e)  Services, personal. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1503) 
Sec. 42-395. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
    As specified in article XVIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1504) 
Secs. 42-396-42-418. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - M-1-LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 42-419. - Purpose; intent. 
    The M-1-Light Industrial District is established with the purpose of reserving certain areas with relatively level topography, adequate water and sewerage facilities, and access to arterial streets for industrial operations, but where such areas' proximity to residential and other districts makes it desirable to limit industrial operations to those that are not objectionable by reason of the emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors or radiation and that do not create fire or explosion hazards or other objectionable conditions. Uses within this district do not require substantial quantities of water for manufacturing operations and do not necessary require rail, air and water transportation. Certain commercial uses having an open storage characteristic, or which are most appropriately located as neighbors of industrial uses, are also included within this district. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1601) 
Sec. 42-420. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Accessory uses and structures normally incidental to permitted principal uses, including offices, showrooms and administrative facilities. 
(b)  Contractor's establishments. 
(c)  Distribution of products and merchandise. 
(d)  Dry cleaning plants. 
(e)  Exterminators and pest control businesses. 
(f)  Kennels. 
(g)  Lumber yards, planning and sawmills. 
(h)  Machine shops. 
(i)  Miniwarehouses and mini-storage facilities. 
(j)  Parking garages and parking lots. 
(k)  Public and semi-public buildings, structures and uses. 
(l)  Racetracks for animals or motor-driven vehicles; provided the site contains a minimum of 15 acres. 
(m)  Radio and television broadcasting towers and cellular phone antennas. 
(n)  Repair of household appliances. 
(o)  Recycling plants, including any processing activities. 
(p)  Research and scientific laboratories. 
(q)  Residences for caretaker or night watchman. 
(r)  Sign fabrication and painting shops. 
(s)  Services, automotive. 
(t)  Storage buildings and storage yards, including unenclosed. 
(u)  Soft drink bottling and distributing plants. 
(v)  Transportation, communication and utility facilities. 
(w)  Welding shops. 
(x)  Wholesaling, wholesale distribution and warehousing facilities. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1602) 
Sec. 42-421. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
    As specified in article XVIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1603) 
Secs. 42-422-42-440. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - M-2-HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 42-441. - Purpose; intent. 
    The M-2-Heavy Industrial District is established with the purpose of reserving certain areas with relatively level topography, adequate water and sewerage facilities and access to arterial streets for industrial operations, which are objectionable by reason of the emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors or radiation and that do create fire or explosion hazards or other objectionable conditions. Uses within this district may require substantial quantities of water for manufacturing operations and may require rail, air and water transportation. Conditional uses permitted in this district are primarily those known to create a severe safety hazard or to be major producers of air pollution, thus being subject to state and or federal environmental controls. This district is not suitable adjacent to residential districts. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1701) 
Sec. 42-442. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Any use permitted in the M-1-Light Industrial District, as enumerated in section 42-420. 
(b)  Canning establishments. 
(c)  Ceramic production facilities. 
(d)  Cold storage, frozen food lockers and ice manufacture. 
(e)  Feed, grain or fertilizer manufacture or storage. 
(f)  Food processing plants, excluding fish and poultry facilities and slaughterhouses. 
(g)  Manufacturing, processing and assembling of the following products: chemicals, floor coverings, glass, machinery, metals, rubber, textiles, tobacco and wood unless more specifically listed under conditional uses. 
(h)  Residences for a caretaker or night watchman. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1702) 
Sec. 42-443. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Automotive and light duty truck manufacturing. 
(b)  Bulk gasoline terminals and bulk gasoline plants. 
(c)  Coating of cans, coils, fabrics, vinyl, metal furniture, appliance surfaces, wire, paper and flat wood paneling. 
(d)  Conical burners. 
(e)  Cotton gins. 
(f)  Cupola furnaces for metallurgical melting. 
(g)  External floating roof tanks. 
(h)  Fertilizer manufacturing plants. 
(i)  Fiberglass insulation manufacturing plants. 
(j)  Kaolin processing facilities. 
(k)  Petroleum liquid storage. 
(l)  Pulp mills. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1703) 
Sec. 42-444. - Area, height, density and placement requirements. 
    As specified in article XVIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1703) 
Secs. 42-445-42-471. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - PUD-PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 42-472. - Purpose; intent 
    The PUD-Planned Unit Development District is intended to: 
(1)  Provide flexibility in the application, height, bulk, placement and other zoning controls; 
(2)  Provide for mixing a wide variety of residential housing types and arrangements; 
(3)  Provide for the mixing of compatible residential, office and commercial land uses; 
(4)  Encourage imaginative and innovative design for the unified development of tracts of land; 
(5)  Provide an alternative for more efficient use of land, resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets, thereby resulting in lower construction and maintenance costs to the public; 
(6)  Reserve the natural amenities of the land by encouraging scenic and functional open areas within the development; and 
(7)  Promote land development in proper relation to the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § P-1, 7-6-2006) 
Sec. 42-473. - Permitted uses. 
    Any land uses and combinations thereof, including signs and accessory buildings and uses, which have been specifically proposed by the applicant and approved by the city as a part of a planned unit development site plan, report or other supporting information are permitted in a PUD district. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § P-2, 7-6-2006) 
Sec. 42-474. - Summary report required. 
    Applications for rezoning of, or development within, a PUD-Planned Unit Development District shall require a written report that explains the type, nature, size, intent and characteristics of the proposed development. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § P-3, 7-6-2006) 
Sec. 42-475. - Site plan approval required. 
(a)  Applications for rezoning of, or development within, a PUD-Planned Unit Development District shall require a site plan, including, as a minimum, those items enumerated in these regulations. The city manager or his designee, planning commission, or city council may require, in addition, such other information, studies, plats, plans or architectural elevations deemed necessary to perform an adequate review of the proposed application. 
(b)  A licensed professional engineer, licensed architect, licensed land planner or licensed landscape architect shall prepare the site plans, and his seal of registration or professional initials shall be indicated on such plans. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § P-4, 7-6-2006) 
Sec. 42-476. - Filing. 
    Any person desiring to subdivide land or develop a planned unit development shall file with the planning commission (through the zoning administrator's office) five copies of the preliminary plat accompanied by a letter of application. The letter of application shall contain the name and address of the developer and his agent, the zoning of the property to be subdivided, whether or not the subdivision or planned unit development will be developed in phases, any plans for potential annexation of adjoining property and plans for serving the proposed subdivision with city gas, sewer and water facilities. The plat shall be prepared in accordance with these regulations and with applicable city specifications: 
(1)  Title block and north arrow. The plat will show the name of the proposed subdivision or planned unit development, its location by county and city, the name, address and registration number of the surveyor preparing the plat and the date of the plat. A north arrow shall be included with a notation referencing the bearings to magnetic north. 
(2)  General layout. The plat shall show information as to the proposed street layout and widths, layout of lots with a notation as to the minimum size and width of lots and any proposed open space. Any lands to be dedicated will be identified. Plat scale, total acreage of the site and total number of lots created shall also be indicated. 
(3)  Topography. The plat shall show existing contour lines dashed and any proposed contour lines solid, both sets of lines to be at two-foot intervals, mean sea level (MSL). Prominent drainage features such as lakes, depressions, streams, etc., which could affect the design of the subdivision shall be shown. Engineering data showing the high-water elevation and how it was established shall be submitted. 
(4)  Existing features. The plat shall show the locations and names of existing and platted property lines, streets (and their rights-of-way), railroads (and their rights-of-way), public and private rights-of-way, sanitary sewer (and size), easements, storm drainage (and size), parks and other public open spaces, land lot and land district lines, city limits lines and names of adjoining property owners or subdivisions. 
(5)  Location map. The plat shall include a small-scale map of sufficient clarity so that the location of the proposed subdivision can be readily determined. 
(6)  Water, gas and sewer. A statement from the subdivider or developer shall be submitted with the preliminary plat, which will describe the method by which sanitary sewer, gas and water facilities will be provided. As a minimum, the report shall include the following: 
a.  A complete listing of every land use proposed within the development, including total acreage and the amount of acreage devoted to each use. All uses not specifically included in the report or site plan and approved by the city are prohibited unless subsequently the application is amended in accordance with applicable procedures. 
b.  Proposed development standards including minimum lot sizes, minimum lot widths, minimum lot frontages, minimum floor areas or residential dwelling unit sizes, maximum number of dwelling units, maximum square footage figures for nonresidential developments, minimum yards/building setbacks, landscape strips and buffers, height limitations, restrictive covenants, and any other such applicable standard or requirement. The report should also indicate any proposed exceptions or variations from the size, setback, frontage, density or other standards that are required in other conventional zoning districts, along with justification for such proposed exceptions or variations. 
c.  Timeframe of development and provisions for ownership and management of the development. 
d.  Intended plans for the provision of utilities, including water, gas, sewer and drainage facilities. 
e.  All streets shall be built to state DOT and the city standards and dedicated to the city upon completion and approval. All streets shall be named by developer and approved by the city. 
(7)  Future tract plan. In cases where a subdivision or planned unit development is to be developed in stages, with additional plats being filed with the planning commission at a later date, the filing of the initial plat will be accompanied by a future tract plan, a reasonably accurate plat in sketch form of the entire tract, which will show the future street system and topography for the entire tract. Once the required tract plan has been reviewed by appropriate city staff and given approval by the planning commission, seven copies of the approved future tract plan must be provided for distribution to the mayor and city council for their review and approval. 
(8)  Completeness. If any of the facts enumerated in subsections (1) through (7) of this section are omitted or misrepresented on the plat, the chairperson of the planning and zoning commission or the zoning administrator may refuse to review the plat and shall return the plat to the subdivider or developer to be completed or revised. 
(9)  City, county and state requirements. The plat shall comply with all city, county and state requirements for filing in the deed records. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § P-5, 7-6-2006) 
Sec. 42-477. - Report and site plan to establish minimum requirements. 
    The approved development summary report, site plan and all other information, studies, plats, plans or architectural elevations submitted in the application, or required to be submitted by the city, shall establish the standards and minimum requirements for the subject property and shall become the zoning regulations that apply to the subject property, regardless of changes in property ownership. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § P-6, 7-6-2006) 
Sec. 42-478. - Revisions to approved application. 
    Any additions in the types of land uses, increases in square footage or density, decreases in lot sizes, changes in the location or dimensions of streets, decreases in dwelling unit floor areas, major alterations in the land use patterns, or other substantial changes which, in the opinion of the city manager or his designee, result in a development of such intent and character which has not been conceptually approved by the city, shall require additional approval. Otherwise, minor changes may be approved by the city manager prior to issuance of building permits. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § P-7, 7-6-2006) 
Sec. 42-479. - Minimum site area and frontage required. 
    The minimum site area for a PUD-Planned Unit Development District shall be subject to approval by the planning commission and city council according to preliminary plat. The planned unit development shall have a minimum of 100 feet of frontage on a public street, which shall provide access to such public street. Lots within the planned unit development should be consistent with current zoning requirements for like type housing or be approved as a variation in the planned unit development. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § P-8, 7-6-2006) 
Sec. 42-480. - Site planning guidelines. 
    The following specifications are guidelines to be utilized in preparing of site plans for planned unit developments: 
(1)  Land uses that have traditionally been viewed as incompatible (e.g., single-family subdivision and a manufacturing plant) shall not be proposed in the same planned unit development. 
(2)  Office and commercial uses shall be located adjacent to major thoroughfares or in other areas with suitable access that will not result in traffic through residential areas. 
(3)  Lot sizes, lot widths, unit sizes and other characteristics of residential development within the planned unit development should be similar to those characteristics of adjacent or nearby residential subdivision, or provide a suitable transition from such adjacent uses. 
(4)  Location of land uses should conform substantially with land use plan goals, policies and suggested types of uses. 
(5)  Street lengths, alignments, patterns and other characteristics should conform to city subdivision regulations or standard planning principles. 
(6)  Proposed developments should make maximum use of natural features of the land. 
(7)  For developments that are predominantly residential, only limited commercial uses for up to ten percent of the total development site area can be of a retail nature. 
(8)  The commercial and retail portion of predominantly residential developments shall be limited to those that do not affect the traffic volume or the character and nature of traffic (i.e., no trucks or vehicles with more than two axles). Commercial uses within these predominately residential areas shall be limited to those uses that do not produce waste that cannot be handled by a standard solid waste handler; those uses that produce waste that must be disposed of in a hazard waste facility shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § P-9, 7-6-2006) 
Secs. 42-481-42-498. - Reserved. 
_____
ARTICLE XVIII. - MINIMUM DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 42-499. - By zoning districts. 
District Maximum Height (in feet) Minimum Lot Width (in feet) Minimum Lot Size (in sq. ft.) Maximum Lot Coverage (percentage) Principal Building Setback Maximum Density (in units per acre) Minimum Gross Floor Area Per Dwelling Unit Front Side Rear R-1 35 100 × 150 15,000 30 25 10 20 2.9 900 R-1A 35 75 × 134 10,000 35 20 7 15 4.3 750 R-1B 35 60 × 100 6,000 40 15 5 10 5.8 600 R-2 45 50 × 90 4,500 45 15 5 10 10.4 480 MHP 35 (See article XI of this chapter) B-1 45 50 4,500 45 25 10 20 N/A 480 B-2 60 N/A N/A N/A 25(a) 10(a) 20(a) N/A N/A O-I 45 50 10,000 45 25 10 20 4.3 480 M-1 150 N/A N/A 45 40 25(b) 50(b) N/A N/A M-2 150 N/A N/A 60 40 25(c) 50(c) N/A N/A  
N/A= Not applicable or no minimum 
(a) = A setback shall not be required when one or more buildings or structures on an abutting lot to the side does not meet the specified setback. 
(b) = When development in this district abuts a residential district, a buffer with a minimum of 40 feet in width shall be provided along the entire property line abutting the residential district. 
(c) = When development in this district abuts a residential or O-I district, a buffer with a minimum of 75 feet in width shall be provided along the entire property line abutting said district. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1801) 
_____
Secs. 42-500-42-521. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 42-522. - Authority. 
    The city may from time to time amend: 
(1)  The number, shape, boundary or area of any zoning district, or may amend any regulation pertaining to any district; or 
(2)  Any article or section of this chapter. 
This chapter shall provide the procedure for amending these regulations. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1901) 
Sec. 42-523. - Initiation. 
    A petition to amend the text of this chapter or the official zoning map may be initiated by the city council, the planning commission, or any person that owns property involved in a petition for amendment, subject to the provisions established in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1902) 
Sec. 42-524. - Application-Frequency. 
(a)  The city or the planning commission may at any time file, in its own name, an application for amendment to the text of this chapter or the official zoning map, except that if a zoning decision of the city council is for the rezoning of property, and the amendment to this chapter and map to accomplish the rezoning is defeated by the city council, the same property may not again be considered for rezoning until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the defeat of the rezoning by the city. 
(b)  A property owner or subsequent property owner shall not initiate action for a map amendment, conditional use permit or variance affecting the same or any portion of property more often than once every 12 months from the date of any previous decision of denial rendered by the city. 
(c)  A property owner or subsequent property owner shall not initiate action for an amendment to this chapter text affecting the same or any portion of property more often than once every 12 months from the date of any previous decision of denial rendered by the city. 
(d)  This section shall not be construed as to limit new applications involving the same property for which the application was made, provided the new application contains substantive differences from the original application as determined by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1903) 
Sec. 42-525. - Same-Withdrawal. 
    Any petition for an amendment to this chapter text, official zoning map, conditional use approval or variance may be withdrawn, at the discretion of the person or agency initiating such a request, at any time prior to closing the required public hearing by the city council upon written notice to the zoning administrator. If the public hearing before the city has been completed, withdrawal by the applicant is not permitted. Any required application fees shall be refunded to the applicant only if such application has not been prepared and submitted for advertisement as determined by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1904) 
Sec. 42-526. - Same-Requirements. 
    Application materials specified in this section shall be required for the following petitions, amendments to the official zoning map, conditional use permits, variances and appeals: 
(1)  An application form furnished by the zoning administrator; 
(2)  A legal description of the property to be considered in the application. The legal description shall be by metes and bounds unless the zoning administrator accepts an alternative legal description (such as a tax plat map). Boundary surveys of the property should be submitted with the application whenever available; 
(3)  A letter of intent that at a minimum describes the general characteristics of the proposed development such as type and timeframe of development, background information in support of such application and any other information deemed pertinent by the applicant. For variance applications, the letter of intent shall address the criteria specified in section 42-530. For zoning map amendment applications, the letter of intent shall address the standards specified in section 42-528. For conditional use permit applications, the letter of intent shall address the standards specified in section 42-529; 
(4)  Applicants for variances, conditional use permits and map amendment to commercial or industrial zoning districts shall require a site plan with all information specified in section 42-527. Unless otherwise noted in the approval, the site plan submitted in support of an approved application shall be considered a part of the approval and must be followed; 
(5)  A fee for said application in an amount as established from time to time by city council resolution; and 
(6)  Applications which require action by the city council shall also require disclosure of any conflicts of interest as specified in O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq., Conflict of Interest in Zoning Actions. 
Applicants shall submit 15 copies of any required site plans and letters of intent to the zoning administrator for distribution to the applicable bodies and/or review agencies. The zoning administrator may require more or less copies depending on the nature and extent of required review. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1905) 
Sec. 42-527. - Site plan requirements. 
    All site plans required by this chapter shall, at a minimum, contain the following information: 
(1)  Title of the proposed development and the name, address and telephone number of the property owner. 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the architect, engineer or other designer of the proposed development. 
(3)  Scale, date, north arrow and general location map showing relationship of the site to streets or natural landmarks. 
(4)  Boundaries of the subject property, all existing and proposed streets, including right-of-way and street pavement widths, buildings, watercourses, parking and loading areas and other physical characteristics of the property and proposed development. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1906) 
Sec. 42-528. - Criteria-Map amendments. 
    The applicant, zoning administrator, planning commission and city council should review an application for zoning map amendment with regard to the following criteria: 
(1)  The existing uses and zoning of nearby property and whether the proposed zoning will adversely affect the existing use or usability of nearby property. 
(2)  The extent to which property values are diminished by the particular zoning restrictions. 
(3)  The extent to which the destruction of property values promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public. 
(4)  The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner. 
(5)  The physical suitability of the subject property for development as presently zoned and under the proposed zoning district. 
(6)  The length of time the property has been vacant, considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property, and whether there are existing or changed conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the rezoning request. 
(7)  The zoning history of the subject property. 
(8)  The extent to which the proposed zoning will result in a use which will or could cause excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, schools, parks or other public facilities. 
(9)  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the comprehensive plan, land use plan or other adopted plans. 
(10)  The possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts. 
The zoning administrator, planning commission and city may consider other factors deemed relevant before formulating recommendations and taking action on a particular request. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1907) 
Sec. 42-529. - Same-Conditional uses. 
    The applicant, zoning administrator, planning commission and city council should review applications for conditional uses with regard to the following criteria: 
(1)  Off-street parking and loading facilities are adequate in terms of location, amount and design to serve the use. 
(2)  The number, size and type of signs proposed are compatible with the surrounding area. 
(3)  The amount and location of open space and the provision of screening is such that buffering of incompatible uses is achieved. 
(4)  Ingress and egress to the property is suitable and safe, and the effect of the proposed activity on traffic flow along adjoining streets is not adverse. 
(5)  The location and intensity of outdoor lighting is such that it does not cast light on adjacent, adjoining or neighboring properties. 
(6)  Hours and manner of operation of the proposed use are not inconsistent with adjacent and nearby uses. 
(7)  Public facilities and utilities are capable of adequately serving the proposed use. 
(8)  The proposed use will not have a significant adverse effect on the level of property values or the general character of adjacent land uses or the general area. 
(9)  The physical conditions of the site, including size, shape, topography and drainage, are suitable for the proposed development. 
(10)  The proposed use is consistent with the goals and objectives of the city's comprehensive plan. 
(11)  The proposed use and development are compatible with adjacent and nearby uses and buildings in terms of density and scale of development. 
The zoning administrator, planning commission and city may consider other factors deemed relevant before formulating recommendations and taking action on a particular conditional use application. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1908) 
Sec. 42-530. - Same-Variances. 
    The city is hereby empowered to authorize upon application in specific cases such variance from the dimensional requirements of zoning regulations (any provisions requiring a number to be achieved, such as height in feet, setback, lot area, lot width, parking and loading requirements, etc.) as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations will in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of these regulations shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. The existence of permitted or nonconforming use of neighboring land, buildings or structures in the same zoning district or of permitted or nonconforming uses in other districts shall not constitute a reason for the requested variance. A variance may be granted in an individual case of unnecessary hardship, after appropriate application in accordance with section 42-526, upon specific findings that all of the following conditions exist. The absence of any one condition shall be grounds for denial of the application for variance. 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography that are not applicable to other land or structures in the same district; 
(2)  A literal interpretation of the provisions of these zoning regulations would create an unnecessary hardship and would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other property owners within the district in which the property is located; 
(3)  Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the property of the applicant any special privileges that are denied to other properties of the district in which the applicant's property is located; 
(4)  Relief, if granted, will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of these regulations and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or general welfare in such a manner as will interfere with or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings or unreasonable affect their value; 
(5)  The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of the applicant; 
(6)  The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the land, building or structure; 
(7)  The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, building or structures that is not permitted by right in the district involved; and 
(8)  A variance shall not be granted in cases where the requested relief to the property owner can be remedied by a change to a zoning district which otherwise would not require a variance. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1909) 
Sec. 42-531. - Procedures for appeals. 
(a)  The city council is empowered to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator in the interpretation or enforcement of these zoning regulations. 
(b)  Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days, or as provided by city rules, by filing with the zoning administrator a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. All papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken shall forthwith be transmitted to the city. 
(c)  The city council shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal and give at least 15 days of public notice thereof and due notice to the parties in interest and shall render a decision on the appeal within a reasonable time. 
(d)  This section shall not be construed as permitting an appeal of the city's denial of a rezoning request or conditional use, the appropriate remedy of which would be a suit filed in the county superior court. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1910) 
Sec. 42-532. - Simultaneous consideration of multiple applications. 
    A petitioner may simultaneously submit multiple applications involving the same property, such as a rezoning request, conditional use, and variance. The planning commission and city council may simultaneously hear and consider multiple applications, provided the applicable public notice and other specified requirements are met. The proper order of consideration of multiple applications shall be the rezoning request first, conditional use second and variance third. The city council may consider and act upon a variance request at the same meeting as a rezoning request and/or conditional use is approved, in accordance with section 42-530. For multiple applications, specified filing fees shall be paid for each individual application, to defray the cost of newspaper advertisements and posting of signs on the subject property. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1911) 
Sec. 42-533. - Conditional approval permitted. 
(a)  The letter of intent, site plan, and other information submitted as a part of any approved application for zoning map amendment, variance, appeal or conditional use, as well as any statements of intent made by the petitioner in public meetings recorded in the minutes of the body considering the application, shall be considered a part of the approval and must be followed. 
(b)  In addition to the conditions of following the submitted site plan, letter of intent and other assurances made by the petitioner, the planning commission may recommend, and the city council may attach, any conditions to its approval which it finds necessary to render the proposed development compatible with adjacent and nearby properties and land uses. 
(c)  Applications to modify the approved site plan, letter of intent or other conditions of approval may be considered by the city after review and recommendation by the planning commission, without the requirement of any public hearings. Any request, however, which in the zoning administrator's opinion constitutes a change that is tantamount to a new application that would otherwise require a rezoning, new conditional use or variance to articles and sections of this chapter not previously contemplated shall require resubmittal and reconsideration of the request as a new application that meets all submittal, notification and public hearing requirements specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1912) 
Sec. 42-534. - Notice and hearing required. 
(a)  This section shall apply to all applications for amendments to this chapter, amendments to the official zoning map, petitions for variances and appeals to the city council, and requests for conditional use approval. Except as otherwise noted, this section shall apply to the adoption and readoption of a zoning chapter and official zoning map. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a completed application, fees and other information required by this chapter, the zoning administrator shall cause notice of such application to be published at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the city council at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of public hearing before the city. Said published notice shall include, as a minimum, the purpose, location, date and time of the public hearing before the planning commission and city council, the location of the property being considered, the present zoning classification of the property, and proposed action to be taken, as appropriate (such as proposed zoning district, type of conditional use, variance to particular articles and sections, and so forth). The zoning administrator shall also cause to have posted in a conspicuous place on said property one or more signs, each of which shall contain the information specified for published notices. The public hearing before the planning commission and the city shall not take place until said signs have been posted for a least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the public hearing. The posting of signs shall not be required for appeals, since an appeal only applies to interpretation of zoning regulations that apply to all similarly situated properties. The city shall not require the posting of signs when adopting or readopting a zoning chapter and official zoning map. 
(c)  Public hearings may be delayed, rescheduled or continued at another time and date, provided announcement is given at the time and place of the initially scheduled and advertised public hearing, and provided such date, time and location of the public hearing to be delayed, rescheduled or continued is announced. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1913) 
Sec. 42-535. - Recommendation-Zoning administrator. 
    The zoning administrator may, as appropriate, customarily submit to the planning commission and city council, prior to a scheduled public hearing, copies of the site plan and letter of intent along with a written recommendation for approval, disapproval, deferral, withdrawal or other recommendation. Said recommendation shall include the reasons for said recommendation, considered within the context of the appropriate criteria as specified by this chapter. The zoning administrator's recommendation shall have an advisory effect only and shall not be binding on the city. Copies of the zoning administrator's recommendation shall be made available upon request to the applicant and other interested parties upon completion and distribution to the appropriate bodies and at the public hearing. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1914) 
Sec. 42-536. - Same-Planning commission. 
(a)  Prior to the public hearing held by the city council, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on all applications for amendment to the text of the zoning regulations, amendments to the official zoning map, conditional use applications and variances. The planning commission shall also provide a recommendation regarding adoption or readoption of a zoning chapter or official zoning map. 
(b)  After completing its studies of the particular petition, the planning commission shall submit a recommended action in writing to the city council. The planning commission may submit any additional report it deems appropriate. The planning commission's recommendation shall have an advisory effect only and shall not be binding on the city. Copies of the planning commission's recommendation and report shall be made available upon request to the applicant and other interested parties upon completion and distribution to the city council and at the public hearing before the city. 
(c)  The planning commission shall have 30 days within which to submit its recommendation. The city council shall not take action on any of said applications, until it has received the planning commission's recommendation within the specified time period; provided, however, that this shall not be construed to limit the city council from conducting its scheduled public hearing on the matter, should it desire to do so. If the planning commission fails to submit a recommendation within the 30-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the recommended application. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1915) 
Sec. 42-537. - Conduct of public hearings. 
    All public hearings regarding applications considered by the planning commission and city council shall be held in accordance with any procedures adopted by said body and, in addition, shall be governed by the following procedures: 
(1)  The presiding officer shall open the hearing by stating the specific application being considered at the public hearing. At this time the presiding officer may summarize the public hearing procedures. 
(2)  The zoning administrator or other staff may present a description of the proposed application, any applicable background material, his recommendation regarding action on said application as appropriate, and the planning commission's recommendation and report, as appropriate. 
(3)  Persons who support the application will be asked to comment first. The petitioner may, upon recognition and upon statement of name and address, present and explain his application. The petitioner, or his designated agent, is expected to attend the public hearing unless written notice of hardship is received prior to such meeting. A time limitation may be imposed at the discretion of the presiding officer. 
(4)  Persons who oppose the application or who have questions about the subject application will be asked to comment next. All interested parties after being recognized shall be afforded an opportunity to address the proposed application by standing before the appropriate body and stating their name, address and interest along with any comments on the proposed application. A time limitation may be imposed at the discretion of the presiding officer. 
(5)  The petitioner shall have an opportunity to answer any questions raised by the public, for summary remarks and for rebuttal concerning the proposed application. 
(6)  Upon the completion of any comments from interested parties and the petitioner, the public hearing shall be completed and adjourned. 
(7)  All public comments having been heard, the members of the body considering the application may publicly discuss the request among themselves. During this discussion period, the members of the body may call on the petitioner or other interested parties to clarify points made previously or to answer questions. Said petitioner or interested parties may respond upon recognition. Additional questions from the general public may not be asked once the public hearing has been closed. Unrecognized responses from the petitioner shall be ruled out of order by the presiding officer once the public hearing is closed and a vote or other action is being considered. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1916) 
Sec. 42-538. - Action by city council. 
    After the public hearing has been completed, the city council may take action to approve or deny the request, refer the application back to the zoning administrator or planning commission for further study, or table or defer action until a later meeting. In voting on a petition, the city council shall follow applicable bylaws for such body, or in lieu of adopted bylaws, shall generally follow the "Robert's Rules of Order." 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-1917) 
Secs. 42-539-42-569. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XX. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 42-570. - Authority of zoning administrator. 
    The zoning administrator shall administrate the provisions of this chapter. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for interpretation of the provisions of these regulations and for maintenance of the official zoning map. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-2001) 
Sec. 42-571. - Enforcement. 
    The zoning administrator shall enforce the provisions of these regulations. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-2002) 
Sec. 42-572. - Development permit required. 
(a)  A development permit shall be required for any proposed use of land or buildings to indicate and ensure compliance with all provisions of these regulations before any building permit is issued or any improvement, grading, land disturbing activity or alteration of land or buildings commences; provided, however, that development permits for individual structures within approved single-family residential subdivisions or for single-family dwelling units on individual lots shall not be required. If a land disturbance permit is required pursuant to the city's soil erosion and sediment control chapter, the development permit and land disturbance permit shall be considered one and the same. Approval of a preliminary plat in accordance with all applicable provisions of the subdivision regulations shall constitute approval of the development permit for each subdivision. 
(b)  All development permits shall be issued by the zoning administrator, who shall in no case approve a development permit for the use, construction or alteration of any land or building if the land or building as proposed to be used, constructed or altered would be in violation of any of the provisions of these regulations or any other codes and laws. Development permits shall be valid for two years from its issuance. If work described in any development permit has not begun within 120 days from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire, and further work shall not proceed until a new development permit has been obtained. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-2003) 
Sec. 42-573. - Building permit required. 
(a)  No building or structure, except as specifically exempted by these regulations, shall be erected, moved, extended, enlarged or structurally altered, nor shall any excavation or filling of any lot for the construction of any building be commenced until the building inspector has issued a building permit for such work in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. 
(b)  The building inspector shall issue all building permits. In cases of uncertainty regarding whether a proposed building or structure conforms to any provisions within these regulations, the zoning administrator shall make the determination. Building permits shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within 90 days of its date of issue, or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months or more. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-2004) 
Sec. 42-574. - Certificate of occupancy required. 
(a)  A certificate of occupancy issued by the building inspector is required in advance of: 
(1)  Occupancy or use of any lot or change or extension in the use of any lot; 
(2)  Any building or structure hereafter erected; or 
(3)  Any change in the use of an existing building or structure. 
(b)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of these regulations. Business licenses shall not be issued until the business conforms to the regulations of the district in which it is located and a valid certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-2005) 
Sec. 42-575. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of these regulations shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $200.00 for each offense, or as determined by the court of proper jurisdiction. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-2006) 
Sec. 42-576. - Remedies. 
(a)  In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of these regulations, the zoning administrator or any other appropriate authority may, in addition to other remedies, and after due notice to the owner of the violation: 
(1)  Issue a citation for violation of these regulations requiring the presence of the violator in the court of proper jurisdiction; or 
(2)  Institute an injunction or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent: 
a.  Such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use to correct or abate such violation; or 
b.  The occupancy of such building, structure or land. 
(b)  Where a violation of these regulations exists with respect to a structure or land, the zoning administrator may, in addition to the remedies listed in subsection (a) of this section, require that utility service be withheld therefrom until such time as the structure or premises is no longer in violation of these regulations. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-2007) 
Sec. 42-577. - Conflicts. 
    Whenever the provisions of these regulations impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute, the provisions of these regulations shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by these regulations, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1995, § 86-2101) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1976 COMPILATION 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1976 Compilation which are included herein. Sections of the 1976 Compilation not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the tables immediately following this table. 
Comp. 1976 
Section Section 

this Code 3-101 2-21 3-104 10-109 3-104-A 10-108 10-110 3-105-A 10-134, 10-135 3-703 2-93-2-96 4-118-B 4-1 4-57-4-60 4-79-4-82 4-84 4-112-4-120 4-217-4-223 4-246-4-249 4-277 4-416-4-421 5-90 20-1 5-91 20-3 5-92 20-25 5-96-5-102 20-26-20-32 5-110 20-53 5-111 20-1 20-54 5-112 20-1 5-112, 5-113 20-55, 20-56 5-113 20-57-20-61 5-120-5-122 20-81-20-83 5-123-5-125 20-110-20-112 5-126, 5-127 20-111 5-128, 5-129 20-113, 20-114 5-129 20-115 5-130, 5-131 20-144, 20-145 5-133-5-135 20-147-20-149 5-140-5-142 20-167 5-143 20-168 5-150, 5-151 20-190, 20-191 5-152 20-2 6-105A 24-1 6-109 16-1, 16-2 7-103(3) 34-97 7-107 30-20, 30-21 7-108 34-66 7-116 34-96 7-120 34-19 34-65 7-122 34-20 7-124-B 34-93-34-95 34-99-34-102 7-125 24-10 8-102 28-1-28-4 28-29, 28-30 9-106 24-9 10-115 36-74 10-116A 36-123 10-120 10-182-10-191 36-1 36-3, 36-4 36-34-36-36 36-52 36-70 36-73 36-92 36-124, 36-125 36-149-36-152 11-104 30-76, 30-77 11-106 30-48-30-51 16-101 6-4 16-104 6-35-6-37 6-63 16-105 6-3 16-204 6-1, 6-2 6-64 6-87 6-118-6-121 17-116 24-5 17-117 24-4 17-119 24-3 17-121 24-2 17-125 2-121-2-124 38-19 18-105-A 30-98-30-103 18-203 40-19 40-47-40-54 40-75-40-82 19-104 10-2 19-105 30-19 19-107 24-11 20-105 8-538 20-106 8-1, 8-2 8-416 20-106-20-111 8-3 21-105 22-1-22-3 22-82-22-92 22-113-22-119 22-137-22-140 22-164-22-170 22-190-22-195 22-215-22-219 22-229-22-232 22-247-22-250 22-279-22-282 22-313-22-315 22-334-22-338 22-365, 22-366 22-101 12-22 22-101(1) 12-19 22-101(2)- 
22-101(4) 12-48-12-50 22-101(5), 
22-101(6) 12-74, 12-75 22-101(7) 12-21 22-101(8) 12-20  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1989 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1989 Code, as updated through January 4, 2010, which are included herein. Sections of the 1989 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
Code 1989 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1, 1-2 1-1, 1-2 1-2-1-8 1-3-1-9 1-9-1-12 1-11-1-14 2-1 2-21 2-95-2-102 20-25-20-32 3-1, 3-2 4-1 3-2 4-225 3-20 4-218 3-21 4-416 3-21(1)-3-21(5) 4-417-4-421 3-23 4-217 3-24 4-221-4-223 4-246-4-249 4-277 3-26, 3-27 4-219, 4-220 3-30 4-57 3-31-3-33 4-80-4-82 3-34 4-58, 4-59 4-79 4-84 4-120 3-35 4-60 3-36-3-43 4-112-4-119 4-1 6-35-6-37 4-2, 4-3 6-3, 6-4 4-20 6-87 4-21 6-1 6-63 4-23 6-118-6-121 4-24 6-64 4-25 6-2 5-1 8-1 5-3 8-538 5-5, 5-6 8-2, 8-3 5-7 8-416 6-1 12-19 6-2-6-4 12-48-12-50 6-5, 6-6 12-74, 12-75 6-7 12-21 6-8 12-20 6-9 12-22 7-30, 7-31 16-1, 16-2 9-1 22-1 9-2 22-3 9-3-9-5 22-113-22-115 9-6 22-2 9-7-9-9 22-116-22-118 9-10-9-13 22-137-22-140 9-14 22-119 9-15-9-19 22-191-22-195 9-20 22-190 9-21-9-25 22-215-22-219 9-26-9-29 22-229-22-232 9-30-9-33 22-247-22-250 9-34-9-37 22-279-22-282 9-38, 9-39 22-365, 22-366 9-40-9-42 22-313-22-315 9-43-9-47 22-334-22-338 9-50-9-56 22-164-22-170 9-60-9-70 22-82-22-92 10-1 36-35 10-2 36-34 36-36 10-3 36-52 10-4 36-70 10-5 36-4 36-149, 36-150 10-6 36-124, 36-125 36-151, 36-152 10-7 36-1 10-8 36-73 10-10 36-3 10-11 36-74 10-12 36-92 10-14 36-123 10-20 36-250, 36-251 10-21 36-252, 36-253 10-22, 10-23 36-254, 36-255 10-24 36-249 10-25, 10-26 36-256, 36-257 10-31-10-38 36-278-36-285 10-41-10-45 36-304-36-308 10-51-10-65 36-335-36-349 10-71-10-84 36-372-36-385 10-85 36-2 10-91-10-98 36-414-36-421 10-101, 10-102 36-441, 36-442 10-111 36-468 10-140, 10-141 28-1, 28-2 10-142, 10-143 28-29 10-144 28-30 10-145-10-147 28-3-28-5 10-166 36-210 10-167-10-171 36-212-36-216 10-173 36-217-36-219 10-174 36-220 10-175 36-211 11-1 10-1 11-2 10-23 11-3 10-25 10-29-10-34 11-4 10-24 11-5-11-11 10-35-10-41 11-11 10-42 11-12 10-182-10-191 11-13-11-15 10-108 11-16, 11-17 10-110 11-18 10-109 11-19, 11-20 10-134, 10-135 11-21 10-2 11-50-11-55 10-154-10-159 11-55-11-57 10-160-10-162 12-2-12-8 24-2-24-8 12-20-12-25 30-98-30-103 14-1-14-4 2-93-2-96 14.5-1 26-2 14.5-2, 14.5-3 26-60, 26-61 14.5-4 26-1 14.5-5-14.5-10 26-62-26-67 14.5-11 26-3 14.5-22 26-26 14.5-31 26-25 14.5-32, 14.5-33 26-27 14.5-34 26-28 14.5-41-14.5-44 26-93-26-96 15-1 2-121, 2-122 15-2, 15-3 2-123, 2-124 15-4 38-19 15-4.1 38-20 15-5 30-49 15-6 30-48 15-7, 15-8 30-50, 30-51 15-9 30-76, 30-77 15-10-15-13 30-19-30-22 16-1 34-19 16-2 24-10 16-20 34-96 16-21 34-99 16-24 34-100-34-102 16-25 34-93-34-95 16-26 34-97 16-41 34-20 16-42, 16-43 34-44, 34-45 16-61, 16-62 34-65, 34-66 17-20 40-19 17-21-17-25 40-47-40-51 17-26-17-30 40-75-40-79 17-31 40-81 17-32 40-54 17-33 40-82 17-34, 17-35 40-52, 40-53 17-36 40-80 17-37 40-20 38-89 20-2 38-90 20-1 38-91 20-3 38-110-38-118 20-53-20-61 38-120-38-122 20-81-20-83 38-123-38-128 20-110-20-115 38-129, 38-130 20-144, 20-145 38-132-38-134 20-147-20-149 38-140, 38-141 20-167, 20-168 38-150, 38-151 20-190, 20-191  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section Section 
this Code  5- 6-1912(1)(Ord.) 6-4  5-23-1927(Ord.) 30-76, 30-77  8-15-1949(Ord.) 1 40-19 2 40-48 3 40-47 3, 4 40-49, 40-50 5 40-75, 40-76 6-8 40-77-40-79 9 40-51 10 40-82 11, 12 40-52, 40-53 14 40-80 15 40-54 16 40-81 20 40-20 11- 6-1950(2)(Ord.) 1 34-96  6- 6-1955(1)(Ord.) 1 34-20  7- 2-1956(Ord.) 1 30-49 2 30-48 3, 4 30-50, 30-51  3- 4-1957(Ord.) 6-35-6-37 6-63  5- 5-1958(Ord.) 0-3 2-93-2-96  6-28-1965(Ord.) 24-11  8-24-1973(1)(Ord.) 1 22-1 2.1-2.7 22-164-22-170 3.1-3.3 22-116-22-118 4.1, 4.2 22-137, 22-138 4.3 22-140 4.4 22-139 4.5 22-119 5.1-5.5 22-191-22-195 6.1 22-190 7 22-82 7.2-7.11 22-83-22-92 8.1-8.5 22-215-22-219 9.1-9.4 22-229-22-232 10-1-10.4 22-247-22-250 11.1-11.4 22-279-22-282 12.1-12.4 22-365 13.1-13.5 22-366 14.1-14.3 22-313-22-315 15.1-15.5 22-334-22-338 16.1-16.3 22-113-22-115 17 22-2 18.1 22-3  5- 6-1974(Res.) 12-22 10- 7-1974(1)(Ord.) 34-66  2- 3-1975(1)(Ord.) 6-3  4- 7-1975(2)(Ord.) 1, 2 2-21  8-12-1976(Ord.) 24-2  3- 7-1977(3)(Ord.) 36-74  8- 7-1978(2)(Ord.) 36-123 12 24-1  8- 7-1978(Ord.) 1 16-1 7 16-2 11- 6-1978(Ord.) 10-2  7- 7-1980(2)(Ord.) 24-10  5- 3-1982(Ord.) 1 6-87 2 6-1 4 6-64 5 6-118-6-121 6 6-2 10- 4-1982(Ord.) 34-19 34-65 11- 1-1982(Ord.) 30-19  3- 7-1983(Ord.) 1 36-70 2 36-52 3 36-35 4 36-34 36-36 5 36-4 36-149, 36-150 6 36-124, 36-125 36-151, 36-152 7 36-1 8 36-73 10 36-3 11 36-92 10- 1-1983(Ord.) 1 2-121, 2-122 2, 3 2-123, 2-124 4 38-19 11- 7-1983(1)(Ord.) 1, 2 10-134, 10-135 11- 7-1983(5)(Ord.) 1-3 10-108 11- 7-1983(Ord.) 4, 5 10-110 6 10-109  8-13-1984(Ord.) 2 8-538 4 8-2 5 8-1 6 8-416 9 8-3  3-14-1985(Ord.) 1 28-1  3-15-1985(Ord.) 2 28-2 3, 4 28-29 5 28-30 6, 7 28-3, 28-4  2- 3-1986(Ord.) 1 20-3 2(A)-2(H) 20-25-20-32 3(A), 3(B) 20-53, 20-54 3(B), 3(C), 11 20-1 3(C), 3(D) 20-55, 20-56 3(D) 20-57-20-61 4(A)-4(C) 20-81-20-83 4(D) 20-110 4(E), (G), (H) 20-111 4(F) 20-112 4(I) 20-113 4(J) 20-114, 20-115 4(K), 4(L) 20-144, 20-145 4(N)-4(P) 20-147-20-149 5(A)-(C) 20-167 5(D) 20-168 6(A), 6(B) 20-190, 20-191 6(C) 20-2  6-24-1986(Ord.) 1(a) 30-98, 30-99 1(b) 30-100-30-103  8- 4-1986(Ord.) 2 4-1 3 4-57 4-6 4-80-4-82 7, 14(a) 4-58, 4-59 4-79 4-84 4-120 8 4-60 9 4-112 10, 14(c) 4-113 11 4-416-4-421 12, 13 4-114, 4-115 14(a)-(d), (f), 22(b) 4-117 14(e) 4-119 15 4-116 17 4-217 18 4-221-4-223 4-246-4-249 4-277 20, 21 4-219, 4-220 23 4-118 25 4-218  5- 4-1987(Ord.) 34-93-34-95 34-99-34-102  2- 6-1989(Ord.) 4-1 4-57-4-60 4-79-4-82 4-84 4-112-4-120 4-217-4-223 4-225 4-246-4-249 4-277 4-416-4-421  6- 5-1989(Ord.) 24-4 1 36-210 2-6 36-212-36-216 8 36-217-36-219 9 36-220 10 36-211  8- 7-1989(Ord.) 24-6, 24-7 34-93-34-95 10- 2-1989(Ord.) I 26-2 II(2-1), II(2-2) 26-60, 26-61 III(3-1) 26-1 IV(4-1)-IV(4-3) 26-62-26-64 V(5-2) 26-26 V(5-3) 26-25 V(5-4), (5-5) 26-27 V(5-6) 26-28 VI(6-1) 26-65 VII 26-93 VII(7-1)-VII(7-3) 26-94-26-96 VIII(8-1), (8-2) 26-66 IX(9-1)-(9-4) 26-67 X(10-1)-(10-3) 26-3 11- 6-1989(Ord.) 34-19  5- 1-1990(Ord.) 26-3  8-31-1990(Ord.) 34-44 10- 1-1990(Ord.) 24-8 11-15-1990(Ord.) 34-65 12- 3-1990(Ord.) 34-45  7- 1-1991(Ord.) 1-14 10- 7-1991(Ord.) 8-416 10-12-1992(Ord.) 10-154-10-162 12- 7-1992(Ord.) 28-5 30-22  9- 7-1993(Ord.) 10-108 10-110  1- 3-1995(Ord.) 26-1 26-26 26-65 26-94-26-96  3-13-1995(Ord.) 26-95, 26-96 10- 2-1995(Ord.) 20-27 1 10-1 10-23-10-25 10-29-10-42 1.1 36-250, 36-251 1.2 36-252, 36-253 1.3, 1.4 36-254, 36-255 1.5 36-249 1.6, 1.7 36-256, 36-257 2.1-2.8 36-278-36-285 3.1-3.5 36-304-36-308 4.1-4.7 36-335-36-341 5-9 36-349 5.1-5.7 36-342-36-348 6.1-6.13 36-372-36-384 7.1 36-385 7.2 36-2 8-13 36-414-36-419 13.2, 13.3 36-420, 36-421 14.1, 14.2 36-441, 36-442 15 36-468 86-301 42-1 86-401-86-406 42-21-42-26 86-501-86-505 42-56-42-60 86-601-86-606 42-118-42-123 86-701-86-713 42-145-42-157 86-713.1 42-158 86-714-86-721 42-159-42-166 86-801-86-805 42-186-42-190 86-901-86-905 42-219-42-223 86-1001-86-1005 42-255-42-259 86-1101-86-1108 42-282-42-289 86-1201-86-1206 42-312-42-317 86-1301-86-1304 42-338-42-341 86-1401-86-1404 42-371-42-374 86-1501-86-1504 42-392-42-395 86-1601-86-1603 42-419-42-421 86-1701-86-1703 42-441-42-443 86-1703 42-444 86-1801 42-499 86-1901-86-1917 42-522-42-538 86-2001-86-2007 42-570-42-576 86-2101 42-577 11- 6-1995(Ord.) 2-121, 2-122 2-124 38-20  9- 9-1996(Ord.) 42-189  4- 7-1997(Ord.) 506 42-79 506.1, 506.2 42-80 506.3-506.9 42-81-42-87 98-001  4- 6-1998 2 2-263-2-265 3 36-612 5 36-613 6, 7 36-636, 36-637 8-10 36-614-36-616 12, 13 36-518, 36-519 15 36-517 16 36-94 18 36-520, 36-521 19, 20 36-53 20 36-71, 36-72 36-92, 36-93 21 36-551 22 36-583-36-588 23 36-589 24 36-552 98-005  6- 1-1998 3-2 4-1 4-225 98-006  8- 3-1998 34-44 99-006  5- 3-1999 36-551 99-007  6- 7-1999 10-16 36-173-36-178 99-011  9- 7-1999 2 42-160 3 42-187 4 42-220 5 42-256 6 42-283 7 42-313 8 42-315 99-014 12- 6-1999 1(12-31) 24-70 1(12-32) 24-69 1(12-33)-1(12-35) 24-71-24-73 2000-02  4- 3-2000 1 36-551 2000-04  9- 5-2000 36-583-36-588 2000-03 10- 2-2000 2 42-189 3 42-222 4 42-258 5 42-285 2001-01  3- 5-2001 1(3-100) 4-1 1(3-101) 4-31-4-34 2001-006  8- 6-2001 1 34-99 2 34-98 3 34-93-34-95 2001-008  8- 6-2001 1(13-60) 2-414 1(13-61)-1(13-68) 2-416-2-423 1(13-69) 2-415 1(13-80) 2-147, 2-148 1(13-81)-1(13-83) 2-149-2-151 2001-010  8- 6-2001 3(11-31), 3(11-32) 10-382, 10-383 3(11-33) 10-385 4 10-384 4, 5 4-224 6(11-47A) 10-401 6(11-47B) 10-402 6(11-47C) 10-403 6(11-47D) 10-404 6(11-47E) 10-405 6(11-47F) 10-406 6(11-47G) 10-407 6(11-47H) 10-408, 10-409 6(11-47I) 10-410 6(11-47J) 10-411 6(11-47K) 10-412 6(11-47L) 10-413 6(11-47M) 10-414 6(11-47N) 10-415 6(11-47O) 10-416 6(11-47P) 10-417 6(11-47Q) 10-418 6(11-47R) 10-419 2001-012 11- 5-2001 1(22(a))-1(22(f)) 36-583-36-588 2002-001  2- 4-2002 1(22(a))-1(22(f)) 36-583-36-588 2001-002  3- 4-2002 1 6-1 6-63 3(a)-3(d) 6-118-6-121 2002-07 11- 4-2002 1 36-307 2002-05  2- 3-2003 1(22(a))-1(22(f)) 36-583-36-588 2 36-589 2003-04  6- 2-2003 42-189 2003-06  9- 2-2003 1 2-197 2003-07 11- 3-2003 1(22(a))-1(22(f)) 36-583-36-588 2004-01  3- 1-2004 32-1-32-13 32-45 32-64 32-66-32-72 32-103-32-110 32-134-32-161 32-191-32-209 32-246-32-249 2004-03  7- 6-2004 2 1-14 2004-002  8- 2-2004 1 36-95-36-97 2004-004  9- 7-2004 1(16-100) 10-223 1(16-101) 10-221 1(16-110)-1(16-121) 10-255-10-266 1(16-150), (16-151) 10-222 1(16-200)-1(16-216) 10-296-10-312 2006-03  6- 5-2005 2 34-66 2005-04  6- 6-2005 1(11-58), 1(11-59) 10-163, 10-164 2005-09 11- 7-2005 1, 2 36-279 2006-04  7- 6-2006 P-1-P-9 42-472-42-480 2006-06  8- 7-2006 1 36-95-36-97 2006-09  1- 2-2007 34-64 34-67 2, 3 34-65, 34-66 2007-02 10- 1-2007 1 4-139 4-162-4-166 4-186-4-189 1(3-301) 4-217 2 4-304 4-306 4-331-4-335 4-359-4-364 2007-04  1- 7-2008 1 8-239-8-247 2007-05  1- 7-2008 3-100-3-107 4-441-4-448 3-200-3-216 4-480-4-496 3-300 4-516 3-301 4-518 3-302 4-517 3-303-3-311 4-519-4-527 2007-06  1- 7-2008 1 4-306 2 4-331 2008-01  3- 3-2008 1(3-103) 4-444 2(3-107) 4-448 3(3-204) 4-484 4(3-205) 4-485 5(3-307) 4-523 2008-02  3- 3-2008 1(3-3) 4-6 2008-03  4- 7-2008 1(3-107) 4-448 2008-05  5- 5-2008 1(3-105) 4-446 2008-06  6- 2-2008 1(3-46) 4-305 2(3-47) 4-306 3(3-49) 4-332 4(3-53) 4-359 2008-09  8- 4-2008 1(5-97) 20-27 2008-10 10- 6-2008 1(3-44) 4-303 2(3-45) 4-304 3(3-49(d)) 4-332 2008-11 10- 6-2008 2, 3 10-25, 10-26 3 10-27, 10-28 4, 5 10-42, 10-43 6(11-20)-6(11-27) 10-75-10-82 2008-13 12- 1-2008 5-200-5-203 14-46-14-49 5-210-5-216 14-50-14-56 5-217 14-45 5-220-5-222 14-86-14-88 5-230-5-236 14-120-14-126 5-240-5-247 14-151-14-158 5-250 14-44 2009-01  2- 2-2009 14-44 2009-02  5- 4-2009 1(10-200), 1(10-201) 2-295, 2-296 1(10-203) 2-297 1(10-204), 1(10-205) 2-328, 2-329 1(10-206)-1(10-211) 2-347-2-352 2(10-202) 2-294 2(10-220) 2-379 2(10-221) 2-378 2(10-222)-2(10-224) 2-380-2-382 2009-03  6- 1-2009 1(3-25) 4-226 2009-06  9- 8-2009 1(10-200), 1(10-201) 10-343, 10-344 2010-01  1- 4-2010 1-4 18-1-18-4 5 18-30 6 18-5 7 18-29 8-11 18-31-18-34 2010-02 12- 6-2010       Added Adopt. ord, p. xi 2010-04  1- 3-2011 1       Added 36-126 2011-01  7- 5-2011 1-7       Added 2-461-2-467 2012-02  8- 6-2012 1 2-264, 2-265 2       Rnbd Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 6       as Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 8 2       Rnbd Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 7       as Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 9 3       Added 2-270-2-272 4       Added 2-280-2-282 2012-04 11- 5-2012 1 8-4 2 8-29-8-40 8-69-8-72 8-103-8-106 8-126-8-129 8-157 8-211-8-215 8-239-8-247 8-273, 8-274 8-297-8-302 8-323-8-328 8-360, 8-361 8-381-8-384 8-412-8-416 8-446-8-450 8-506, 8-507 8-537-8-540 02-07-11(Res.)  2- 7-2011 1-5       Added 10-44 2013-01 10- 7-2013 1 4-57-4-60 2 4-112-4-120 3       Dltd 4-127-4-131       Added 4-127-4-133 4 4-268 5       Added 4-269-4-274 2013-02 10- 7-2013 1       Dltd 6-63-6-121 2       Added 6-63-6-83 2013-03  1- 6-2014 1       Dltd 10-382-10-385       Added 10-382-10-400B 2       Added 4-134 2014-03 10- 6-2014 1 10-155 2 10-163 2014-04 10- 6-2014 1       Added 36-19 2015-01  2- 2-2015 1 4-60 2 4-165 3 4-220 2015-02  1- 8-2015 1 4-127 2015-03  8- 3-2015 1       4-1 2       4-60 3       4-120 2015-04  7-20-2015 2       42-339 2015-06  1- 4-2016 3       Rplc 34-65 4       Rplc 34-66 2015-07  1- 4-2016 1       Added 6-71.5 2017-01  5- 1-2017 1       Added 24-100-24-107 2017-02  8- 7-2017       Rpld 26-1-26-3, 26-25-26-28, 26-60-26-67, 26-93-26-96, 1-16       Added 26-1-26-16  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
O.G.C.A. 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1-3 1-6 1-1-7 1-4 1-3-1 1-2 1-3-1 et seq. 1-3 1-3-3 36-126 2-10-105 10-36 tit. 3 4-442 3-1-1 et seq. Ch. 4 4-2 3-1-2 4-1 3-2-15 4-219 3-3-1 4-3 3-3-1 et seq. Ch. 4 4-128 4-218 3-3-2 Ch. 4 3-3-7 Ch. 4 4-1 4-217 3-3-20 4-1 4-217 3-3-21 10-393 3-3-22 et seq. 4-222 3-3-23 4-246 3-3-23.1 4-248 3-3-40 et seq. Ch. 4 3-4-1 4-1 3-4-3 4-219 3-4-40 et seq. Ch. 4, Art. III 3-4-49 Ch. 4, Art. III 3-4-50 4-60 3-4-110 Ch. 4, Art. III 3-5-1 4-1 3-5-1 et seq. Ch. 4 3-5-20 4-60 3-5-40 et seq. Ch. 4 3-5-42 Ch. 4, Art. III 3-5-43 4-60 3-5-80 4-416 3-6-1 4-1 3-6-1 et seq. Ch. 4 3-6-20 4-60 3-6-21.2 4-217 3-6-25.1 4-219 3-6-40 Ch. 4 Ch. 4, Art. III 3-6-60 4-416 3-7-1 4-1 3-7-2 4-217 4-3-1 et seq. Ch. 6 4-5-1 et seq. Ch. 6 4-8-1 Ch. 6 4-8-5, 4-8-6 Ch. 6 4-8-20 et seq. Ch. 6 4-8-40 et seq. Ch. 6 4-11-1 et seq. Ch. 6 5-4-1 14-152 8-2-1 et seq. Ch. 8 8-2-21 Ch. 8 16-1 8-2-26 Ch. 8 8-2-110 et seq. Ch. 22 42-166 12-5-20 32-11 12-5-20 et seq. 32-11 12-7-1 32-11 12-7-1 et seq. 14-20 32-11 12-7-3 14-19 12-7-17 14-19 12-8-20 et seq. 24-11 12-8-79 Ch. 28 12-9-1 Ch. 28 15-6-67 32-11 15-10-63 18-33 15-10-66 18-33 15-21-73 Ch. 1 1-9 1-14 16-5-60 24-4 16-7-25 30-21 16-7-40 et seq. 24-11 16-8-14 24-6 16-10-26 et seq. 24-1 16-11-30 24-4 16-11-32 24-4 16-11-36 24-4 16-11-39 24-4 16-11-43 30-19 16-11-103, 16-11-104 24-3 16-11-406(a) 4-441 16-12-4 Ch. 6 16-12-4(f)(2) 6-80 16-12-20(2) 10-384 16-12-20(3) 10-385 16-12-35 10-396 16-12-35(a)-(k) 10-384 10-401 16-12-35(b), (c) or (d) 10-382 16-12-35(c), (d)(1), (2) 10-394 16-12-35(d)(1)(B), (C) 10-382 16-12-35(e), (f) or (g) 4-134 16-13-20 et seq. 10-414 16-13-30(j) 24-2 17-10-1 Ch. 1 1-9 1-14 tit. 21, ch. 2 2-462 21-2-1 et seq. Char. § 5.10 Char. §§ 5.13, 5.14 21-2-45(c) 2-461 21-5-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI 22-1-1 et seq. Char. § 1.13 25-1-1 et seq. Ch. 16 25-3-1 et seq. Ch. 16 25-3-4 Ch. 16 25-3-20 et seq. Ch. 16 25-4-1 Ch. 16 25-8-1 et seq. Ch. 16 25-10-1 et seq. Ch. 16 31-3-1 et seq. 18-2 31-3-5.2 36-126 31-19-1 Ch. 6 31-19-1 et seq. 6-87 31-19-3 Ch. 6 6-63 33-3-5 10-1 33-8-4 10-110 33-8-8.1, 33-8-8.2 10-110 33-8-8.2(a) 10-110 33-34-1 et seq. 24-7 33-34-3 24-7 34-4-3.1 Ch. 2, Art. V 36-1-20 Ch. 1 18-29 36-1-20(a) 14-46 36-13-1 et seq. Ch. 8 36-30-1 Char. Arts. I-VII Ch. 1 36-30-3-36-30-6 Ch. 2, Art. II 36-30-13 Ch. 2, Art. II 36-31-1 et seq. Char. Arts. I-VII 36-31-9 Ch. 2, Art. II 36-32-1 Ch. 1 1-9 1-14 36-32-3 1-14 36-32-5 Ch. 1 1-9 1-14 36-32-6 et seq. 1-14 36-33-1 et seq. Ch. 2 36-34-1 et seq. Char. Arts. I-VII Ch. 2 36-34-3 Ch. 30 36-35-1 et seq. Char. Arts. I-VII Ch. 1 Ch. 2 Ch. 8 Ch. 12 Ch. 22 Ch. 30 Ch. 34 36-35-2 Char. Arts. I-VII 36-35-3 Char. Arts. I-VII Ch. 1 1-1 Ch. 2 36-35-3(b) Char. Arts. I-VII 36-35-6 Char. Arts. I-VII Ch. 1 1-9 1-14 Ch. 2 36-37-1 et seq. Ch. 2 36-42-1 et seq. Ch. 42 36-43-1 et seq. Ch. 42 36-44-1 Ch. 42 36-60-1 et seq. Ch. 2 36-60-19 Ch. 12 36-60-23 Ch. 16 36-61-1 et seq. Ch. 42 36-62-1 et seq. Ch. 42 36-66-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 Ch. 42 36-67-1 et seq. Ch. 42 36-67A-1 et seq. Ch. 42 42-526 36-69-1 et seq. Ch. 12 36-70-1 et seq. Ch. 42 36-74-1 et seq. Ch. 8 36-75-1 et seq. Ch. 12 36-80-2 et seq. Ch. 2 36-80-19 Ch. 1 1-1 36-81-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 36-81-7 Ch. 2, Art. V 36-82-1 et seq. L.A § 3 38-3-1 et seq. Ch. 12 38-3-3(1) 12-19 38-3-27 Ch. 12 12-48 38-3-28 Ch. 12 40-1-1 34-19 40-1-1 et seq. Ch. 34 40-6-1 34-19 40-6-1 et seq. Ch. 34 40-6-97.1 24-102 40-6-181 Ch. 34, Art. IV 40-6-183 Ch. 34, Art. IV 40-6-249 24-11 40-6-371 Ch. 34 40-6-372 Ch. 34 40-6-390 34-20 40-8-76 1-14 40-13-1 et seq. Ch. 34 43-1-1 et seq. Ch. 10 10-37 43-8-1 10-382 43-14-1 et seq. Ch. 8 43-17-5 24-101 24-104 43-17-9 24-101 24-104 44-3-1 et seq. 32-11 44-3-70 et seq. 42-289 44-10-1 et seq. 20-28 45-8-1 Ch. 2, Art. V 45-11-1 1-12 46-3-1 et seq. 10-36 46-5-1 et seq. 10-344 46-5-1(b)(8), (9) 10-343 46-7-15 10-36 48-2-40 10-42 48-5-355 10-36 48-5-356 10-36 48-6-93 10-36 10-134 48-6-93(d) 10-135 48-8-1 et seq. 4-523 48-13-1 et seq. 10-44 48-13-7 10-25 48-13-9(b)(1)-(31) 10-1 48-13-9(c)(1)-(22) 10-1 48-13-20 10-44 48-13-26 10-82 48-13-50.2 10-163 48-13-51(a)(3) 10-163 48-17-1(2) 10-382 50-18-70 et seq. Ch. 1 10-40 50-18-72 et seq. 2-1 50-27-3 10-400 50-27-70(b)(2)(A) or (B) 10-382 50-27-71 10-397 50-27-71(a.1), (b) 10-397 50-27-78 10-397 50-27-84(b)(1) 10-395 51-2-6 Ch. 6  
